EUREKA, CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE
2025 S-29 Supplement contains:
Local Legislation current through Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF EUREKA
CHARTER TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Article I. Name, and Seal; Form of Government; Boundaries; Municipal Affairs
   
100.   Name and Seal
   
101.   Form of Government
   
102.   Boundaries
   
103.   Municipal Affairs
Article II. Elections
   
200.   Kinds of Elections
   
201.   Wards
   
202.   General Municipal Elections
   
203.   Officers to be Elected at Elections After Adoption of Revised Charter
   
204.   Canvass of Returns
   
205.   Time of Taking Office; Term
   
206.   Special Municipal Elections
   
207.   Procedure for Conducting Elections
   
208.   Term Limits - Office of the Mayor
   
209.   Term Limits - Council Members
Article III. City Council
   
300.   Legislative Authority
   
301.   Qualifications of Council Members
   
302.   Filling Vacancies in Office of Council Member
   
303.   Council Meetings
   
304.   Quorum
   
305.   Actions by Council
   
306.   Mayor Pro Tem
   
307.   Rules: Censure and Expulsion of Council Members: Subpoenas
   
308.   Administration of Oaths and Affirmations
   
309.   Minutes of Council Meetings
   
310.   Salaries and Expenses of Council Members
   
311.   Establishment of Boards, Commissions and Committees
Article IV. Mayor
   
400.   Qualifications of Mayor
   
401.   Duties of Mayor
   
402.   Notification of Special Meetings of the City Council and Notification of
and Attendance At Other Meetings
   
403.   Vacancy in Office of Mayor
   
404.   Other Offices Prohibited
   
405.   Salary and Expenses of Mayor
   
406.   Administration of Oaths and Affirmations
Article V. Ordinances
   
500.   Enacting Clause
   
501.   Amendment of Ordinances
   
502.   One Subject
   
503.   Reconsideration
   
504.   Adoption of Ordinances
   
505.   Action by Council after Mayor Disapproval
   
506.   Publication or Posting
   
507.   Effective Date
   
508.   Codification or Compilation In Book Form
Article VI. Administration
   
600.   City Manager
   
601.   Council Members Ineligible
   
602.   Duties of the City Manager
   
603.   Department Heads Responsible to City Manager
   
604.   Emergency Powers
   
605.   Interference With City Manager
   
606.   City Manager Pro Tem
   
607.   Administrative Organization Authorized
   
608.   City Attorney
   
609.   City Clerk
   
610.   Creation and Abolition of Offices and Employments; Salaries
   
611.   Contracts with Temporary Help Firms
Article VII. Fiscal Administration
   
700.   Property Taxation
   
701.   Funds to be Established
   
702.   Fiscal Year
   
703.   Budget Preparation
   
704.   Budget Hearing and Approval
   
705.   Budget Transfers
   
706.   Assessment
   
707.   Tax Collection
   
708.   General Revenues
   
709.   Purchasing
   
710.   Public Works
   
711.   Terms of Contracts
   
712.   Accounting System
   
713.   Authorization and Control of Expenditure
   
714.   All Money to Treasury
   
715.   Suits Must be Preceded by Demand
   
716.   Independent Audit
   
720.   Off-Street Vehicular Parking
Article VIII. Officers and Employees
   
800.   Personnel Merit System
   
801.   Provisional Appointments
   
802.   Personnel Ordinance
   
803.   Removal or Suspension
   
804.   Oath of Office
   
805.   Official Bonds
   
806.   Officers Holding Other Office
   
807.   Prohibited Interest in Contracts, Work or Business of the City
   
808.   Prohibited Acts of Officers and Employees
   
809.   Absence From City; or Conviction of Felony
   
810.   Non-Discrimination
Article IX. Franchises
   
900.   Award of Franchise; Abandonment
Article X. Initiative, Referendum and Recall
   1000.   Reservation to People of Right of Initiative, Referendum and Recall
Article XI. Miscellaneous Provisions
   
1100.   Books Open to Public Inspection
   
1101.   Records and Other Personal Property of City
   
1102.   Definitions
   
1103.   Headings
   
1104.   Validity and Separability
   
1105.   Revolving Door Prohibition
ARTICLE I. NAME AND SEAL; FORM OF GOVERNMENT;
BOUNDARIES; MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS
SECTION 100. NAME AND SEAL.
   The municipal corporation now existing, known as the City of Eureka, shall
remain and continue a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of
Eureka, and by that name shall have perpetual succession, and may have and use
a common seal alterable at the pleasure of the City Council.
SECTION 101. FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
   The government provided by this Charter shall be known as the “Council-
Manager” form of government.
SECTION 102. BOUNDARIES.
   The boundaries of the City of Eureka now existing shall continue until
changed in the manner authorized by law.
SECTION 103. MUNICIPAL AFFAIRS.
   The City of Eureka may make and enforce all ordinances and regulations in
respect to municipal affairs, subject only to restrictions and limitations
provided in the Constitution of the State of California and in this Charter.
With respect to municipal affairs this Charter shall supersede all laws
inconsistent herewith, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be
construed to prevent or restrict the City from exercising or consenting to, and
the City is hereby authorized to exercise any and all rights, powers and
privileges heretofore or hereafter granted or prescribed by general laws of the
State.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
ARTICLE II. ELECTIONS
SECTION 200. KINDS OF ELECTIONS.
   Elections to be held in the City for the purpose of electing officers of
said City and for all other purposes are of two (2) kinds:
   General Municipal Elections
   Special Municipal Elections
(Amended by election November 8, 1994)
SECTION 201. WARDS.
   The City is hereby divided into five (5) wards, numbered consecutively from
one (1) to five (5), inclusive, the respective boundaries of which shall be as
established on the effective date of this section; provided, that the Council
shall by ordinance change such boundaries from time to time to provide equal
representation among the five (5) wards in compliance with the one person - one
vote principle. The qualified electors of the City shall elect one member of
the Council from the ward in which the residents are registered to vote.
(Amended by election November 8, 2016)
SECTION 202. GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   For filling the elective offices of Mayor and five (5) Council Members, a
general municipal election must be held on the same date as the State of
California general election and consolidated therewith. Municipal measures may
also be submitted to the electorate at said general municipal election, as well
as at special elections called for the purpose. As determined by the ranked
choice voting process detailed in the ordinance the Council must enact under
Section 207, the officers elected are those who receive the majority of votes
for each office at said general municipal election.
(Amended by election on November 8, 1994; Amended by election November 2, 2010;
Amended by election November 3, 2020)
SECTION 203. OFFICERS TO BE ELECTED AT ELECTIONS AFTER ADOPTION OF REVISED
CHARTER.
   At each municipal election the number of Council Members to be elected shall
be equal to the number of terms to expire at the ensuing first regular meeting
of the Council, as the case may be, following the general municipal election
date.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 204. CANVASS OF RETURNS.
   On the first regular meeting date of the City Council after any municipal
election has been canvassed and certified, the Council shall meet at its
regular meeting place to declare the results thereof. Newly elected officers
shall be installed in their respective offices as provided in Section 205 of
this Charter.
(Amended by election on November 5, 2002)
SECTION 205. TIME OF TAKING OFFICE; TERM.
   All elected officers, after they have qualified as provided in this Charter,
shall take office at the first regular meeting of the body to which they have
been elected after the general municipal election has been canvassed and
certified and shall hold their office for the term of four years or until their
successors are elected and qualified.
(Amended by election on November 5, 2002)
SECTION 206. SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   Special municipal elections shall be held on such dates as fixed by the
Council therefor except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
SECTION 207. PROCEDURE FOR CONDUCTING ELECTIONS.
   The Council by ordinance must provide for conducting municipal elections. In
the elections of the Mayor and Council Member, the Council must provide for
Ranked Choice Voting. Except as provided by this Charter or the Election
Ordinance, the provisions of the Elections Code of the State of California
pertaining to municipal elections, as amended from time to time, govern.
(Amended by election November 3, 2020)
SECTION 208. TERM LIMITS - OFFICE OF THE MAYOR.
   No person may serve more than two consecutive full terms as Mayor. If a
person serves a partial term in excess of two years, it shall be considered a
full term for the purpose of this provision. Nothing in this section shall act
as a bar to service as Mayor a previously elected or appointed Mayor after at
least four years absence from office.
(Amended by election on June 7, 1994; Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 209. TERM LIMITS - COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   No person may serve more than two consecutive full terms as a Council
Member. If a person serves a partial term in excess of two years, it shall be
considered a full term for the purpose of this provision. Nothing in this
section shall act as a bar to service as Council Member a previously elected or
appointed Council Member after at least four years absence from office.
(Amended by election on June 7, 1994; Amended by election November 2, 2010)
ARTICLE III. CITY COUNCIL
SECTION 300. LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The legislative powers of the City of Eureka shall be vested in a Council of
five (5) members.
SECTION 301. QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   No person shall be eligible for the office of Council Member unless such
person is at the time of assuming such office an elector of the City and was a
registered voter and a resident of the City and of the ward from which such
person is seeking election at the time nomination papers are issued to such
person as provided for in Section 10227 of the Elections Code of the State of
California as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended or superseded.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 302. FILLING VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF COUNCIL MEMBER.
   If for any reason there occurs a vacancy in the office of Council Member,
the Mayor and Council shall, within thirty (30) days from the commencement of
the vacancy either fill the vacancy by appointment by the Mayor with the
approval of a majority of the Council Members or the Council shall call a
special municipal election to fill the vacancy; provided, that no such special
municipal election shall be called if a general municipal election is to be
held within ninety (90) days from the commencement of the vacancy. Such a
special municipal election shall be held not less than eighty-eight (88) days
from the call of the special municipal election. The person so appointed or
elected shall possess the qualifications hereinbefore prescribed for Council
Members, and shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent.
(Amended by election on November 8, 1994)
SECTION 303. COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Council shall be public and shall be held in the City
Hall of the City or at such other place or places as may be designated by the
Council by resolution. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held at such
times as may be established by the Council by resolution. Special meetings of
the Council may be called by the Mayor or three members of the Council, and the
only business that may be transacted at special meetings is that which is
enumerated or set forth in the call for the special meeting.
SECTION 304. QUORUM.
   Three (3) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, and the
affirmative vote of three members shall be necessary for the passage of an
ordinance or the final transaction of any business.
   Less than a quorum may adjourn from time to time, and compel the attendance
of absent members in the manner and under the penalties prescribed by
ordinance.
SECTION 305. ACTIONS BY COUNCIL.
   The Council may act by ordinance, resolution or motion.
SECTION 306. MAYOR PRO TEM.
   The Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem who shall
preside at all meetings of the Council during the absence of the Mayor, and
shall, in case of sickness or inability of the Mayor, or his absence from the
City, act as Mayor of the City.
SECTION 307. RULES; CENSURE AND EXPULSION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS; SUBPOENAS.
   The Council shall establish rules for its proceedings. It shall have power
to censure its members for disorderly conduct, committed in its presence, and
may expel any member upon conviction of a felony by an affirmative vote of
three (3) of its members. It shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel
the attendance of witnesses, and production of all papers relating to any
business before the Council, and disobedience of such subpoena or the refusal
to testify before the Council shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be
punishable in the same manner as violations of this Charter are punishable.
(Amended by election on November, 1991)
SECTION 308. ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS AND AFFIRMATIONS.
   All Council members shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations relative to any business brought before or under consideration of
the Council.
SECTION 309. MINUTES OF COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   Minutes of all Council Meetings shall be kept by the City Clerk or a Deputy
City Clerk under the direction of the City Council, and the ayes and noes on
each action taken by the Council shall be entered in the minutes.
SECTION 310. SALARIES AND EXPENSES OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   The monthly salary of each Council Member shall be $500.00 per month and
each Council Member may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses
incurred by such member in the performance of official duties.
(Ratified June 7, 1988)
SECTION 311. ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES.
   The Council may create advisory or appellate boards, commissions and
committees, prescribe their duties and fix their compensation, if any. The
members thereof shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
Council, subject to the following requirements:
   (a)   On or before December 31 of each year, the City Council shall cause to
have prepared an appointments list of all regular and ongoing boards,
commissions and committees the members of which are appointed as herein
provided. The appointees' list shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A list of all appointive terms which will expire during the next
calendar year, with the name of the incumbent appointee, the date of
appointment, the date the term expires, and the necessary qualifications for
the position.
      (2)   A list of all boards, commissions and committees whose members
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council, and the necessary
qualifications for each position.
   (b)   The appointments list shall be made available to members of the public
for a reasonable fee which shall not exceed actual cost.
   (c)   Whenever an unscheduled vacancy occurs in any board, commission or
committee for which the Mayor and City Council have the appointing power,
whether due to resignation, death, termination or other causes, a special
vacancy notice shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk, and in other
places as directed by the Mayor and City Council, within twenty (20) days after
the vacancy occurs. Final appointment to the board, commission or committee
shall not be made for at least ten (10) working days after the posting of the
notice in the City Clerk's office. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
subsection (c), the Mayor and City Council may, if they find that an emergency
exists, fill the unscheduled vacancy immediately. Persons appointed to fill
such a vacancy shall only serve on an acting basis until the final appointment
is made pursuant to this subsection (c).
   The chairman of each board, commission and committee shall have the power to
administer oaths and affirmations relative to any business brought before or
under consideration by the respective board, commission or committee of which
he is the chairman.
ARTICLE IV. MAYOR
SECTION 400. QUALIFICATIONS OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor of the City of Eureka shall be elected as an officer of the City
separate and apart from the Council. No person shall be eligible for the office
of Mayor unless he is at the time of assuming such office at least twenty-six
(26) years of age and an elector of the City. In addition he shall be a
registered voter and a resident of the City at the time nomination papers are
issued to him as provided for in Section 10227 of the Elections Code of the
State of California as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended or
superseded.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 401. DUTIES OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council; shall decide by his
vote all tie votes of the Council; shall approve or disapprove all ordinances
as herein provided; shall make the appointments authorized by this Charter with
approval of the Council; shall be recognized as the head of the city government
for all ceremonial purposes, and by the Governor for the purposes of military
law and during periods of state or local emergency or disaster; but shall have
no regular administrative duties.
SECTION 402. NOTIFICATION OF SPECIAL MEETINGS OF THE CITY COUNCIL AND
NOTIFICATION OF AND ATTENDANCE AT OTHER MEETINGS.
   The Mayor shall be duly notified by the City Clerk of all special meetings
of the Council when called by its members. He shall also be notified by the
City Clerk of the time and place of all regular or special meetings of boards,
commissions, and committees, and shall have the right and privilege of being
present at all such meetings.
SECTION 403. VACANCY IN OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   When a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor, the Council shall within
thirty (30) days from the commencement of the vacancy, either fill the vacancy
by appointment or call a special municipal election to fill the vacancy;
provided, that no such special municipal election shall be called if a general
municipal election is to be held within ninety (90) days from the commencement
of the vacancy. Such a special municipal election shall be held on the next
regularly established election date not less than eighty-eight (88) days from
the call of the special municipal election. The person so appointed or elected
shall possess the qualifications hereinbefore prescribed for Mayor and shall
hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. No member of the
Council during the term for which he shall have been elected or appointed shall
be eligible to fill such vacancy.
(Amended by election on November 8, 1994)
SECTION 404. OTHER OFFICES PROHIBITED.
   The Mayor shall not, during the term for which the Mayor has been elected or
appointed, hold any other elected salaried public civil office.
SECTION 405. SALARY AND EXPENSES OF MAYOR.
   The monthly salary of the Mayor shall be $625.00 per month, and the Mayor
may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred by the Mayor in
the performance of official duties.
(Ratified June 7, 1988)
SECTION 406. ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS AND AFFIRMATIONS.
   The Mayor shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations relative
to any business or affairs of the City.
ARTICLE V. ORDINANCES
SECTION 500. ENACTING CLAUSE.
   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be in these words: “Be it
Ordained by the Council of the City of Eureka as follows:”.
SECTION 501. AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCES.
   No ordinance shall be amended by reference to its title only, but the
section or subsection thereof to be amended shall be re-enacted at length, as
amended.
SECTION 502. ONE SUBJECT.
   Every ordinance shall embrace but one subject which shall be clearly
indicated in the title. In all cases where the subject is not so expressed in
the title, the ordinance shall be void as to the matter not expressed in the
title.
SECTION 503. RECONSIDERATION.
   When any bill is put upon its final passage and fails to pass, if a motion
is made to reconsider, the vote upon such motion shall not be taken until the
next regular meeting of the Council.
SECTION 504. ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES.
   The procedure for the adoption of ordinances shall be as follows:
   When an ordinance is first introduced it shall be known as a bill. If such
bill receives the three (3) affirmative votes required for its introduction, it
shall be put upon its final passage no sooner than three (3) days after its
introduction; provided, that no bill for the grant of any franchise shall be
put upon its final passage within thirty (30) days after its introduction; and
provided further that an urgency ordinance may be passed by a four-fifths vote
of the City Council. Every bill after it has finally passed the Council shall
be signed by the Mayor Pro Tem and then presented forthwith to the Mayor. The
Mayor shall return the bill to the Council within ten (10) days (Sundays
excepted) after receiving it. If the Mayor approves it, the Mayor must sign it,
and the same shall then become an ordinance; but if the Mayor shall disapprove
it, it shall be returned, with the Mayor's objections in writing, to the
Council. If the bill is not returned with such approval or disapproval within
the time specified herein, it shall take effect as an ordinance as if the Mayor
had approved the same.
SECTION 505. ACTION BY COUNCIL AFTER MAYOR DISAPPROVAL.
   When a bill is returned to the Council with the Mayor's disapproval, the
Council shall cause the objections of the Mayor to be entered in its minutes
and proceed to consider and vote on the bill. If, after such consideration, the
bill is passed by an affirmative vote of not less than four (4) members of the
Council, it shall take effect as an ordinance as if the Mayor had approved the
same. If the bill shall fail, on being so considered, to receive four (4)
affirmative votes of the Council it shall then be finally lost.
SECTION 506. PUBLICATION OR POSTING.
   All ordinances shall be published or posted in the manner prescribed by the
Council.
SECTION 507. EFFECTIVE DATE.
   No ordinance passed by the Council shall take effect until thirty (30) days
after its passage and approval as an ordinance, except the following
ordinances:
   (a)   Relating to an election.
   (b)   For the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety,
containing a declaration of the facts constituting the urgency, and is passed
by a four-fifths vote of the City Council.
   (c)   Relating to street improvement proceedings.
   (d)   Relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the city.
   (e)   Covered by particular provisions of law prescribing the manner of its
passage and adoption.
SECTION 508. CODIFICATION OR COMPILATION IN BOOK FORM.
   The Council shall either cause to have the ordinances of the City of Eureka
codified in accordance with the provisions of state law for codification of
city ordinances and provide for keeping such city code current and updated, or
it shall, every three (3) years, cause all the ordinances of the City of Eureka
to be reviewed, compiled and published in book form.
ARTICLE VI. ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 600. CITY MANAGER.
   There shall be a City Manager appointed by the Council, who shall be the
administrative coordinator of the city government and shall serve at the
pleasure of the City Council. The City Manager shall be chosen solely on the
basis of executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to
actual experience in, or knowledge of, accepted practice in respect to the
duties of the office as hereinafter set forth.
SECTION 601. COUNCIL MEMBERS INELIGIBLE.
   No member of the City Council shall, during the time for which such member
was elected or appointed, or for one year thereafter, be eligible to hold the
position of City Manager or City Manager pro tem.
SECTION 602. DUTIES OF THE CITY MANAGER.
   Subject to policy prescribed by the Council, the City Manager shall have the
power and duty to:
   (a)   Supervise the administrative affairs of the city except as otherwise
specifically provided in this Charter.
   (b)   Provide the Council with such information as may be requested or
needed for the Council to perform its duties.
   (c)   Make such recommendations to the Council concerning the affairs of the
city as the City Manager may deem desirable, including the proposal of
ordinances and resolutions the City Manager finds necessary for effective
management or in the public interest.
   (d)   Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs
of the city.
   (e)   See that the ordinances of the city and the applicable laws of the
State are enforced.
   (f)   Appoint, discipline and remove all department heads of the city under
the jurisdiction of the City Manager provided that the appointment or dismissal
of department heads shall be subject to approval of the Council.
   (g)   Act as purchasing agent for the city and all offices, boards,
commissions and committees.
   (h)   Investigate the operations of departments and other agencies of the
city, and of all contracts to which the city is a party, and assure proper
performance.
   (i)   Investigate complaints concerning utility operations and see that all
permits, privileges and franchises granted by the city are faithfully
performed.
   (j)   When directed by the City Council, represent the City in its inter-
governmental relations, and negotiate contracts for joint governmental actions
subject to Council approval.
   (k)   If so authorized by ordinance, perform the duties imposed by law on a
City Clerk, Auditor, Assessor, Tax Collector or Treasurer and deputize others
to act for the City Manager in such matters to the extent permitted by law.
   (l)   Exercise general supervision over all public property under control of
the city.
   (m)   Attend all meetings of the City Council unless excused, and such
meetings of the boards, commissions and committees as the City Manager chooses,
or which the City Manager is directed to attend by the Council, and participate
in discussions at such meetings.
   (n)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or
required of the City Manager by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
   (o)   Recommend to the City Council such general rules and regulations as
the City Manager may deem necessary or expedient in the general conduct of the
administrative departments under the jurisdiction of the City Manager.
   (p)   Devote full-time to the duties of the office and to the interests of
the city.
SECTION 603. DEPARTMENT HEADS RESPONSIBLE TO CITY MANAGER.
   The heads of the administrative departments under the City Manager shall be
directly responsible to the City Manager for the efficient administration of
their respective departments. The City Manager may designate acting department
heads, subject to the approval of the Council, when necessary to assure the
continuity of the City's business. The City Manager shall have the power, with
the approval of the Council, to employ expert consultants to perform work or
give advice connected with the departments of the city when the City Manager
finds such work or advice necessary.
SECTION 604. EMERGENCY POWERS.
   In the case of general conflagration, rioting, floods or other emergency
menacing life or property, the City Manager shall at the direction of the
Mayor, marshal all of the forces of the different departments of the city for
the maintenance of the general security.
SECTION 605. INTERFERENCE WITH CITY MANAGER.
   No member of the Council shall by suggestion or otherwise attempt to
influence or coerce the City Manager for personal gain, nor shall any member of
the Council discuss directly or indirectly or attempt to exact any promise from
any candidate for City Manager concerning appointments to City offices or
employment. Council Members may make inquiry of City staff and may conduct
discussions with staff, but shall not direct the staff's allocation of time or
resources nor dictate the results of their work product. Neither the Council
nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City
Manager, either publicly or privately. A violation of the provisions of this
section by any member of the Council shall constitute a misdemeanor for which
the offending member may be charged in any court of competent jurisdiction, and
if found guilty the sentence imposed shall include removal from office. No
prohibition herein contained shall be construed to mean that any member of
Council shall in any respect be prohibited from informing the City Manager as
to any fact within the Council Member's knowledge which might be of value in
assisting the City Manager to appoint or employ qualified persons, or to
discharge any unqualified person.
(Amended by election on June 7, 1994)
SECTION 606. CITY MANAGER PRO TEM.
   The City Council shall appoint one of the officers of the City to serve as
Manager pro tem during any absence or disability of the City Manager.
SECTION 607. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION AUTHORIZED.
   The Council shall by ordinance provide the form of organization through
which the functions of the city are to be administered. Any combination of duly
authorized duties, powers and functions which in the judgment of the Council
will provide the most efficient and economical service possible consistent with
the public interest and in keeping with accepted principles of municipal
administration may be authorized by such ordinance. All departments or other
administrative sub-divisions so created shall be administered by the City
Manager or by a department head, unless otherwise authorized by this Charter.
   The functions and services which shall be included in the administrative
organization herein authorized may include but are not necessarily limited to
the following:
   (a)   The planning, and regulation of land use.
   (b)   The regulation of building and housing standards and regulations
governing occupancy.
   (c)   Cultural and recreational programs.
   (d)   The protection and improvement of the public health.
   (e)   The protection of persons and property and the preservation of the
peace.
   (f)   The prevention and extinguishing of fires.
   (g)   The development, maintenance and operation of parks and recreation
areas.
   (h)   The acquisition, construction and maintenance of public works.
   (i)   The acquisition, construction, maintenance and operation of public
utilities and enterprises, including but not limited to power and light, fuel
and heat, water, harbors, airports, vehicular parking and transportation.
   (j)   All necessary administrative and fiscal services.
   (k)   Any other function or service specifically authorized by Charter or
authorized or permitted by State Law.
SECTION 608. CITY ATTORNEY.
   There is hereby created the office of City Attorney, who shall be the chief
legal advisor and prosecutor of the city. The City Attorney shall be appointed
by and serve at the pleasure of the Council and shall have been at the time of
appointment admitted to practice and engage in the practice of law in the State
of California and must be a citizen of the United States. The City Attorney
shall advise all officers and agencies of the city on legal matters referred to
the City Attorney, shall draft such ordinances, resolutions, contracts and
other legal documents as directed by the City Council or requested by the City
Manager, shall prosecute violations of city ordinances and shall act as counsel
in behalf of the city or any of its officers or agencies in litigation
involving any of them in their official capacity. The City Attorney shall
administer the office of City Attorney subject to policies prescribed by the
Council. The Council may empower the City Attorney, at the request of the City
Attorney, to employ special legal counsel, appraisers, engineers and other
technical and expert services necessary for the handling of any pending or
proposed litigation, proceeding or other legal matter. The City Attorney shall
approve, as to form, all official and other bonds given to or for the benefit
of said City, and no contract shall become enforceable as against said City
without the endorsement thereon of the City Attorney's approval thereof.
   When the City Council determines that City Attorney is unable or unwilling
to perform the duties of his office the City Council shall appoint some other
qualified attorney to temporarily act in his place when in the judgment of the
Council, the interest of the city require it.
(Amended by election November 5, 1991)
SECTION 609. CITY CLERK.
   The Council shall appoint or provide for the appointment of a City Clerk who
shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Clerk will perform all
duties as prescribed in this Charter or by Ordinance.
SECTION 610. CREATION AND ABOLITION OF OFFICES AND EMPLOYMENTS;
SALARIES.
   The City Council may create offices and employments in addition to those
provided by this Charter. Whenever in the judgment of the Council no necessity
exists for the continuation of any appointed office or employment created or
provided by this Charter, except that of City Manager, the Council shall
discontinue such office or employment.
   The Council shall by ordinance or resolution determine the salaries of all
officers and employees of the City except as otherwise provided in this
Charter.
SECTION 611. CONTRACTS WITH TEMPORARY HELP FIRMS.
   The City Council may contract with temporary help firms for temporary help
to assist city agencies, departments or offices during any peak load, temporary
absence, or emergency, provided the Council determines that it is in the
economic interest of the city to provide such temporary help by contract,
rather than employing persons for such purposes. Use of temporary help under
this section shall be limited to a period of not to exceed ninety (90) days for
any single peak load, temporary absence, or emergency situation. Temporary help
furnished by temporary help firms pursuant to contract as authorized by this
section shall not be deemed to be officers or employees of the city and Article
VIII of this Charter shall have no application to such temporary help.
ARTICLE VII. FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 700. PROPERTY TAXATION.
   The Council of the City of Eureka shall annually fix the rate of taxation to
be levied, and levy the taxes upon all property, both real and personal, in the
city, necessary to raise sufficient revenue to carry on the various departments
of the Municipal Government for the current fiscal year; provided, that the
rate of taxation so levied shall not exceed in any year One and 50/100 Dollar
for each One Hundred Dollars upon the assessed value thereof, except for the
payments of principal and interest of the bonded debt of the city, if any; and
provided further, that in addition to said One and 50/100 Dollar rate, the
Council may levy a tax of not more than Ten Cents for each One Hundred Dollars
upon the assessed value thereof, to be used for recreational purposes only.
SECTION 701. FUNDS TO BE ESTABLISHED.
   The Council shall, before fixing the rate of annual city tax, establish by
ordinance separate funds representing the several funded obligations of the
city, if any, and of the several departments requiring municipal expenditures,
including a General Fund, and the percentage of said levy shall be named for
each fund, and the whole amount of taxes and revenue of the city apportioned
accordingly; and no transfers shall be made except of balances in excess, or
from the General Fund to meet deficiencies, or to provide for the redemption of
city bonds, if any.
SECTION 702. FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city shall commence on the first day of July of each
year.
SECTION 703. BUDGET PREPARATION.
   At least 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City
Manager shall submit to the Council a budget of proposed expenditures and
estimated revenues, accompanied by an explanatory budget message. For such
purpose, the City Manager, on such schedule and under such terms as may be
prescribed by the City Manager, shall obtain from the head of each department
or other agency of the city their estimates of revenue and expenditure in such
detail and with such supporting plans and data as the City Manager may require.
The City Manager may revise such estimates in any manner the City Manager deems
advisable. The explanatory budget message of the City Manager to the Council
shall explain the budget, shall outline the proposed financial policies of the
city for the ensuing fiscal year, shall propose priorities for capital
expenditures, and shall describe the important features of the budget plan. It
shall state the reasons for salient changes from the previous year in cost and
revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy. The
budget shall be submitted in such form as to enable the Council to compare the
prior and current years' revenue and expenditures to which such proposed
revenues and expenditures relate. Estimates of revenue shall include surpluses
to be carried over from the current year, plus current revenues from all
sources.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 704. BUDGET HEARING AND APPROVAL.
   After submission of the budget by the City Manager, the Council shall review
it in such detail as it deems necessary, and after a public hearing held not
less than 10 days after public notice thereof, may revise the budget in any
manner it finds necessary. Not later than the last day of the fiscal year the
Council shall adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year, failing which the
last fiscal year allotments shall be effective until the budget is adopted.
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as
proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects
and purposes therein named.
SECTION 705. BUDGET TRANSFERS.
   At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the Council may amend or
supplement the budget by motion so as to authorize the transfer of unused
balances appropriated for one department to another department, or to
appropriate available funds not included in the budget; and may authorize the
City Manager to transfer funds between purposes within departments.
SECTION 706. ASSESSMENT.
   The Council shall provide by ordinance for the assessment of property for
the purpose of taxation, either under the direction of the City Manager or by
agreement with the County of Humboldt in the manner provided by law.
SECTION 707. TAX COLLECTION.
   The Council shall provide by ordinance or resolution for the collection of
all taxes and other revenues due the City, either under the direction of the
City Manager or City Clerk or by agreement with the County of Humboldt, the
State of California, or any other agency regularly engaged in the collection of
a given tax or other revenue.
SECTION 708. GENERAL REVENUES.
   The Council may, by ordinance or resolution, provide for any tax, license or
permit fee, service charge or other kind of revenue authorized by this Charter
or by the Constitution or general laws of the State, and not prohibited by the
Charter or by the Constitution.
SECTION 709. PURCHASING.
   The City Manager shall purchase or contract for the equipment, materials,
supplies and services required by the city, for which expenditures have been
authorized in the budget or by other action of the Council. The Council shall
establish by ordinance or resolution the conditions under which purchases shall
be made only after competitive bidding, shall specify these amounts and
conditions under which Council approval is required for specific items of
purchase, and shall prescribe conditions under which all bids may be rejected
and new bids invited. In the case of materials, supplies and equipment, a
preference of not to exceed five percent may be allowed to firms or individuals
who regularly maintain a place of business and transact business in, or
maintain an inventory of merchandise for sale in the city.
SECTION 710. PUBLIC WORKS.
   Any city improvement estimated to cost more than $15,000 shall be performed
under contract with sealed bid and accompanying performance bond, except where
such improvement is authorized by the Council to be made directly by a city
department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and estimates. All
such contracts for more than $15,000 shall be awarded to the lowest responsible
bidder after such public notice and competition as may be prescribed by
ordinance or resolution provided that all bids may be rejected for cause, and
new bids may be sought in accordance with the original procedure. Alterations
in contracts affecting the scope of work, time requirements, cost or any other
substantive provisions affecting cost or the city's interests, shall be
approved by the Council after considering the recommendations of the City
Manager.
SECTION 711. TERMS OF CONTRACTS.
   No contract for equipment, materials or supplies shall be made by the city
for a longer term than one year; provided that contracts with other
governmental agencies for utility services the rates for which are regulated by
the state or national government, for public works improvements for which funds
have been provided or for services, may be for a longer term in the discretion
of the City Council.
SECTION 712. ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.
   The City Manager shall direct the establishment and supervise the
maintenance of a uniform system of accounting applicable for all departments
and other agencies of the city, conforming to modern accepted practices of
municipal accounting, which shall be adequate to account for all monies on hand
and for all income and expenditures in such detail as will provide complete and
informative data concerning the financial affairs of the city and in such
manner as will be readily acceptable to audit and review.
SECTION 713. AUTHORIZATION AND CONTROL OF EXPENDITURE.
   No expenditure of city funds shall be made except for the purpose and in the
manner specified in an appropriation by the Council. The City Manager shall
establish and direct such systems of internal control and audit as the City
Manager may find necessary to insure the fulfillment of the purpose of this
Section.
SECTION 714. ALL MONEY TO TREASURY.
   All public monies collected by any officer, or employee, of the city shall
be paid into the City Treasury, without any deduction on account of any claim
for fees, commissions, or any other cause or pretense; and the compensation of
any officer, employee, or other person so collecting money, shall be paid by
demands upon the Treasury, duly audited as other demands are audited and paid.
SECTION 715. SUITS MUST BE PRECEDED BY DEMAND.
   No suit shall be brought upon any claim for money or damages against the
City of Eureka until a demand for the same has been presented as herein
provided, and rejected in whole or in part. If rejected in part, suit may be
brought to recover the whole. Nor shall suit be brought against said city upon
any such claim or demand, if the same shall be in whole approved and audited as
provided herein; provided, that nothing herein contained shall be construed so
as to deprive the holder of any demand of his right to resort to a writ of
mandate, or other proceedings against the said Council, or any Board,
Commission or Committee or officer of said city, to compel it, or him, to act
upon such demand or claim, or to pay the same when so audited.
SECTION 716. INDEPENDENT AUDIT.
   The Council shall employ at the beginning of each fiscal year a certified
public accountant who shall, at such time or times as may be specified by the
Council and at such other times as the certified public accountant shall
determine, examine the books, records, inventories and reports of all officers
and employees who receive, handle or disburse public funds, and of such other
officers, employees or department as the Council may direct. The Council may
direct that such certified public accountant may conduct the independent audit
throughout the fiscal year and make reports at intervals required by the
Council, but a report for the entire fiscal year shall be filed within 210 days
after the closing of the books for said fiscal year, and copies of such reports
shall be filed with a Council and with the City Manager, and shall be available
for public inspection and review.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 720. OFF-STREET VEHICULAR PARKING.
   The Council is hereby expressly authorized to exercise the powers vested by
law in any city to provide off-street vehicular parking facilities and to
provide for the financing thereof in whole or in part from revenues derived
therefrom.
ARTICLE VIII. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION 800. PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM.
   There shall be a personnel merit system in the City of Eureka which shall
include all offices and employees in the city government except:
   (a)   offices required by this Charter to be filled by election or
appointment by the Mayor and/or City Council.
   (b)   part-time or temporary employees who are regularly employed for less
than one-half time throughout the year, or who are employed in seasonal
employment for not more than 120 days in any consecutive 12 months; and
   (c)   those engaged by contract for special services of a professional,
scientific or technical nature, or where the service is essentially non-
personal in character.
   All appointments and promotions in the personnel merit system of the city
shall be based on merit as determined by tests and by records of achievement.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 801. PROVISIONAL APPOINTMENTS.
   Provisional appointments to positions in the personnel merit system may be
made pending the creation of eligible lists, as provided for in the City
Personnel Rules and Regulations.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 802. PERSONNEL ORDINANCE.
   The City Council shall by ordinance provide a modern system of personnel
administration based on the personnel merit principle required by this Article,
consistent with modern accepted practices in public personnel administration,
and giving due consideration to the relative interests of the city as an
employer and of its employees.
SECTION 803. REMOVAL OR SUSPENSION.
   Any officer or employee of the city subject to the personnel merit system
who shall be removed or suspended by proper authority having charge of his
appointment, shall have a written notice of the cause of his removal or
suspension from duty, and he shall have an opportunity to be heard on the cause
of his removal or suspension at a public hearing of the City Council or
personnel board.
SECTION 804. OATH OF OFFICE.
   Every officer and employee shall, before entering upon the duties of their
respective offices or employments, take and subscribe the oath or affirmation
required by the Constitution of the State of California.
SECTION 805. OFFICIAL BONDS.
   Officers or employees receiving and disbursing or accounting for public
funds are to provide an official bond. The City Council shall determine by
ordinance which other officers and employees are to provide such bond, and
shall determine the amount and terms thereof. All bonds shall be executed by a
responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City
Attorney, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds
shall be paid by the city. There shall be no personal liability upon, or any
right to recover against, a superior officer or his bond for any wrongful act
or omission of his subordinate, unless such superior officer was a party to or
conspired in such wrongful act or omission.
SECTION 806. OFFICERS HOLDING OTHER OFFICE.
   Any elective officer of the City who shall during his term of office hold or
retain any other elective public office to which compensation is attached, or
who shall hold any other position, office or employment the compensation of
which is paid by the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter or by
law, shall be deemed thereby to have vacated the office held by him under the
city government.
SECTION 807. PROHIBITED INTEREST IN CONTRACTS, WORK OR BUSINESS OF THE CITY.
   No member of the Council, and no officer or employee of the city, shall be
or become directly or indirectly financially interested in, or with the
performance of, any contract, work, or business, or in the sale of any article,
the expense, price or consideration of which is payable from the City Treasury,
or in the purchase or lease of any real estate or property belonging to or
taken by the city, or which shall be sold for taxes or assessments or by virtue
of legal process at the suit of the city; provided, however, that any member of
a board, commission or committee serving without compensation may contract to
sell personal or real property to the city to be used by a department of the
city, board, commission or committee other than the board, commission, or
committee on which he serves; and provided further, that no officer or employee
shall be deemed to be financially interested, within the meaning of the
foregoing provisions, if such interest is not a prohibited interest under, and
disclosure is made in accordance with the provisions of Article 4, Chapter 1,
Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code of the State of California as the
same now exists or may hereafter be amended, or under the provisions of the
Political Reform Act of 1974 as the same now exists or may hereafter be amended
or an applicable local conflict of interest code adopted pursuant to said
Political Reform Act of 1974.
   Any member of the Council, or any officer or employee of this city,
violating the provisions of this section, or who shall be directly or
indirectly interested in any franchise, right, or privilege granted by the city
while he is such officer, member, or employee, unless the same shall devolve
upon him by law, shall forfeit his office or employment, and be forever
disqualified from holding any position in the service of the city; and all
contracts made, or rights or franchises granted, in violation of this section
shall be absolutely void.
SECTION 808. PROHIBITED ACTS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   No officer or employee of the city shall be or become a surety on any bond
given to the city, or to any person for the benefit of the city; nor shall any
officer or employee of the city give or promise to give any person any portion
of such officer's or employee's compensation, or any money, or thing of value,
or any position, in consideration of having been or being nominated, appointed,
voted for, or elected to any office or employment under the city. No officer or
employee of the city shall, while in office, accept any donations or gratuity
in money or anything of value, either directly or indirectly from any
subordinate employee, or from any candidate or applicant for any position under
such officer or employee, or from any person seeking special favors or
considerations. Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall
forfeit his office and employment with the city.
SECTION 809. ABSENCE FROM CITY; OR CONVICTION OF FELONY.
   If any non-elected officer, of the city shall absent himself therefrom for
more than thirty days, consecutively, without the permission of the Council, or
be convicted of a felony his office shall be and become vacant, and such
vacancy shall be filed, as in this Charter provided.
(Amended by election on November 5, 1991)
SECTION 810. NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   No officer or employee in any department of the city government shall ever
be appointed or removed for or on account of partisanship, political opinions,
race, color, ethnic or national origin, religious beliefs, sex, ancestry, age,
physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, sexual orientation,
family care or medical leave status, veteran status, marital status or any
other protected status as defined by Federal, State and/or local legislation.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
ARTICLE IX. FRANCHISES
SECTION 900. AWARD OF FRANCHISE; ABANDONMENT.
   All grants of franchises by the Council shall be awarded to the highest
responsible bidder in accordance with a franchise ordinance adopted by the
Council or if no such ordinance has been adopted, in pursuance of the general
laws of the State of California. Whenever any franchise shall have been in
disuse, in whole or in part, for the period of one year, there being no legal
impediment to the use thereof, it shall be deemed abandoned and forfeited to
the extent of such disuse, and said franchise, or part thereof, so in disuse,
shall no longer be used or enjoyed. When in the exercise of any franchise, use
has been made in any way of any street or alley of the city, such street or
alley shall be put in good repair, and all the materials or obstructions which
have been placed therein in the exercise of such franchise shall be removed
therefrom at the expense of the person or company who has held such franchise
whenever the franchise is abandoned or falls into disuse.
ARTICLE X. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
SECTION 1000. RESERVATION TO PEOPLE OF RIGHT OF INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND
RECALL.
   The people reserve to themselves the right of initiative, referendum and
recall of the elected officials, and the Council may on its own motion refer
matters to referendum vote, all in the manner prescribed by general law.
ARTICLE XI. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 1100. BOOKS OPEN TO PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   All books and records of every office and department shall be open to the
inspection of any citizen, consistent with California Constitutional
requirements concerning public records.
(Amended by election November 2, 2010)
SECTION 1101. RECORDS AND OTHER PERSONAL PROPERTY OF CITY.
   All books, papers, plats, charts, records, files, and stationery belonging
to the city, made, or made use of, by any officer or employee of the city in
the performance of official duties, shall be deemed and considered as belonging
to the city, and shall be delivered to the successor in office, who shall give
duplicate receipts in writing therefor, one of which shall be filed with the
City Clerk.
SECTION 1102. DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the provisions or the context otherwise requires, as used in this
Charter:
   (a)   “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
   (b)   “City” is the City of Eureka and “department”, “board”, “commission”,
“committee”, “agency”, “officer” or “employee” is a department, board,
commission, committee, agency, officer or employee, as the case may be, of the
City of Eureka.
   (c)   “County” is the County of Humboldt.
   (d)   “State” is the State of California.
   (e)   “Council” is the City Council of the City of Eureka
   (f)   “Mayor” is the Mayor of the City of Eureka.
   (g)   “Member”, “Member of the Council” or “Council Member” means any one of
the five members of the Council.
   (h)   “He” or “His” whenever the male gender is used it shall refer to
persons of either gender.
(Amended by election on November 5, 1991)
SECTION 1103. HEADINGS.
   Article and section headings appearing in this Charter are for illustration
and information and do not in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent
of the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 1104. VALIDITY AND SEPARABILITY.
   If any provision of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid the remainder of the Charter and the application
of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
SECTION 1105. REVOLVING DOOR PROHIBITION.
   No officer appointed by the City Council or elected city official shall
appear before the city and attempt to influence either appointed or elected
city officials on any matter of policy or administration as a paid or
compensated representative of or consultant to a private entity for a period of
twelve (12) months after leaving office.
(Added by election on November 5, 1991)
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
10.01   Title; reference to code
   
10.02   Authority
   
10.03   Effective date
   
10.04   Effect of code on past actions and obligations
   
10.05   Reference to specific ordinances
   
10.06   Validity of code
   
10.07   Repeal of ordinances
   
10.08   Maintenance of code
   
10.09   Exclusions from code
   
10.10   Scope of chapter
   
10.11   Provisions construed as restatements and continuations
   
10.12   Tenure of officers preserved
   
10.13   Meaning of section, subsection and subchapter
   
10.14   Reference to acts or omissions within the city
   
10.15   Acts by deputies
   
10.16   Writing
   
10.17   References to ordinances
   
10.18   Service of notices
   
10.19   Statute of limitations
   
10.20   Definitions
   
10.21   Ordinances and regulations directory
   
10.22   Prohibited acts
   
10.23   Imposition of penalty; determination of punishment
   
10.24   Place of confinement
   
10.25   Fees, charges, and taxes made a civil debt
   
10.26   Severability
Administrative Citations
   
10.35   Purpose
   
10.36   Applicability
   
10.37   Severability
   
10.38   Definitions
   
10.39   Administrative citations
   
10.40   Amount of administrative fines
   
10.41   Payment of administrative fines
   
10.42   Delinquent administrative fines; penalties and interest
   
10.43   Issuance of permits
   
10.44   Service of administrative citations and other notices
   
10.45   Notice of violation
   
10.46   Correction of violation
   
10.47   Request for administrative hearing
   
10.48   Advance deposit; hardship waiver
   
10.49   Hearing officer
   
10.50   Hearing date
   
10.51   Conduct of hearings
   
10.52   Hearing officer's decision
   
10.53   Disposition of administrative fines
   
10.54   Right to judicial review
   
10.55   Late payment charges
   
10.56   Recovery of administrative fine, penalties, interest and costs
   
10.57   Lien procedure generally
   
10.58   Recording of lien
   
10.59   Satisfaction of lien
   
10.99   General penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE; REFERENCE TO CODE.
   This code shall be known as the “Eureka Municipal Code.” It shall be
sufficient to refer to this code as the Eureka Municipal Code in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be
sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing this
code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the
Eureka Municipal Code, or a portion thereof.
('63 Code, § 1-1.01)
§ 10.02 AUTHORITY.
   Except as otherwise herein or hereafter provided, this code consists of all
the regulatory, penal, and administrative laws of general application of the
city, codified pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Gov't Code Article 2
of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 (commencing with § 50020).
('63 Code, § 1-1.02)
§ 10.03 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance
adopting this code by reference.
('63 Code, § 1-1.03)
§ 10.04 EFFECT OF CODE ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of
the city shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of
ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of this
code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective
date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of
the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such
license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof,
nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required
to be posted, filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested
rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect.
('63 Code, § 1-1.04)
§ 10.05 REFERENCE TO SPECIFIC ORDINANCES.
   The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this code.
('63 Code, § 1-1.05)
§ 10.06 VALIDITY OF CODE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this code is for
any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council hereby declares
that it would have passed this code and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause, and phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared
unconstitutional.
('63 Code, § 1-1.06)
§ 10.07 REPEAL OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of
this code are hereby repealed.
('63 Code, § 1-1.07)
§ 10.08 MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
   (A)   Not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for use and
examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three
additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on
file in his office as the official copies of the code. Additional copies of the
code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the city as shall
be prescribed by the City Manager.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code, or upon
the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and
shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this code of the
taking of such action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinance
pursuant to which such action is taken.
   (C)   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the code
shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly
indexed for ready reference.
   (D)   At least quarterly the City Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of
this code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the
notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is
adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the code,
prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city
and the general public, may be brought up to date.
('63 Code, § 1-1.08)
§ 10.09 EXCLUSIONS FROM CODE.
   Ordinances relating to matters of a special or temporary nature only are
excluded from this code and are unaffected by the provisions of this code.
('63 Code, § 1-1.09)
§ 10.10 SCOPE OF CHAPTER.
   Unless the provisions of the context otherwise specify, the general
provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter
shall govern the construction of this code. The provisions of this code and all
proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and
to promote justice.
('63 Code, § 1-3.01)
§ 10.11 PROVISIONS CONSTRUED AS RESTATEMENTS AND CONTINUATIONS.
   The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as
restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.
('63 Code, § 1-3.02)
§ 10.12 TENURE OF OFFICERS PRESERVED.
   All persons who, at the time this code takes effect, hold office under any
of the ordinances repealed by this code, which offices are continued by this
code, shall continue to hold them according to their former tenure.
('63 Code, § 1-3.03)
§ 10.13 MEANING OF SECTION, SUBSECTION AND SUBCHAPTER.
   “Section” shall mean a section of this code, unless some other source is
specifically mentioned. “Division” shall mean a division of the section in
which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned.
“Subchapter” shall mean a division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the
chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the
heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
('63 Code, § 1-3.05)
§ 10.14 REFERENCE TO ACTS OR OMISSIONS WITHIN THE CITY.
   This code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the
territorial limits of the city and to that territory outside the city over
which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the constitution of the
state or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property.
('63 Code, § 1-3.06)
§ 10.15 ACTS BY DEPUTIES.
   Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer
or employee, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a
deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized
pursuant to law or ordinance, unless this code expressly provides otherwise.
('63 Code, § 1-3.07)
§ 10.16 WRITING.
   Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by
ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement, or record is
required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the english
language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.
('63 Code, § 1-3.08)
§ 10.17 REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES.
   Whenever any reference is made to an ordinance, the reference shall apply to
such ordinance of the city unless otherwise specifically provided. Whenever any
reference is made to any portion of this code, or to any ordinances of the
city, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or
hereafter made.
('63 Code, § 1-3.09)
§ 10.18 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless
different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, such notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified
or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to such person to be notified at his last known business or residence
address as the same appears in the public records of the city or other records
pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail
shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post
office.
('63 Code, § 1-3.10)
   (B)   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any
officer or employee of the city or by affidavit of any person over the age of
18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
('63 Code, § 1-3.11)
§ 10.19 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or
statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose,
has begun to run before this code goes into effect, the time which has already
run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.
('63 Code, § 1-3.12)
§ 10.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CALENDAR YEAR. From January 1 through December 31 of any given year.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, California.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Eureka.
   COUNTY. The County of Humboldt.
   FISCAL YEAR. From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following
year.
   GENDER. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter genders.
   MAY. This term shall be permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month unless otherwise expressed.
   NUMBER. The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural number
shall include the singular.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OFFICE. The use of the title of any officer, employee, office, or ordinance
shall mean such officer, employee, office, or ordinance of this city, unless
otherwise specified.
   OWNER. A building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such
building or land.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association,
any public corporation, political subdivision, city (excepting the city),
county, district in the county, the state, or the United States of America, or
any department or agency of any thereof, unless this code expressly provides
otherwise.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Money, goods, chattels, things in action, and evidences
of debt.
   PROPERTY. Both real and personal property.
   QUARTERLY. When used to designate a period of time, shall mean the first
three calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three
calendar months.
   REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   SHALL. This term shall be mandatory.
   STATE. The State of California.
   STREET. All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places,
squares, or other public ways in the city which have been or may hereafter be
dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated
in any law of this state.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone
or with others.
   TENSES. The present tense shall include the past and future tenses, and the
future tense shall include the present tense.
('63 Code, § 1-3.13)
§ 10.21 ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS DIRECTORY.
   Except as expressly provided to the contrary, all city ordinances and
regulations do not impose a “mandatory duty” within the meaning of Cal. Gov't
Code § 815.6. Neither the enactment of city ordinances or regulations nor the
failure to discover or to enforce violations thereof is intended to or shall be
construed as imposing liability upon the city.
('63 Code, § 1-3.14) (Ord. 429-C.S., passed 6-20-85)
§ 10.22 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include
causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of
such act or omission.
('63 Code, § 1-2.02)
§ 10.23 IMPOSITION OF PENALTY; DETERMINATION OF PUNISHMENT.
   (A)   Imposition of penalty. The provisions of this code which declare
certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the
court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment
described.
('63 Code, § 1-2.03)
   (B)   Determination of punishment. Whenever in this code the punishment for
a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be
inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to
pass sentence, within such limits as may be prescribed by this code.
('63 Code, § 1-2.04)
§ 10.24 PLACE OF CONFINEMENT.
   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code
and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the city or county jail.
('63 Code, § 1-2.05)
§ 10.25 FEES, CHARGES, AND TAXES MADE A CIVIL DEBT.
   The amount of any fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or tax of
any nature whatsoever imposed by any provision of this code shall be deemed a
civil debt owing to the city. An action may be commenced in the name of the
city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the amount of
any such delinquent or unpaid fee, service charge, utility charge, license, or
tax, together with any penalties applicable thereto as prescribed by this code.
The remedy prescribed by this section shall be accumulative, and the use of an
action to collect such an amount as a debt by civil action shall not bar the
use of any other remedy provided by this code or by law for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions thereof.
('63 Code, § 1-2.06)
§ 10.26 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, unconstitutional, or otherwise
unenforceable, such decision shall not affect other provisions that can be
given effect without the invalid provision or application. The Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, sentence,
clause, and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any section, sentence,
clause, or phrase be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or otherwise
unenforceable.
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
§ 10.35 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The following policies and procedures are adopted to implement a
program of enforcement of the city's zoning, building, fire, health and safety,
conditions on entitlement in terms of city permits and agreements and other
city ordinances.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to seek voluntary and timely compliance
with these provisions and to provide an effective means of enforcement if such
compliance is not obtained in a timely manner.
   (C)   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the municipal affairs provision
of the city charter and Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.4 to provide for the imposition
of an administrative fine for any violation of this code and to set forth the
procedures for the imposition and collection of such fines.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.36 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter provides for administrative citations in addition to all
other legal remedies, criminal, civil, or administrative, which may be pursued
by the city to address any violation of this code. References to "this code"
shall mean the Eureka Municipal Code as it may be hereafter amended as well as
any other code adopted by reference therein. The use of this subchapter shall
be at the sole discretion of the city. The use of any other enforcement
proceedings provided for by this code shall not be considered a prerequisite
for the use of this subchapter, nor shall the use of this subchapter be
considered a prerequisite for the use of any other enforcement proceedings.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.37 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter as now or later amended or its
application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, unconstitutional, or
otherwise unenforceable, such decision shall not affect other provisions that
can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. The Council
hereby declares that it would have adopted this subchapter and each section,
sentence, clause, and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any section,
sentence, clause, or phrase be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or otherwise
unenforceable.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.38 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFECTED DEPARTMENT. Whichever city department that has responsibility to
administer or enforce the applicable provisions of this code.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any city employee or agent authorized to enforce any
provisions of this code or any code adopted by the city.
   PREMISES. The real property of the violator, including contiguous
properties, and/or any buildings, structures or other improvements situated
thereon or affixed thereto, where any violation of any of the provisions of
this code has or is suspected to have occurred or is suspected to be occurring.
The premises may include public property to which a violator has access.
   VIOLATOR. An adult owner, emancipated minor, tenant, occupant, resident or
other person having possession, control or any other ownership interest in or
the right of access to the premises, excluding persons having only a security
interest in the premises, who is suspected or alleged to have violated or to be
in violation of any of the provisions of this code. There may be one or more
violators as to any particular violation.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.39 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   (A)   Authorization to issue administrative citation. Whenever an
enforcement officer charged with enforcement of any provision of this code or
any code adopted by the city determines that a violation of that provision has
occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an
administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation and/or to
the owner of the property to which the violation pertains. If the code
enforcement officer determines that multiple code violations have occurred, the
administrative citation shall address all the violations.
   (B)   Notice of violation in lieu of administrative citation. If the
violation consists of a violation of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing
or zoning regulations that does not create an immediate danger to health or
safety, the enforcement officer may defer issuance of an administrative
citation until the person responsible for a violation has first been given
notice of the violation and an opportunity to correct the violation, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this subchapter.
   (C)   Administrative citations in lieu of criminal citations. An
administrative citation may be issued pursuant to this section in lieu of any
criminal citation, which could have been issued for the same violation. The
issuance of the administrative citation shall not, however, prevent the
issuance of a criminal citation or filing of a criminal complaint for:
      (1)   The same violation when any administrative fine imposed pursuant to
this subchapter has not been paid by the date payment is due;
      (2)   A subsequent violation of the same nature; or
      (3)   A violation that creates, in the opinion of the enforcement
officer, an immediate threat to the health or safety of any person or the
public generally.
   (D)   Contents of administrative citation. Each administrative citation
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The date of the violation;
      (2)   The address or a definite description of the location where the
violation occurred or is occurring;
      (3)   The section of this code which has been violated and a description
of the violation;
      (4)   The amount of the administrative fine for each code violation;
      (5)   A description of the fine payment process, including the date upon
which the fine is due and the place at which the fine shall be paid;
      (6)   An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the
code violation described in the administrative citation;
      (7)   A description of the administrative citation review process,
including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested
and the manner in which review of the citation may be requested; and
      (8)   The name and signature of the citing enforcement officer.
   (E)   Service and filing of administrative citations. The enforcement
officer shall serve the original citation on the person cited in the manner set
forth in this subchapter and shall forward a copy of the administrative
citation to the affected department and finance office.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.40 AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   The amounts of the administrative fines imposed for code violations under
this subchapter shall be established by resolution of the City Council. That
resolution shall also set forth any increased fines for repeat violations of
the same code provision by the same person within 12 months from the date of a
previous administrative citation. Such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation
of any provision of this subchapter is committed, continued, or permitted by
such person.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.41 PAYMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   An administrative fine shall be paid to the city within 30 calendar days
from the date of the administrative citation or, if an administrative hearing
is requested and a hardship waiver granted, the fine shall be payable within 30
calendar days from the date of service of the hearing officer's decision.
Payment of a fine under this subchapter shall not excuse or discharge any
continuation or repeated occurrence of the code violation that is the subject
of the administrative citation.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.42 DELINQUENT ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Penalties. The finance officer or designee shall add a penalty of 10%
to the original amount of any delinquent administrative fine on the last day of
each month after the due date thereof. However, the total amount of such
penalties to be added shall not exceed 50% of the amount of the administrative
fine.
   (B)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any recipient of an
administrative citation who fails to remit an administrative fine by its due
date shall pay interest at the rate of 1% per month, or fraction thereof, on
the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, exclusive of penalties, from
the first day of delinquency until paid.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.43 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Whenever an administrative citation has been issued for the undertaking of
any activity without a permit, license, or franchise required by this code and
the amount of the administrative fine imposed for that violation is delinquent,
no permit, license, or franchise for that activity shall be issued unless and
until the delinquent administrative fine and any applicable penalties and
interest are first paid. A permit may be issued to correct outstanding
violation(s) of this code provided the owner has entered into a settlement and
payment agreement to the satisfaction of the City Manager after first
considering the circumstances, severity and extent of the violation.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01; Am. Ord. 746-C.S., passed 11-17-09)
§ 10.44 SERVICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND OTHER NOTICES.
   The administrative citation and all notices authorized or required to be
given by this subchapter shall be deemed served when made in writing and either
personally delivered to the person cited or responsible for the violation or
deposited in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope with first class
postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his or her last known address as
the same appears in the latest equalized assessment roll of Humboldt County.
Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit
in the United States Post Office depository. Failure of any person to receive
any citation or notice specified in this subchapter shall not affect the
validity of the citation or notice or of the proceedings conducted hereunder.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.45 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Generally. Except as provided in division (B), when a violation
consists of a violation of building, fire, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or
zoning regulations set forth in this code, or any violation of this code, the
enforcement officer may issue a written notice of violation to any person or
persons responsible for the violation prior to the issuance of an
administrative citation for that violation. The notice of violation shall
contain all of the following:
      (1)   The date and location that the violation was observed;
      (2)   The section of this code violated and a description of the
violation;
      (3)   The actions required to correct the violation;
      (4)   A reasonable and definite time period for the correction of the
violation; and
      (5)   Notice that if the violation is not corrected by the date specified
in the notice of violation, an administrative citation may be issued and
administrative fines may be imposed.
   (B)   Exceptions. An administrative citation may be issued in lieu of a
notice of violation if:
      (1)   The person responsible for the violation was issued an
administrative or infraction citation for violation of the same provision of
this code within the immediately preceding 12 months;
      (2)   The violation constitutes, in the opinion of the enforcement
officer, an immediate threat to the health or safety of any person or the
public generally;
      (3)   One or more other violations exist on the property, any one of
which is not subject to §10.45; or
      (4)   The person responsible for the violation currently owes the city
unpaid administrative fines that are delinquent.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.46 CORRECTION OF VIOLATION.
   If the enforcement officer determines that all violations listed in the
notice of violation have been corrected within the time specified in the notice
of violation, an administrative citation shall not be issued. If the
enforcement officer determines that any or all violations listed in the notice
of violation have not been corrected within the time specified, an
administrative citation may be issued for each uncorrected violation or the
enforcement officer may invoke any other remedy provided by law.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.47 REQUEST FOR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was
a violation of this code or of any code adopted by the city, or that he or she
is responsible party, by completing a request for hearing form and returning it
to the City Clerk within 30 days from the date of administrative citation,
together with an advance deposit of the fine or notice that a request for an
advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to §
10.49.
   (B)   A request for hearing form may be obtained from the City Clerk.
   (C)   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and
place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (D)   If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report
concerning the administrative citation to the hearing officer for consideration
at the hearing, then a copy of this report shall be served on the person
requesting the hearing at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.48 ADVANCE DEPOSIT; HARDSHIP WAIVER.
   (A)   Any person who requests a hearing to contest an administrative
citation and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the
administrative fine, as otherwise required by this subchapter, may file for a
hardship waiver. The request for a hardship waiver shall be filed with the
finance office on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form available
from the finance office within ten days of the date of the administrative
citation. Upon the filing of a hardship waiver, the finance officer or designee
shall make a determination whether or not the advance deposit of the fine shall
be waived. The finance officer or designee may waive the requirement of an
advance deposit of the fine only if the person requesting the waiver submits to
the director a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or
materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the finance officer or designee
such person's actual financial inability to deposit the full amount of the fine
with the city in advance of the hearing.
   (B)   The finance officer or designee shall issue a written determination to
issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written
determination of the director shall be served upon the person who applied for
the advance deposit hardship waiver by mail at the address provided in the
waiver application. The determination of the finance officer shall be final.
   (C)   If the finance officer determines not to issue an advance deposit
hardship waiver, the person shall remit the advance deposit to the city no
later than ten days after the date of that decision. If a hardship waiver is
not issued and the advance deposit is not made on or before the tenth day after
the date of the notice of that decision, the applicant shall be deemed to have
waived his or her right to an administrative hearing and the administrative
fine shall be deemed to be delinquent.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.49 HEARING OFFICER.
   The City Manager shall designate one or more persons qualified by education
and experience to serve as hearing officers for administrative hearings
conducted under this subchapter.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.50 HEARING DATE.
   Upon receipt of a timely request for an administrative hearing and the
advance deposit of the administrative fine, or the issuance of a hardship
waiver, a date for the administrative hearing shall be set which is not less
than 15 nor more than 60 days from the date the hearing is requested. Written
notice of the date, time, and location of that hearing shall be provided to the
person requesting the hearing at least 15 days prior to the hearing date.
However, a hearing may be set less than 15 days from the date upon which it is
requested if the person requesting the hearing provides a written waiver of
that time limit and of the 15 day prior written notice of the hearing date,
time, and location. No administrative hearing shall be set or held unless the
fine has been deposited in advance or an advance hardship waiver has been
issued by the finance officer.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.51 CONDUCT OF HEARINGS.
   (A)   Evidentiary rules. At the hearing, the administrative citation shall
constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in the
citation. Both the party contesting the administrative citation and the
enforcement officer shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present
additional evidence concerning the administrative citation. Such evidence may
include the testimony of other witnesses, or the introduction of documents or
other evidence. Such testimony, written documents, or other evidence sought to
be introduced shall not be limited to any legal rules of evidence, save and
except for the rule that it shall be relevant and material to the issues of
whether the violation alleged in the citation occurred and whether the person
cited committed, caused or was responsible for the violation.
   (B)   Waiver of personal appearance at hearing. Instead of appearing at an
administrative hearing in person or by an authorized representative, a person
contesting an administrative citation may request that the hearing officer
decide the matter based on the face of the citation and any other documentary
evidence submitted by the person cited or the enforcing department prior to the
date of the hearing.
   (C)   Failure to appear at hearing. The failure of any person requesting an
administrative hearing to appear at the hearing in person or by an authorized
representative shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to be personally
present at the hearing and the hearing officer shall decide the matter based
upon the citation, any written materials which have previously been submitted
in anticipation of the hearing, and any other evidence which may be presented
at the hearing by the enforcement officer.
   (D)   Attendance of enforcement officer. The enforcement officer who issued
the administrative citation may, but is not required to, attend the
administrative hearing. If the enforcement officer does not attend, he or she
may, prior to the hearing date, submit to the hearing officer reports,
photographs or other documentation regarding the violation for consideration at
the hearing.
   (E)   Continuation of hearings. The hearing officer may continue any hearing
and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the
recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.52 HEARING OFFICER'S DECISION.
   (A)   Written decision. After considering all of the testimony and evidence
admitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to
uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall state in the decision
the reasons therefor.
   (B)   Effect of decision. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final
and shall be served on the cited person within 15 days of the date of the
hearing.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.53 DISPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be
upheld, then the fine amount on deposit with the city shall be retained by the
city. If the fine was deposited with the city and the hearing officer
determines that the administrative citation should be canceled, the city shall
refund the amount of the deposited fine. If, pursuant to a hardship waiver, the
fine has not been deposited with the city, and the hearing officer determines
that the administrative citation should be upheld, the due date for the payment
of the fine shall be 30 calendar days from the date of service of the hearing
officer's decision.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.54 RIGHT TO JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved by the decision of a hearing officer on an
administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by
filing an appeal with the Superior Court of California, County of Humboldt,
Eureka Courthouse, in accordance with the procedures and within the time set
forth in Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.4.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.55 LATE PAYMENT CHARGES.
   Any person who fails to pay to the city any fine or any scheduled partial
payment of such fine pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter on or before
the date that the fine or scheduled partial payment of such fine is due shall
be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in
the schedule of administrative citation fines established by resolution by the
City Council.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.56 RECOVERY OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINE, PENALTIES, INTEREST AND COSTS.
   The city may collect any past due administrative fine, penalty, and interest
charge by use of all available legal means. The obligation for past due
administrative fines, penalties, and interest imposed for any violation which
arises from a condition or use of any real property, or structure thereon,
which is owned by the person cited, which has not been fully satisfied within
90 calendar days, and for which no appeal has been filed may also be assessed
and made a lien against the real property upon which the violation occurred.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01; Am. Ord. 746-C.S., passed 11-17-09)
§ 10.57 LIEN PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
   (A)   Whenever an administrative fine has been imposed pursuant to this
subchapter on an owner of property for a violation occurring or existing on
that property and the fine has not been fully paid within 60 calendar days of
the date upon which such fine became due and payable, and is not the subject of
a pending appeal filed under Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.4, the finance officer may
initiate proceedings to establish and record a lien against the property.
   (B)   Prior to the recording of the lien, the finance officer shall prepare
and file with the City Clerk a report stating, for each property for which a
lien is proposed, the amount of the delinquent administrative fine, any
applicable penalties and interest, and an administrative fee established by
resolution of the City Council to recover the administrative costs incurred in
recording the lien and carrying out the lien procedures of this subchapter.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing by the
City Council of the report and any protests or objections thereto.
   (D)   The finance officer shall cause written notice to be served on the
owner of each affected property not less than ten days prior to the time set
for the hearing. Such notice shall set forth the amount of the delinquent
administrative fine and any penalties and interest which are due. Such notice
shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each
owner of such property to be assessed as that owner's address appears on the
last equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Humboldt,
whichever is more current. Service by mail as provided for herein shall be
effective on the date of mailing, and the failure of any person to actually
receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the notice.
   (E)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may adopt a
resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the amount of the lien
proposed for each affected property and order that the amount not discharged as
to any property be reduced to a lien against that property. The City Council
may thereupon order that the fee be specifically assessed against the property
involved. If the City Council orders that the fee be specially assessed against
the property, it shall confirm the assessment; and
   (F)   Thereafter said assessment may be collected at the same time and in
the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be
subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable
to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable
to the special assessment.
   (G)   A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the city for a money
judgment.
   (H)   The city may recover from the property owner any costs incurred
regarding the process and recording of the lien and providing notice to the
property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01; Am. Ord. 746-C.S., passed 11-17-09; Am. Ord.
850-C.S., passed 11-1-16)
§ 10.58 RECORDING OF LIEN.
   Within 30 days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council
imposing a lien, the City Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the
office of the county recorder for the County of Humboldt, California.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.59 SATISFACTION OF LIEN.
   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding administrative
fines, penalties, interest, and administrative fees, the finance officer shall
provide the property owner or concerned escrow company or financial institution
with a notice of satisfaction of lien for recordation with the office of the
county recorder. Recordation of the notice of satisfaction shall cancel the
city's lien.
(Ord. 638-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of
any code adopted by reference by this code. Any person violating any of such
provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this
code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor
under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which
any violation of any provision of this code, or the provisions of any code
adopted by reference by this code, is committed, continued, or permitted by
such person and shall be punishable accordingly. Any violation of this code
which is declared to be a misdemeanor shall be considered and treated as an
infraction subject to the procedures described in Cal. Penal Code §§ 19.6 and
19.7, when:
      (1)   The City Attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an
infraction unless the defendant, at the time he is arraigned, after being
informed of his rights, elects to have the case proceed as a misdemeanor; or
      (2)   The court, with the consent of the defendant, determines that the
offense is an infraction in which event the case shall proceed as if the
defendant had been arraigned on an infraction complaint.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by this city, and each day
such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
('63 Code, § 1-2.01)
   (C)   Each violation of this code expressly declared to be an infraction is
punishable by:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation of the same
ordinance within one year;
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one year.
('63 Code, § 1-2.07)
(Ord. 362-C.S., passed 5-18-82)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
         
30.   CITY COUNCIL
         
31.   CITY OFFICIALS
         
32.   CITY DEPARTMENTS
         
33.   BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
         
34.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
         
35.   FINANCE, REVENUE AND TAXATION
         
36.   HEALTH FACILITY REVENUE BONDS
         
37.   ELECTIONS
         
38.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
         
39.   CITY POLICY
         
40.   TRANFERS OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
30.00   Definitions
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Special meetings
   
30.03   Adjourned sessions
   
30.04   Presiding officer
   
30.05   Mayor Pro Tem
   
30.06   Temporary Chairperson
   
30.07   Roll call
   
30.08   Quorum
   
30.09   Order of business
   
30.10   Minutes
   
30.11   Rules of debate
   
30.12   Addressing the Council
   
30.13   Decorum
   
30.14   Persons authorized to be within the rail
   
30.15   Ordinances, resolutions and contracts
   
30.16   Roll call vote required
   
30.17   Reports and resolutions to be filed with City Clerk
   
30.18   Attendance of witnesses; administration of oaths
   
30.19   Council chambers
   
30.20   Disclosure of confidential information
   
30.21   Time for filing nomination papers
 
   
30.99   Penalty
§ 30.00 DEFINITIONS.
   Words or phrases in this chapter shall bear the definitions set forth in the
Ralph M. Brown Act and the California Public Records Act, unless otherwise
specified herein. Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are
used, they shall be:
   AGENDA. The agenda of the body covered by this chapter which has scheduled a
public meeting. The agenda must meet the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code §
54954.2 and § 30.01(D). For closed sessions, the agenda must meet the
requirements set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 54954.5.
   AGENDA AND RELATED MATERIALS. The agenda, all reports and other written
material prepared and forwarded by staff to any body covered by this chapter
and other materials forwarded to the body by the deadline for posting agendas,
which provide background information or recommendations concerning the subject
matter of any agenda item for any meeting of that body covered by this chapter.
   AGENDA SUBSCRIBER. Any individual or group of persons who request, on a
regular basis, the receipt of an agenda or an agenda and related materials.
   BUSINESS DAY. Any day other than a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday and
during those regular hours of such days established for the operation of the
city department or office.
   CITY. The City of Eureka.
   ON-LINE. Accessible via computer, tablet, mobile device or other electronic
device without a charge to the user.
   The POLICY BODIES covered by this chapter are: the City Council, Successor
Agency to the Redevelopment Agency, and the Public Financing Authority.
(Ord. 856-C.S., passed 5-16-17)
§ 30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   Time. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first and third
Tuesday and Thursday of each month at 6:00 p.m. A 9:30 p.m. curfew will be
observed on all open session agenda items. The Council shall hold closed
session meetings on the first and third Tuesday and Thursday of each month at
5:00 p.m. Any regular meeting may be canceled or rescheduled by a majority vote
of the Council provided the vote is taken no later than at the regular meeting
immediately preceding the regular meeting to be canceled or rescheduled.
   (B)   Place. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Council chambers on the second floor of the City Hall. Adjourned or special
meetings may be held in a place other than the Council chambers when designated
by City Clerk or City Manager.
   (C)   Agenda. The agenda shall contain a brief, general description of each
item of business to be transacted or discussed during the meeting and shall
avoid the use of undefined abbreviations or acronym not in common usage and
terms whose meaning is not known to the general public. It may refer to
explanatory documents, including, but not limited to, correspondence or
reports, in the related material.
   (D)   Notice and agenda requirements; regular meetings. All agenda
summaries, bills, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, communications,
reports and other matters to be submitted to the Council for action,
consideration, or discussion shall be delivered to the City Clerk not later
than the end of business 11 days before a regular Council meeting, or at least
24 hours before a special Council meeting. The City Clerk, in consultation with
the City Manager, shall prepare an agenda that conforms to §
30.01(C) to be presented to the Council. In an emergency, supporting documents
to an agenda item may be delivered to the City Clerk prior to the meeting. The
City Clerk shall furnish the Mayor, each member of the Council, the City
Manager, the City Attorney, and media, agenda subscribers and the public with a
copy of the agenda on the Wednesday prior to the regular Council meeting. The
agenda shall be made public by posting the agenda on the public bulletin board
outside City Hall and on the city’s website.
   (E)   Supplemental agenda and related materials requirements.
Notwithstanding the notice provisions of §
30.01(D), a body may amend or supplement a posted agenda or agenda-related
materials no later than 72 hours before a regular meeting.
   (F)   Public hearings. The City Clerk with the concurrence of the City
Manager is authorized to schedule, advertise, and place on the agenda all
public hearings required by law.
(‘63 Code, § 2-2.01) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 89-C.S., passed 3-10-
67; Am. Ord. 252-C.S., passed 7-4-75; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-82; Am.
Ord. 457-C.S., passed 1-6-87; Am. Ord. 471-C.S., passed 5-19-88; Am. Ord. 498-
C.S., passed 8-10-89; Am. Ord. 507-C.S., passed 2-1-90; Am. Ord. 629-C.S.,
passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 741-C.S., passed 5-19-09; Am. Ord. 856-C.S., passed 5-
16-17)
§ 30.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings may be called by the Mayor or by three members of the
Council. Notices of special meetings shall be served on each member of the
Council, the Mayor, the City Attorney, and the City Manager personally or by e-
mail. Special agendas will be delivered to individuals who have subscribed in
receive Council agendas. At such special meeting no other business shall be
considered except that specified in the notice. Notice of special meetings
shall be given to all news media.
   (B)   Notice and agenda requirements: special meetings. All agenda
summaries, bills, resolutions, ordinances, contract documents, communications,
reports and other matters to be submitted to the Council for action,
consideration, or discussion shall be delivered to the city at least 24 hours
prior to the special meeting. Materials for scheduled special meetings/
workshops shall be submitted to the City Clerk no later than close of business
the Thursday prior to the special meeting/workshop for Friday publication.
(‘63 Code, § 2-2.02) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 856-C.S., passed 5-
16-17)
§ 30.03 ADJOURNED SESSIONS.
   Any session of the Council may be continued or adjourned from day to day or
for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than
until the next regular meeting thereafter.
('63 Code, § 2-2.03) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60)
§ 30.04 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor, or in his absence the Mayor Pro Tem of the Council,
sometimes referred to in this chapter as the presiding officer, shall take the
chair at the hour appointed for the Council to meet and shall immediately call
the members to order.
('63 Code, § 2-2.04)
   (B)   The presiding officer shall preserve order at all meetings of the
Council. He shall state every question coming before the Council, announce the
decision of the Council on the subject, and decide all questions of order
subject, however, to an appeal to the Council, in which event a majority vote
of the Council, shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order.
('63 Code, § 2-2.08)
(Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-82)
§ 30.05 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   The Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tem of the Council.
The Mayor Pro Tem of the Council shall preside at all meetings of the Council
during the absence of the Mayor, and shall act as Mayor during the absence or
disability of the Mayor and in the event of vacancy of the office of Mayor,
pending the selection of a successor. The Mayor Pro Tem of the Council shall be
elected annually at the second meeting in November of each year.
('63 Code, § 2-2.05) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82)
§ 30.06 TEMPORARY CHAIRPERSON.
   In the absence of the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem of the Council, the City
Clerk or his or her deputy shall call the Council to order and call the roll of
the members. If a quorum is found to be present, the Council shall proceed to
elect, by a majority vote of those present, a Chairperson of the meeting to act
until the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem of the Council appears. Upon the arrival of
the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem of the Council, the Temporary Chairperson shall
immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business
immediately before the Council.
('63 Code, § 2-2.06) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82)
§ 30.07 ROLL CALL.
   Before proceeding with the business of the Council, the City Clerk or his
deputy shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall
be entered in the minutes.
('63 Code, § 2-2.07) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60)
§ 30.08 QUORUM.
   Three members of the Council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or
special meeting of the Council. When there is no quorum, the Mayor, Mayor Pro
Tem of the Council, or any member of the Council shall adjourn such meeting or,
if no member of the Council is present, the City Clerk shall adjourn the
meeting.
('63 Code, § 2-2.09) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82)
§ 30.09 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The business of all regular meetings of the Council shall be transacted in
the order set by resolution, unless the Council, by a vote of at least a
majority of the members present, shall suspend the rules and change the order.
(‘63 Code, § 2-2.10) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82; Am. Ord. 545-C.S., passed 6-18-92; Am. Ord. 616-C.S., passed 5-20-97; Am.
Ord. 796-C.S., passed 4-16-13; Am. Ord. 825-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 30.10 MINUTES.
   (A)   Reading of the minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of the
previous Council meeting is requested by a member of the Council, such minutes
may be approved without reading if the Clerk has previously furnished each
member with a synopsis thereof.
('63 Code, § 2-2.11)
   (B)   Preparation and distribution of minutes; synopsis of debate. The
minutes of the Council, or journal of its proceedings, shall be kept by the
City Clerk, shall be neatly typewritten in a book kept for that purpose, and
shall include a record of each particular type of business transacted set off
in paragraphs with proper subheads; provided, however, that the City Clerk
shall be required to make a record only of such business as was actually passed
upon by vote of the Council and shall not be required to record any remarks of
members of the Council or any other person except at the special request of a
member of the Council; and provided, further, that a record shall be made of
the names of persons addressing the Council and the title of the subject matter
to which their remarks related.
   (C)   Members may file protests against Council action. Any member shall
have the right to have the reasons for his dissent from, or protest against,
any action of the Council entered in the minutes of the Council meeting.
('63 Code, § 2-2.20)
(Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60)
§ 30.11 RULES OF DEBATE.
   (A)   Presiding officer may debate and vote. The Mayor Pro Tem of the
Council or such other member of the Council as may be presiding may move,
second, and debate from the chair subject only to such limitations of debate as
are by these rules imposed on all members. He shall not be deprived of any of
the rights and privileges of a Councilmember by reason of his acting as the
presiding officer. The Mayor may enter the debate on any question before the
Council.
   (B)   Getting the floor; improper references to be avoided. Every
Councilmember desiring to speak shall address the Chair and, upon recognition
by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate
and shall avoid all personalities and indecorous language. Every Councilmember
desiring to question the administrative staff shall address his question to the
City Manager, who shall be entitled either to answer the inquiries himself or
to designate some member of his staff for that purpose.
   (C)   Interruptions. A Councilmember once recognized shall not be
interrupted when speaking, unless called to order by the presiding officer,
unless a point of order is raised by another member or unless the speaker
chooses to yield to questions by another member. If a Councilmember while
speaking shall be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question
of order shall be determined and, if in order, he shall be permitted to
proceed.
   (D)   Privilege of closing debate. The Councilmember moving the adoption of
an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
   (E)   Remarks of Councilmember; entry in minutes. A Councilmember may
request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having a written
abstract of his statement on any subject under consideration by the Council
entered in the minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such statement shall
be entered in the minutes.
('63 Code, § 2-2.12) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82)
§ 30.12 ADDRESSING THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Right to address. Any person desiring to address the Council may do so
after first securing the permission of the presiding officer so to do;
provided, however, under the following headings of business any qualified and
interested person shall have the right to address the Council upon obtaining
recognition by the presiding officer:
      (1)   Written communications. Any person may address the Council by
written communication in regard to any matter concerning the city's business.
      (2)   Oral communications. Any person, or his authorized representative,
may address the Council by oral communication on any matter concerning the
city's business or on any matter over which the Council has control.
      (3)   Public hearings and protests. Interested persons, or their
authorized representatives, may address the Council by reading protests,
petitions, or communications relating to zoning, sewer and street proceedings,
hearings on protests, appeals, and petitions, or similar matters in regard to
matters then under consideration.
('63 Code, § 2-2.14)
   (B)   Addressing the Council after a motion is made. After a motion is made
by the Council, no person shall address the Council without first securing the
permission of the Council so to do.
('63 Code, § 2-2.15)
   (C)   Manner of addressing the Council. Each person addressing the Council
shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the records.
All remarks shall be addressed to the Council as a body and not to any member
thereof. No person, other than the Council and the person having the floor,
shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a
member of the Council, without the permission of the presiding officer. No
question shall be asked a Councilmember except through the presiding officer.
('63 Code, § 2-2.16)
(Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-82)
§ 30.13 DECORUM.
   (A)   The following guidelines ensure that the public's business is
efficiently and effectively carried out during public meetings:
      (1)   Public comments shall be limited to topics that are within the City
Council's subject matter jurisdiction;
      (2)   Public comments are limited to three minutes;
      (3)   The City Council supports the public's right to voice opinions and
disagreement, and encourages civil discourse on matters of public importance.
Personal attacks, or statements of a racist, hateful, or bigoted nature, are
strongly discouraged.
      (4)   The public does not have a right to make obscene, defamatory,
fraudulent, or threatening statements, or to make statements that incite
violence or criminal conduct. These categories of speech, which are not
protected by the First Amendment, are not allowed at City Council meetings.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 54957.95, the presiding officer may
cause a person or persons to be removed for disrupting the meeting as follows:
      (1)   Prior to removal, the presiding officer or designee will warn the
person or persons that their behavior is disrupting the meeting and that their
failure to cease the behavior may result in removal; unless the behavior
entails a use of force or a true threat, in which case no warning is necessary
prior to removal.
      (2)   If the disruption does not cease after warning, the presiding
officer shall request that the sergeant-at-arms remove the person or persons
from the chambers so that public business may resume.
      (3)   The presiding officer may call a recess to determine, in
consultation with staff and the sergeant-at-arms, whether a violation of this
policy has occurred.
      (4)   Under limited circumstances, removal of all persons in attendance
may be necessary; if this is the case, members of the press will be allowed to
remain in the meeting.
   (C)   Persons disrupting the meeting may be cited for violation of Cal.
Penal Code § 403.
(Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 323-C.S., passed 8-3-82; Am. Ord. 682-
C.S., passed 7-6-04; Am. Ord. 812-C.S., passed 6-2-15; Am. Ord. 944-C.S.,
passed 3-21-23)
§ 30.14 PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO BE WITHIN THE RAIL.
   No person, except city officials, their representatives, and news reporters,
shall be permitted within the rail in front of the Council chambers without the
express consent of the Council.
('63 Code, § 2-2.19) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60)
§ 30.15 ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Preparation of ordinances. No ordinance shall be prepared for
presentation to the Council unless ordered by a majority vote of the Council,
requested in writing by the Mayor or City Manager, or prepared by the City
Attorney on his or her own initiative.
   (B)   Prior approval by administrative staff. All ordinances, resolutions,
and contract documents, before presentation to the City Attorney or his or her
authorized representative shall have been examined and approved for
administration by the City Manager or his or her representative when there are
substantive matters of administration involved.
   (C)   Introducing for passage or approval.
      (1)   Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring
introduction shall be introduced and sponsored by a member of the Council,
except that the City Manager or City Attorney may present ordinances,
resolutions, and other matters or subjects to the Council, and any
Councilmember may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such ordinances,
resolutions, or other matters or subjects be adopted.
      (2)   Ordinances, other than urgency ordinances and ordinances required
by law, shall not be passed within five days of their introduction nor at other
than a regular meeting.
      (3)   The title of all ordinances shall be read before introduction and
passage. Passage shall never be made on the same day nor within five days of
introduction except as to ordinances which take effect immediately upon passage
and approval as provided in the Charter of the city.
      (4)   Within ten days after its approval by the Mayor, the City Clerk
shall cause the title of each ordinance to be published at least once in a
newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the city.
   (D)   Reading. Upon request of any Councilmember, no vote shall be taken on
any ordinance, resolution, nor motion until the same is read in full.
('63 Code, § 2-2.21) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82; Am. Ord. 580-C.S., passed 10-20-94)
§ 30.16 ROLL CALL VOTE REQUIRED.
   The ayes and noes shall be taken and entered by the City Clerk or Council
Clerk in the minutes of the Council or journal of its proceedings in the final
action of any business actually passed upon by the vote of the Council.
('63 Code, § 2-2.22) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60)
§ 30.17 REPORTS AND RESOLUTIONS TO BE FILED WITH CITY CLERK.
   All reports and resolutions shall be filed with the City Clerk and the title
of such shall be entered in the minutes.
('63 Code, § 2-2.23) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82)
§ 30.18 ATTENDANCE OF WITNESSES; ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS.
   (A)   In relation to matters coming before it for disposition, the Council
shall have the power and authority to compel the attendance of witnesses, to
examine them under oath, and to compel the production of evidence, including
all papers, relating to any business before it. Subpoenas may be issued in the
name of the city and may be attested to by the City Clerk. Disobedience of such
subpoenas or refusal to testify (upon other than Constitutional grounds) shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine as provided in §
30.99 of this chapter.
   (B)   The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem of the Council, and each member of the
Council shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations relative to
any business brought before the Council or under consideration by committees of
the Council.
('63 Code, § 2-2.24) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-
82)
§ 30.19 COUNCIL CHAMBERS.
   (A)   Use. The Council chambers shall be under the supervision and control
of the City Clerk or his/her designee when the Council is not in session.
Except as provided in this chapter, they shall be used solely by the Council
for the transaction of public business of the city. If not required for such
use, the City Clerk may permit their use by agencies of the federal, state, or
city government for the transaction of public business, and by groups,
societies, or organizations for public, literary, scientific, recreational, or
educational meetings, or for the discussion of matters of general or public
interest to the citizens of the city.
   (B)   Application for use. Application for such use shall be made to the
City Clerk or his/her designee in such manner as may be prescribed by him. The
City Clerk shall give preference to use by public agencies. The City Clerk
shall not grant the use of the Council chambers to any person, group, society,
or organization for the commission of any act intended to further any program
or movement, the purpose of which is to accomplish the overthrow of the
government of the United States or of the state by force, violence, or other
unlawful means. Any permission granted for the use of the Council chambers may
be cancelled or rejected by the City Clerk when necessary for the protection of
city property, the preservation of order, or other sufficient reason.
('63 Code, § 2-2.25) (Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 2865, passed 6-6-61;
Am. Ord. 370-C.S., passed 8-3-82)
§ 30.20 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Councilmembers and appointed and elected officials of the city shall not,
without prior Council authorization, disclose confidential information properly
received and discussed during a closed session of the City Council pursuant to
the Ralph M. Brown Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 54950, et seq., concerning the
closed session with the Attorney General, District Attorney, or Chief of Police
or the respective deputies on matters posing a threat to the public's right of
access to public services or public facilities, the appointment, employment, or
dismissal of a public employee, the hearing of complaints or charges brought
against a public employee unless such employee requests a public hearing,
discussions with the city's designated Employee Relations Officer, or
litigation, nor shall such persons use such information to advance the
financial or other private interests of themselves or others. Violation of this
section may be deemed misconduct in office and may constitute cause for removal
from office. Notwithstanding §
10.99, no other penalty shall attach to a violation of this section and any
person present may disclose violations of the Ralph M. Brown Act.
('63 Code, § 2-2.26) (Ord. 334-C.S., passed 11-7-78)
§ 30.21 TIME FOR FILING NOMINATION PAPERS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of the law, whenever municipal elections
under the Charter are consolidated with the statewide primary election, the
period for the filing of nomination documents by candidates shall commence on
the 113th day prior to the election. The nomination documents shall be filed
not later than 5:00 p.m. on the 88th day prior to the general election in the
office of the City Clerk during regular office hours.
('63 Code, § 2-2.27) (Ord. 358-C.S., passed 1-5-82)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of §
30.18(B) shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99 and may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of
the City Attorney. (‘63 Code, § 2-2.18)
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of §
30.18 shall be subject to the provisions of §
10.99 and may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of
the City Attorney. (‘63 Code, § 2-2.24)
(Ord. 2834, passed 4-19-60; Am. Ord. 323-C.S., passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. 370-
C.S., passed 8-3-82; Am. Ord. 812-C.S., passed 6-2-15)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Official bonds
   
31.02   City Manager duties as to loans
   
31.03   County Health Officer to act as City Health Officer
   
31.04   Contracts, conveyances, and other transactions
Cross-reference:
   Personnel regulations; salaries and benefits, see
Ch. 34
§ 31.01 OFFICIAL BONDS.
   (A)   Benefits. Every official bond given pursuant to law executed by any
officer of the city shall inure to the benefit of any person within the city as
well as to the city, and any such bond is hereby declared to be for the use and
benefit of all persons who may be injured or aggrieved by a wrongful act or
default of such officer in his official capacity. Any person so injured or
aggrieved may bring suit on such bond in his own name without an assignment
thereof.
('63 Code, § 2-5.201)
   (B)   Suits for recovery. No such bond shall be void on the first recovery
of a judgment thereof, but suit may be afterwards brought from time to time and
judgment thereon recovered by the city or by any person to whom a right of
action has accrued against such officer and his surety until all penalties of
the bond are exhausted.
('63 Code, § 2-5.202)
   (C)   Defects. Whenever an official bond does not contain the substantial
matter or conditions required by law, or whenever there are any defects in the
approval or the filing thereof, it shall not be declared as void so as to
discharge such officer and his sureties, but they shall be equitably bound to
the city or the person interested, and the city or such person may file an
action upon such defective bond in the same manner and with the same effect as
though such defect did not exist.
('63 Code, § 2-5.203)
(Ord. 2220, passed - - )
§ 31.02 CITY MANAGER DUTIES AS TO LOANS.
   Upon the written recommendation of the Eureka Housing Advisory Board, the
City Manager is hereby authorized to execute Housing Rehabilitation Loans not
exceeding $15,000 and First-Time Homebuyer Loans not exceeding $120,000.
('63 Code, § 2-3.901) (Ord. 437-C.S., passed 10-17-85; Am. Ord. 674-C.S.,
passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 689-C.S., passed 5-3-05; Am. Ord. 702-C.S., passed
11-1-05)
§ 31.03 COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER TO ACT AS CITY HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   Pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code § 101375 and any other
applicable sections of said Code, the County Health Officer shall enforce and
observe in the city, state laws relating to the public health, the orders,
quarantine regulations, and rules by the Department of Public Health of the
state, and other rules and regulations issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Health and Safety Code of the State.
   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Health & Safety Code § 101400 and
any other applicable sections of said code, the enforcement of the provisions
of this code relating to public health and sanitation shall be provided by the
County Health Officer, acting as City Health Officer, pursuant to the terms of
an agreement with the county.
('63 Code, § 2-3.701) (Ord. 3-C.S., passed 9-20-63)
§ 31.04 CONTRACTS, CONVEYANCES, AND OTHER TRANSACTIONS.
   (A)   All written contracts, conveyances or other transactions made or
entered into by the City with an aggregate value of $50,000 or more, shall be
signed by the Mayor, or whomever the City Council designates when it takes
action authorizing execution of the contract or conveyance.
   (B)   All written contracts, conveyances or other transactions made or
entered into by the City with less than a $50,000 aggregate value may be signed
by the City Manager or the City Manager's designee.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall sign certification of authenticity and similar
attestations bearing the official seal of the City of Eureka. The Mayor shall
sign all other documents which bear the Eureka City Seal.
(Ord. 620-C.S., passed 12-16-97)
CHAPTER 32: CITY DEPARTMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Departments
City Manager Department
   
32.010   City Manager Department
   
32.011   Duties of City Manager
   
32.012   Information Technology Division
   
32.013   Economic Development Division
Office of the City Clerk
   
32.020   City Clerk Office
Community Services Department
   
32.030   Community Services Department
   
32.031   Community Services Director
   
32.032   Responsibilities of the Community Services Department
Development Services Department
   
32.040   Development Services Department
   
32.041   Development Services Director
   
32.042   Building Official
Finance Department
   
32.050   Finance Department
   
32.051   Finance Director
Fire Department
   
32.060   Fire Department
   
32.061   Functions
   
32.062   Acting Fire Chief
   
32.063   Uniforms
Human Resources Department
   
32.070   Human Resources Department
   
32.071   Human Resources Director
Police Department
   
32.080   Police Department
   
32.081   Acting Chief of Police
   
32.082   Powers and duties
   
32.083   Uniforms
   
32.084   Request for police services
Public Works Department
   
32.090   Public Works Department
   
32.091   Public Works Director
   
32.092   Responsibilities of the Public Works Department
Cross-reference:
   Public works, see
Title V
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 DEPARTMENTS.
   There are hereby created the following departments:
   (A)   City Manager Department;
   (B)   Office of the City Clerk;
   (C)   Community Services Department;
   (D)   Development Services Department;
   (E)   Finance Department;
   (F)   Fire Department;
   (G)   Human Resources Department;
   (H)   Police Department; and
   (I)   Public Works Department.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
CITY MANAGER DEPARTMENT
§ 32.010 CITY MANAGER DEPARTMENT.
   A City Manager's Department is created, which will be under the direct
control and management of the City Manager and consist of the City Manager and
any other employees who the City Manager may assign to the department. The City
Manager has the authority within any office or department under their control,
to organize divisions, bureaus, or other operating units, in addition to those
prescribed by the Charter or by ordinance, and may assign work to them, as may
be necessary or convenient for the proper conduct of the work of the office or
department. The Manager may assign to any office, department, division, or
bureau, duties in addition to those assigned by ordinance.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.011 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   Pursuant to the provisions of City Charter, §
602, the City Manager is empowered and authorized to perform the duties imposed
by law upon the City Treasurer and is further authorized and empowered to
deputize the Finance Director and any other officers and employees of the city
to act for them in matters required to be performed by the City Treasurer to
the extent permitted by law. Any reference to a specific employee in this code
may be interpreted to mean the City Manager or their designee.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.012 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY DIVISION.
   (A)   The Division of Information Technology is responsible for providing
information technology services to all city departments and contract agencies.
   (B)   The Chief Information Officer is the administrative head of the
division and is appointed by the City Manager.
   (C)   The Information Technology Division, under the direction of the Chief
Information Officer, is responsible for performing those duties and functions
assigned and directed by the Chief Information Officer, including developing
and maintaining the city's information technology infrastructure to support
city operations, managing procurement and contracts for information technology
equipment, services, wireless technology and communications systems, developing
and managing enterprise applications and other information technology related
projects to address specific department needs and operations, and implementing
information technology standards and cyber security requirements.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.013 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIVISION.
   (A)   The Economic Development Division is responsible for Economic
Development within the City of Eureka and works with all departments and
agencies in the city.
   (B)   The Economic Development Division Manager is the administrative head
of the division and is appointed by the City Manager.
   (C)   The Manager is responsible for any activity that enhances the factors
of productive capacity, such as land, labor, capital, and technology, of the
local economy. "Economic development" includes policies and programs expressly
directed at improving the business climate in business finance, marketing,
neighborhood development, small business development, business retention and
expansion, technology transfer, and real estate redevelopment.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
OFFICE OF THE CITY CLERK
§ 32.020 CITY CLERK OFFICE.
   (A)   The office of the City Clerk is established as provided by City
Charter, §
609. The City Clerk will have all of the powers, duties, and responsibilities
granted to and imposed upon the office of the City Clerk by the provisions of
chapter 2, part 3, division 3, title 4 of the Government Code of the state,
other general laws of the state, the provisions of this code, and the
ordinances and resolutions of the City Council. The City Clerk administers the
office of City Clerk and is responsible for the performance of its functions.
   (B)   Among other duties the City Clerk will:
      (1)   Attend all meetings of the council and be responsible for recording
and maintaining a record of all actions of Council;
      (2)   Promptly after each Council meeting where business is transacted,
cause a copy of the draft minutes thereof to be placed on a Council agenda for
approval. The City Clerk maintains a record of Council minutes, with a record
of each particular item of business transacted; provided however, that the City
Clerk is only required to record business that was acted upon by vote of
Council, and is not required to record or summarize the remarks of any Council
member, or any other person, except at the special request of a Council member;
      (3)   Keep all ordinances and resolutions and other official records of
the Council in such a manner that the information contained therein will be
readily accessible and open to the public;
      (4)   Keep all records of the Council and of the office of the City Clerk
in such a manner that the information contained therein will be readily
accessible and open to the public until such time as any of the records may be
destroyed, or reproduced and the original thereof destroyed, in accordance with
state laws;
      (5)   Be the custodian of the Seal of the City of Eureka;
      (6)   Administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits and depositions
pertaining to the affairs and business of the city, and certify copies of the
official records;
      (7)   Act as the city's Election Official;
      (8)   Be responsible for the maintenance of the municipal code; and
      (9)   Obtain and maintain a Notary Public Commission from the State of
California.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.030 COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   There is established in the administrative organization of the city the
Community Services Department, which will be headed by the Community Services
Director and consist of such other personnel as may be authorized by the City
Manager and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.031 COMMUNITY SERVICES DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Administrative policies and procedures.
      (1)   Performance of duties. The Community Services Director performs all
duties required of their office by state law, the Charter of the city, this
subchapter, and other ordinances of the city and such other duties not in
conflict therewith as may be required by the City Manager.
      (2)   Responsibility to City Manager. The Community Services Director is
immediately responsible to the City Manager for the administration of his or
her department and all activities assigned thereto. Subject to approval of the
City Council, the City Manager may contract with a third party to provide such
services for the city.
      (3)   Sound practices. The Community Services Director keeps informed as
to the latest and best practices in their field and with the approval of the
City Manager inaugurates new practices that appear to be of benefit to the
administrative organization of the city and to the public.
      (4)   Authority over employees. The Community Services Director will have
power, when authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and remove, subject to
the merit principle of personnel administration as provided for in the Charter
of the city, and according to the city's adopted personnel policies, all
subordinates under them.
      (5)   Records. The Community Services Director will establish and
maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of the
activities of the Community Services Department.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   It is the management duty of the Community Services Director to be
responsible for all parks and recreation activities and all matters relating to
the maintenance and operations of city facilities, including open spaces,
trails, zoo, parks and harbor; and
      (2)   To serve as executive secretary and chief advisor to the Open
Space, Parks and Recreation Commission.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.032 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Services.
      (1)   Parks and Recreation. Develop and operate a comprehensive municipal
open space, parks, and recreation program and manage it in the interests of
encouraging participation by individuals of all age groups, and by
organizations, both public and private. Work with the Open Space, Parks and
Recreation Commission in all matters pertaining to public relations, make
recommendations to the City Council or the City Manager with respect to
financing and operations of environmental programs, city facilities, zoo,
parks, recreation and harbor activities. Administer the rules, regulations, and
policies of the City Council pertaining to the Community Services Department.
   (B)   Operations.
      (1)   Building and facilities maintenance. Maintain and supervise the
maintenance and upkeep of all city-owned public buildings and city facilities
not specifically operated by another department of the city.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.040 DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   There is established in the administrative organization of the city the
Development Services Department, which includes planning and building
functions, will be headed by the Development Services Director, and will
consist of such other personnel as may be authorized by the City Manager and
approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.041 DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Administrative policies and procedures.
      (1)   Performance of duties. The Development Services Director performs
all duties required of their office by state law, the Charter of the city, this
subchapter, other ordinances of the city and such other duties not in conflict
therewith as may be required by the City Manager.
      (2)   Responsibility to City Manager. The Development Services Director
is immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective administration
of their Department and all activities assigned thereto.
      (3)   Sound practices. The Development Services Director will keep
informed as to the latest and best practices in his or her particular field and
inaugurate, with the approval of the City Manager, such new practices as appear
to be of benefit to the administrative organization of the city and to the
public.
      (4)   Authority over employees. The Development Services Director has the
power, when authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and remove, subject to
the merit principle of personnel administration as provided for in the Charter
of the city and the city's adopted personnel policies, all subordinates under
them.
      (5)   Cooperation with other departments. The Development Services
Director will furnish, upon the direction of the City Manager, any other
department of the city such services within the scope of the department to
better the development of the city and the performance of city government.
      (6)   Records. The Development Services Director will establish and
maintain a system of filing and indexing for records and reports belonging to
the city pertaining to the activities and work of the Department in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for the proper administration of
the department.
   (B)   Duties.
      (1)   The Development Services Director or their designee oversees the
Planning Division.
      (2)   The Development Services Director oversees the Building Division.
      (3)   The Development Services Director or their designee will serve as
executive secretary and chief advisor to the Planning Commission, Historic
Preservation Commission, Design Review Committee, and Board of Building
Appeals.
   (C)   Responsibilities of Department. It is the responsibility of the
department to:
      (1)   Administer and interpret the planning and zoning regulations of the
city;
      (2)   Administer and interpret the Local Coastal Program of the city;
      (3)   Administer and interpret the building regulations of the city and
the state;
      (4)   Be responsible for the preparation of a comprehensive long-term
general plan for the physical development of the city and of any land outside
the boundaries of the city which may be related to its planning. That plan may
be referred to as the general plan and be officially certified as the general
plan upon its adoption by the Planning Commission and City Council;
      (5)   Prepare, review, and be responsible for environmental documents for
private and public developments;
      (6)   Prepare, administer, and direct conservation and rehabilitation
activities as directed by the City Manager and approved by the Council;
      (7)   Upon approval by the City Manager, consult with and advise public
officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational,
professional, and other organizations, and citizens generally with relation to
the activities assigned to the department;
      (8)   Coordinate and guide programs related to environmental and climate
concerns.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.042 BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Administrative policies and procedures.
      (1)   Performance of duties. The Building Official performs all duties
required of office by state law, the Charter of the city, this subchapter, and
ordinances of the city and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may
be required by the Development Services Director and/or City Manager. The
Building Official administers, interprets, and enforces the building
regulations of the city in an impartial, consistent manner, without prejudice
or favor.
      (2)   Responsibility. The Building Official is responsible to the
Development Services Director or in their absence the City Manager and will be
responsible for the effective administration of the division and all activities
assigned to it.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
FINANCE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.050 FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
   There is established in the administrative organization of the city the
Finance Department to be headed by the Finance Director and to consist of such
other personnel as may be authorized by the City Manager and approved by the
City Council.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.051 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Administrative policies and procedures.
      (1)   Performance of duties. The Finance Director will perform all duties
required of their office by state law, the Charter of the city, this
subchapter, and ordinances of the city and such other duties not in conflict
therewith as may be required by the City Manager.
      (2)   Responsibility to City Manager. The Finance Director will be
immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective administration of
their Department and all activities assigned thereto.
      (3)   Sound practices. The Finance Director will keep informed as to the
latest and best practices in his/her particular field and will inaugurate, with
the approval of the City Manager, new practices that appear to be of benefit to
the administrative organization of the city and to the public.
      (4)   Reports to City Manager. The Finance Director submits monthly and
annual reports of the activities of the Finance Department to the City Manager
and such other reports as the City Manager may request.
      (5)   Records. The Finance Director will establish and maintain a system
of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all
information necessary for proper control of the activities of the Finance
Department and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the City Manager.
      (6)   Authority over employees. The Finance Director has the power, when
authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and remove, subject to the merit
principle of personnel administration as provided for in the Charter of the
city and the personnel policies of the city, all subordinates under them.
      (7)   Cooperation with other departments. The Finance Director will
furnish, upon the direction of the City Manager, to any other department of the
city such services, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of
such other department and as the facilities of the Finance Department permit
through the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as other
expenditures are incurred.
   (B)   Duties. In all cases where the duty is not expressly charged to any
other department or office of the city, it is the duty of the Finance Director
to act to promote, secure, and preserve the financial and property interests of
the city. In addition, the Finance Director will have the following specific
duties:
      (1)   Fiscal supervision over officers. To exercise general supervision
over all officers of the city regarding the proper management of the fiscal
concerns of their respective offices, including:
         (a)   The examination of the books of each department of the city from
time to time to see that they are kept in proper form; and
         (b)   Making certain that officers of the city receiving money pay the
same into the City Treasury when thereto required, that all necessary financial
reports are made by officers of the city, and the reporting of all
delinquencies in such payments or reports to the City Manager.
      (2)   Duty upon default of officers. To report the default of any officer
of the city to the City Manager, who will direct the City Attorney to take
immediate legal measures for the recovery of the amount for which such officer
may be in default;
      (3)   Responsibility for proceeds of bonds. To deposit the proceeds of
all sales of bonds with the City Treasurer immediately after receiving the same
and, until such deposit, to be responsible for the amount thereof;
      (4)   Payment of money from special trust funds. To pay to persons duly
entitled thereto, on warrant of the Finance Director, without appropriation by
the Council, any money paid into the City Treasury pursuant to condemnation
proceedings or for the redemption of property sold for taxes or rising from
special assessments for public improvements, park fund certificates,
condemnation fund certificates, and all special trust funds;
      (5)   Accounts of receipts and expenditures. To keep in proper books a
full and accurate account of all money received and disbursed by them on behalf
of the city, specifying the time of receipt and disbursement, from whom
received and to whom disbursed, and on what account received and disbursed and
how paid;
      (6)   Payment of city employees. To pay city employees upon presentation
of the properly certified payroll;
      (7)   Collect moneys and fees due. To demand and receive all moneys and
fees owing to the city whenever any person is indebted to the city in any
manner when the means of collection of such debt are not otherwise provided for
by law, and when any claim cannot be collected by other methods, to report the
same to the City Attorney for prosecution;
      (8)   Audit accounts. To examine and audit the accounts of all officers
and departments subject to the approval of the City Manager;
      (9)   Prescribe forms. To prescribe the form of accounts and reports to
be rendered by them;
      (10)   Budget estimates. To prepare estimates of revenue and give such
other assistance in the preparation of the budget as may be required by the
City Manager;
      (11)   Financial statements. To transmit to the City Manager at least
semi-monthly audited statements of cash on hand and of classified unencumbered
appropriation balances for the city as a whole and such other financial
statements as the City Manager may from time to time require and to keep all
departments, boards, commissions, and institutions currently informed of their
classified unencumbered appropriation balances;
      (12)   Keep accounts. To keep all general accounts of the city government
and of the respective departments, offices, boards, commissions, and
institutions thereof;
      (13)   Purchasing agent. To act as purchasing agent for the city and for
all offices, boards, and commissions if so directed by the City Manager;
      (14)   Annual inventory. To organize and supervise an annual inventory of
all personal property owned or possessed by the city and to organize and
supervise the accounting for supplies and materials;
   (C)   Official bond. The Finance Director will give and execute in favor of
the city, as beneficiary, a surety bond in the sum of $100,000 for the faithful
performance of the duties of his office and to account to the city for all sums
of money coming into his or her hands or under his or her control during his
service. The premium on such official bond will be paid by the city.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.060 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Under the administration of the City Manager, the Fire Department is created
and established. The Fire Chief, subject to the approval of the City Manager,
will organize and maintain such divisions in the Department as in his or her
judgment the operations may require, and be responsible for the direction and
control of all functions assigned to the Department. In the event that the city
is without fire protection services or wishes to engage a third party, the City
Manager may, subject to the approval of the City Council, establish a fire
department or contract with a third party to provide fire protection services
for the city.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.061 FUNCTIONS.
   The Fire Department or contracted agency will be responsible for all fire
protection services within the city including:
   (A)   To protect life and property by preventing and eliminating fire
hazards and by controlling and extinguishing fires;
   (B)   To enforce laws and ordinances relating to the prevention and
extinguishing of fires and the handling of potentially dangerous combustibles
and explosives and to investigate and report to law enforcement officials all
cases when there is reason to believe that any fire is the result of a crime or
that a crime has been committed in connection therewith;
   (C)   To maintain in efficient and operable condition, fire fighting and
fire prevention systems and facilities;
   (D)   To train such volunteers and auxiliary personnel as may be reasonably
required to augment regular operations; and
   (E)   To perform such other duties as the City Manager may direct or request
through agreement.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.062 ACTING FIRE CHIEF.
   In the event of the absence or disability of the Fire Chief, the City
Manager can designate an individual to perform the duties and exercise the
powers of the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.063 UNIFORMS.
   No person other than authorized members of the Fire Department will wear any
part or portion of the approved uniform or accouterments prescribed for members
of the Department.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT
§ 32.070 HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT.
   There is established the Human Resources Department. This Department
consists of the Human Resources Director and such other employees as may be
provided for by the Council. Whenever this Code or ordinances or resolutions of
the Council use the term "Human Resources Director or Personnel Director," this
term will mean and refer to the Human Resources Director.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.071 HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR.
   The City Manager is the ex officio Personnel Director. The City Manager may
delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon them as Personnel Director
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to the Human Resources Director.
The City Manager will:
   (A)   Attend all meetings of the Personnel Board and serve as its secretary.
If the City Manager appoints another person to the position of Human Resources
Director, the Human Resources Director will attend the meetings of the
Personnel Board;
   (B)   Administer all the provisions of this subchapter and of the Personnel
Rules and Regulations not specifically reserved to the Council or to the
Personnel Board;
   (C)   Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and amendments to the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. The City Attorney will approve the legality of
such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the Council;
   (D)   Prepare a position classification plan, including new class
specifications and revisions of the plan. The plan, new classifications, and
any major revisions to the plan, become effective upon approval by the Council.
Minor revisions to individual class specifications that do not change the
character or the salary of the class may be made by the Human Resources
Director. The plan follows those guidelines set forth in the personnel rules
and regulations; and
   (E)   Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all
classifications in the competitive service as described in the Personnel Rules
and Regulations. The plan, and any revisions thereof, become effective upon
approval by the Council.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.080 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Under the administrative direction of the City Manager, the Police
Department is created and established. The Chief of Police, subject to the
approval of the City Manager, organizes and maintains such divisions in the
Department as in his or her judgment the operations may require, and is
responsible for the direction and control of all functions assigned to the
Department.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.081 ACTING CHIEF OF POLICE.
   In the event of the extended absence or disability of the Chief of Police,
the City Manager can designate an individual to perform the duties and exercise
the powers of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.082 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Police Department is responsible for all law enforcement services within
the city including:
   (A)   To prevent crime and maintain law and order in the city by enforcing
the laws of the United States, the state, and city except where enforcement is
by law vested in another office or officer;
   (B)   To maintain in efficient operable condition, crime prevention and law
enforcement systems and facilities;
   (C)   To train such volunteers and reserve personnel as may reasonably be
required to augment regular full-time manpower;
   (D)   Maintenance, safekeeping and proper disposition of evidence and
property;
   (E)   Administration, operation and direction of the City Communications
Center;
   (F)   Administration, operation and direction of city animal control duties;
   (G)   To perform such other duties as the City Manager may direct.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.083 UNIFORMS.
   No person other than authorized members of the Police Department may wear
any part or portion of the approved uniform or accouterments prescribed for
members of the Department.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.084 REQUEST FOR POLICE SERVICES.
   (A)   Any person, corporation, firm or organization desiring additional
personnel, equipment or materials of the Police Department, for law enforcement
purposes within the city, may request the Chief of the Police Department
provide such personnel for such services in the number the Chief determines to
be necessary to perform the services. These additional police services are over
and above and are in addition to the basic police services funded by general
fund resources of the city.
   (B)   Payment for services. The person, corporation, firm or organization
desiring such services will pay to the Police Department such sums of money as
may be necessary to pay for the additional services. The payment will be
calculated using the annual fee schedule adopted by the City of Eureka.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
§ 32.090 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   There is established in the administrative organization of the city the
Public Works Department.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.091 PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Administrative policies and procedures.
      (1)   Performance of duties. The Public Works Director performs all
duties required of their office by state law, the Charter of the city, this
subchapter, and other ordinances of the city along with other duties not in
conflict therewith that may be required by the City Manager.
      (2)   Responsibility to City Manager. The Public Works Director is
immediately responsible to the City Manager for the effective administration of
his or her department and all activities assigned thereto.
      (3)   Sound practices. The Public Works Director will keep informed as to
the latest and best practices in their particular field and inaugurate, with
the approval of the City Manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit
to the administrative organization of the city and to the public.
      (4)   Authority over employees. The Public Works Director has the power,
when authorized by the City Manager, to appoint and remove, subject to the
merit principle of personnel administration as provided for in the Charter of
the city, all subordinates under their supervision.
      (5)   Maintenance of equipment. The Public Works Director is responsible
for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in the
Public Works Department.
      (6)   Cooperation with other departments. The Public Works Director will
furnish, at the direction of the City Manager, any other department of the city
those services, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of
that other department and as the facilities of the Public Works Department
permit through the same procedure and subject to the same audit and control as
other expenditures are incurred.
      (7)   Records. The Public Works Director establishes and maintains a
system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to
furnish all information necessary for proper control of the activities of the
Public Works Department.
   (B)   Duties. It is the management duty of the Public Works Director to be
responsible for all matters relating to the construction, maintenance, and
operation of the physical plants of the city.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 32.092 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Services.
      (1)   Water and wastewater. Construct, maintain, and repair all
facilities and systems necessary for the efficient treatment and distribution
of potable water throughout the city, as well as the collection, treatment, and
discharge of wastewater.
      (2)   Stormwater. Construct, maintain, and repair all facilities and
systems necessary for the effective collection, treatment as needed, and
discharge of stormwater.
      (3)   Engineering services. Perform all engineering services for the
city, including those indicated in this code to be the responsibility of the
City Engineer. The City Manager may, subject to the approval of the City
Council, contract with a third party to provide such services for the city, or
may hire a city employee to serve as the City Engineer. In either case, the
City Engineer is immediately responsible to the Director of Public Works,
though this must not be interpreted as creating direct influence over the
independent exercise of engineering judgement on the part of the City Engineer.
      (4)   Records. Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing
maps, plats, profiles, field notes, and other records and reports belonging to
the city pertaining to the activities and work of the Department in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for the proper administration of
the Department.
      (5)   Street-lighting facilities. Administer the city's street-light
program and coordinate with the utility company for installation and operation
of the street-light system.
      (6)   Inspection services. Provide inspection services for all public
construction improvements and enforce the city's standard specifications; and
issue all permits for and inspect the work involved in the construction of
public improvements and all work done under the provisions of the laws of the
city.
      (7)   Traffic services. Supervise the installation and operation of
traffic safety devices for the use and control of traffic and parking on the
city streets. Establish and maintain a system of filing records pertaining to
traffic and publish periodic reports of pertinent data for the city's use with
recommended changes when necessary.
      (8)   Duties required by state law. Discharge the duties required of the
Public Works Director by state law.
   (B)   Operations.
      (1)   Street maintenance. Supervise and direct the repair, maintenance,
and uses of all city streets, drains, and alleys.
      (2)   Off-street parking. Maintain all municipal off-street parking lots
and areas.
      (3)   Central garage. Supervise the operation of the central garage and
corporation yard. Maintain the fleet lease equipment owned by the city.
      (4)   Code enforcement. Supervise the enforcement of the Municipal Code
and any other regulations adopted by the City Council, working with other
departments and, when necessary, the City Attorney, to enforce or otherwise
remedy violations. For the purposes of this section, the Director of Public
Works has the same authority as the Fire Chief, Director of Community
Development, or Building Official.
   (C)   Pest control. Control and attempt to eliminate all rodents, insects,
and pests capable of carrying disease and annoyance to residents of the city
either under contract with the Humboldt County Health Department or through
other recognized pest control methods.
(Ord. 919-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
Section
Boards and Commissions Created by Council
   
33.001   Purpose
   
33.002   Qualifications
   
33.003   Temporary committees
   
33.004   Appropriations
   
33.005   Appointments; terms
   
33.006   Vacancies
   
33.007   [Reserved]
   
33.008   Officers
   
33.009   Meetings; rules and regulations; quorum
   
33.010   Liaison with Council
   
33.011   Compensation
   
33.012   Expert consultants
   
33.013   Conflict of interest
Art and Culture Commission
   
33.025   Creation
   
33.026   Powers and duties
   
33.027   Association with Ink People Center for the Arts
Finance Advisory Committee
   
33.035   Creation; membership
   
33.036   Duties
   
33.037   Conduct of meetings
   
33.038   Non-interference
Open Space, Parks and Recreation Commission
   
33.045   Creation
   
33.046   Powers and duties
Transportation Safety Commission
   
33.055   Creation
   
33.056   Powers and duties
   
33.057   Conduct of meetings
Eureka Energy Committee
   
33.065   Establishment and title
   
33.066   Role of the Committee
   
33.067   Meetings
Economic Development Commission
   
33.075   Creation
   
33.076   Powers and duties
   
33.077   Conduct of meetings .
Board of Community Oversight on Police Practices
   
33.200   Creation
   
33.201   Membership
   
33.202   Liaisons
   
33.203   Qualifications
   
33.204   Removal from office
   
33.205   Confidentiality
   
33.206   Meetings
   
33.207   Purpose and objectives
   
33.208   Powers and duties
   
33.209   Appeal
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS CREATED BY COUNCIL
§ 33.001 PURPOSE.
   Except as otherwise provided by the ordinance establishing a board or
commission, boards and commissions created by the Council pursuant to City
Charter, §
311 will be established, the members thereof will be appointed, and such boards
and commissions will be organized and governed as to procedure in accordance
with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.002 QUALIFICATIONS.
   Membership on such bodies will be representative of the Greater Eureka
community insofar as possible, and members on such boards and commissions must
be willing to serve as a civic responsibility and without compensation other
than payment of authorized expenses. No member of any board or commission will
hold any paid office or employment in the city government, unless, by ordinance
or resolution, such membership is specifically authorized or required.
Appointments of qualified non-city residents require a four-fifths vote of the
Council for confirmation. In order to be eligible for appointment to any board
or commission, a person must be a qualified registered elector of the City of
Eureka, the Humboldt Community Services District, the Humboldt County Service
Area No. 3, or be the owner of a business located within the city limits.
However, in no event will less than a majority of any board or commission be
made up of qualified registered electors of the city, the County Community
Services District or the County Services Area No. 3.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.003 TEMPORARY COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor and the City Manager, with the approval of the Council, may
appoint from time to time such temporary committees as are deemed advisable to
render counsel and advice to the Council and the City Manager on any designated
matters or subjects within the jurisdiction of the Council and the City
Manager. Membership on these temporary committees will not be limited by the
requirements of §
33.002 of this subchapter.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.004 APPROPRIATIONS.
   The Council may include in the annual budget appropriations of funds as in
its opinion will be sufficient for the efficient and proper functioning of the
city's boards and commissions.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.005 APPOINTMENTS: TERMS.
   (A)   The members of each board or commission will be appointed by the Mayor
with the approval of the Council. The members will serve for a term of two or
four years, as required by the authorizing ordinance of the specific board or
commission and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.
   (B)   The members first appointed to boards and commissions will classify
themselves by lot so that each succeeding January 1 the term of one of the
members will expire. If the total number of members of a board or commission to
be appointed exceeds four, the classification by lot will provide for the
grouping of terms to such an extent as is necessary in order that the term of
at least one member expires on each succeeding January 1, and that the number
of terms expiring in any year does not exceed by more than one the number
expiring in any other year.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.006 VACANCIES.
   (A)   If a member of a board, commission, or committee fails to file a
financial disclosure form, if required by the city's Conflict of Interest Code,
in the manner and at the time required by law or violates §
33.013 of this subchapter, his or her office will become vacant and so declared
by the City Clerk with Council approval.
   (B)   Any vacancies on any board or commission, from whatever cause arising,
will be filled by appointment by the Mayor with the approval of the Council.
When a vacancy occurs, any appointment to fill such vacancy will be for the
unexpired term.
   (C)   If a member of a board or commission absents him or herself from three
consecutive regular meetings of such board or commission, unless by permission
of such board or commission expressed in its official minutes, or ceases to be
a qualified elector of the city or the Community Services District #3, his or
her office will become vacant and be so declared by the Council.
   (D)   Any member of a board, commission, or committee may be removed with or
without cause by a majority vote of the City Council.
   (E)   Applications for all scheduled and unscheduled appointments will be
solicited by press release, posting on the city's website and by posting in a
public area of City Hall.
   (F)   The Council may each year, at the time of board and commission
appointments, create a sub-committee of two Council members to review
applications and make a recommendation to the Mayor for the appointment to that
board.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.007 [RESERVED.]
§ 33.008 OFFICERS.
   (A)   At the first regular meeting in January of every year, each board and
commission will organize by electing a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson from
its membership to serve at the pleasure of the board or commission.
   (B)   The City Manager may designate an Executive Secretary to provide for
the recording of minutes for each board or commission, keep a record of its
proceedings and transactions, provide staff assistance, and act as principal
staff advisor.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.009 MEETINGS; RULES AND REGULATIONS; QUORUM.
   (A)   Meetings. Each board or commission will hold a regular meeting at a
time to be designated by the board or commission and such special meetings as
the board or commission may require. The City Manager may impose meeting
reductions due to constraints in staffing, facility restrictions or
emergencies. Insofar as possible, all meetings of boards and commissions will
be held in the Council Chambers of City Hall. All meetings are to be open to
the public as provided by the California Brown Act.
   (B)   Rules, regulations, and records. Each board or commission may
prescribe its own rules and regulations for the transaction of its business,
which rules and regulations will be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk where they are available for public inspection. Each board or commission
will keep a written record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and
determinations, copies of which will be kept on file in the office of the City
Clerk.
   (C)   Quorum. A majority of the total members of each board or commission
constitutes a quorum for the transaction of business. The vote of a majority of
the members in attendance at the meeting is necessary for the final transaction
of any business.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21; Am. Ord. 948-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 33.010 LIAISON WITH COUNCIL.
   With the approval of the Council, the Mayor may designate a member of the
Council to meet with a board or commission, but such Councilmember will not be
a member of that board or commission.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.011 COMPENSATION.
   The members of boards and commissions serve without compensation for their
services as such but may receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and
other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have been
budgeted by the Council.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.012 EXPERT CONSULTANTS.
   Every board or commission may recommend to the City Manager the employment
of expert consultants to perform work or give advice connected with such board
or commission when such board or commission finds the work or advice necessary.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.013 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   No member of a board, commission, or committee may be or become directly or
indirectly financially interested in, or with the performance of any contract,
work, or business, or in the sale of any article, the expense, price or
consideration of which is payable from the City Treasury if such contract,
work, business, or sale falls within the advisory duties delegated to the
board, commission, or committee upon which such member is serving; and provided
further, that no member will be deemed to be financially interested, within the
meaning of the foregoing provisions, if such interest is not a prohibited
interest under, and disclosure is made in accordance with the provisions of
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 1091, 1091.1 and 1091.5, or under the provisions of the
Political Reform Act of 1974.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)   
Penalty, see § 10.99
ART AND CULTURE COMMISSION
§ 33.025 CREATION.
   The Art and Culture Commission is hereby created and consists of either five
or seven members, at the discretion of the Mayor, with the approval of the City
Council. Regular meetings of the Commission will be scheduled quarterly at a
time and place agreed upon by the Commission which will facilitate the
attendance and input of the public.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.026 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Art and Culture Commission will have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Council and the City Manager on
all matters pertaining to art, literature, music, and other cultural
activities;
   (B)   To formulate and recommend to the Council and the City Manager a
program relating to art, literature, music, or other cultural activities for
the inhabitants of the city, which program contributes to the utilization and
enjoyment of the leisure time of the inhabitants of the city and promote the
public appreciation, education, and development of cultural activities;
   (C)   To recommend to the Council and the City Manager the acceptance or
rejection of offers of donations of money, personal property, or real estate to
be used for cultural activities, subject to approval by the Council;
   (D)   To prepare and recommend for adoption by the Council rules and
regulations for the use, management, and government of the city's cultural
facilities;
   (E)   To promote subject to guidelines established by City Council, the
preservation of historic places, buildings, structures, documents, works of
art, and other objects having special character, or special historical or
aesthetic interest or value associated with the economic, social, political,
military, and cultural annals of the city, and recommend to the Council and the
City Manager the adoption of special conditions or regulations for the
protection, enhancement, perpetuation, or use of such places and objects, which
conditions or regulations may include appropriate and reasonable control of the
use or appearance of neighboring private property within public view, or both;
and
   (F)   To perform such other duties relating to cultural matters as may be
prescribed by the Council.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.027 ASSOCIATION WITH INK PEOPLE CENTER FOR THE ARTS.
   The Art and Culture Commission will retain its standing as a City Commission
and coordinate its activities through the Ink People Center for the Arts (Ink
People). The Commission strives to utilize the Ink People's organizational
structure, expertise and resources to undertake and accomplish Commission
objectives, and together with the Ink People will work with the art community
to support and develop new art and cultural opportunities, and provide the City
Council with the vision and ideas needed to promote public art concepts and
projects in the City of Eureka.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
FINANCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 33.035 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Finance Advisory Committee is hereby established and consists of
five or seven voting members at the discretion of the Mayor, with the approval
of the City Council, qualified by experience or training in financial
principles. The membership of the Committee must be appointed by the Mayor with
the concurrence of the City Council.
   (B)   In recognition that government finance is a specialized area of
knowledge, it is highly desirable that each of the members possess knowledge of
governmental accounting or governmental financial operations.
   (C)   The City Manager and the Finance Director, or their designees, will
serve as ex officio non-voting members of the committee.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.036 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Finance Advisory Committee will advise the City Council on matters
pertaining to the state of city finances and may be called upon by the City
Council to review, analyze, and recommend improvements or resolutions to
problems in the areas of financial planning, revenue generation, budgeting,
purchasing, financing, and auditing.
   (B)   The Committee will review the draft city budget as prepared by the
City Manager for presentation to the City Council. The Committee may recommend
changes in Council policy regarding revenue generation, collection, and
investment; budgeting; general or capital expenditures; or accounting
procedures and internal controls. The Committee may recommend improvements in
future budget documents and financial reports with an eye to readability and
good communication of the state of city finances to the public. The Committee
may recommend privatization, or consolidation, or other means of cost savings
and higher efficiencies.
   (C)   The Committee will, from time to time, assist in the selection of city
auditors; review the scope, content and timing of audits of city funds and the
efficiency of the process; and review and comment on recommendations and
problems identified by the auditor in the audit report and management letter.
   (D)   The Committee will act as the Oversight Committee for the Supplemental
Transactional Use Tax as approved by voters.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.037 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Committee will be scheduled at a time and
place agreed upon by the Committee which will facilitate the attendance and
input of the public.
   (B)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson or three
or more members.
   (C)   A quorum consists of a majority of the total number of members of the
Commission. Each Commission member will be entitled to one vote. Approval of
any matter requires an affirmative vote from the majority of the members
present.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.038 NON-INTERFERENCE.
   The purpose, duties, and responsibilities of the committee are not to be
construed to limit or interfere with the City Manager's responsibilities to
construct and recommend the annual budget to the City Council, nor to control
it upon adoption, nor to intercede between the City Manager and the City
Council on budget recommendations or other financially related matters, nor to
restrict or limit the City Manager's budgetary relationship to departmental
staff, nor to interfere or impede departmental operations, nor to interfere
with the City Manager's relationship with labor organizations or groups of city
employees or individual employees.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
OPEN SPACE, PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 33.045 CREATION.
   The Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Commission is hereby created and
consists of either five or seven members, at the discretion of the Mayor, with
the approval of the City Council.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21; Am. Ord. 953-C.S., passed 4-2-24)
§ 33.046 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Commission has the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To serve in an advisory capacity to the Council, the City Manager,
and city staff in all matters pertaining to public open space, recreation,
parks, parklets, landscaped squares, and grounds;
      (2)   To make recommendations to the Council, the City Manager, and city
staff with respect to the provisions of the annual budget for open space,
recreation, and park purposes;
      (3)   To accept and reject offers of donations of money, personal
property, and real estate to be used for open space, recreation, and park
purposes, subject to approval by the Council;
      (4)   To prepare and recommend to the Council, the City Manager, and city
staff comprehensive municipal open space, recreation, and park programs for the
inhabitants of the city, to promote and stimulate public interest in these
programs, and to solicit to the fullest possible extent the cooperation of
school authorities and other public and private agencies interested therein;
      (5)   To advise in the establishment of schedules of charges, subject to
approval by the Council;
      (6)   To prepare and recommend for adoption by the Council rules and
regulations for the use and improvement of publicly-owned open space, parks and
recreation areas, squares, and grounds in the city, including wetlands,
gulches, greenways, playgrounds, concessions, and recreational facilities and
programs installed and maintained therein;
      (7)   To prepare and recommend to the Council, the City Manager, and city
staff policies for the acquisition, development, and improvement of open space,
parks and recreation areas; and
      (8)   To perform such other duties relating to open space, recreation and
park matters as may be prescribed by the Council.
   (B)   One member of the Commission will be appointed to serve as a liaison
to the Sequoia Park Zoo Foundation.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21; Am. Ord. 953-C.S., passed 4-2-24)
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY COMMISSION
§ 33.055 CREATION.
   (A)   The Transportation Safety Commission is hereby created and consists of
either five or seven members, at the discretion of the Mayor, with the approval
of the City Council.
   (B)   The Commission composition should reflect, as much as possible,
interest in all transportation modes, including but not limited to
accessibility, bicycling, pedestrian, senior, student/academia, transit,
healthy living and quality of life in the City of Eureka and represent any
parking district so far as practicable.
   (C)   In recognition that transportation and traffic safety is a specialized
area of knowledge, it is highly desirable that each of the members obtains and
maintains a knowledge base in this subject.
   (D)   The City Engineer and the Chief of Police, or their designees, will
serve as ex officio non-voting members of the Commission.
   (E)   The Mayor may also appoint an ex officio non-voting high school
student, for a term of one school year, from applicants recommended by the
Transportation Safety Commission.
   (F)   Members serve two-year terms.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.056 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Transportation Safety Commission advises the City Council, the
City Manager, and city staff in all matters pertaining to transportation safety
and public off-street and on-street vehicle parking matters.
   (B)   To make recommendations to the Council, the City Manager, and city
staff with respect to the provisions of the annual budget for transportation
safety purposes and public vehicle-parking facilities.
   (C)   To prepare and recommend to the Council, the City Manager, and city
staff a comprehensive transportation safety plan.
   (D)   To establish standing committees, as necessary to facilitate expedited
and/or more comprehensive review of certain matters. These standing committees
may meet as often as is necessary to provide greater accessibility to the
community. All actions of these standing committees will be subject to the
review and approval of the Transportation Safety Commission.
   (E)   To perform such other duties relating to transportation safety and
vehicle parking matters as may be prescribed by the Council.
   (F)   To prepare and recommend to the Council and the City Manager policies
for the acquisition, development, and improvement of public parking facilities.
   (G)   To act in an advisory capacity to the Council on all matters
pertaining to vehicle parking districts established within the city under Cal.
Streets and Highways Code Part 4 of Division 18 (being Cal. Sts. & Hwys. Code
35100 et seq.).
   (H)   The Transportation Safety Commission shall have the powers, duties,
jurisdiction, and authority all as now or hereafter provided in the Parking
District Law of 1951, except as otherwise provided in this section, and, in
addition to the previously stated powers and duties.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.057 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Commission will be scheduled at a time agreed
upon by the Commission which will facilitate the attendance and input of the
public.
   (B)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson or three
or more members.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
EUREKA ENERGY COMMITTEE
§ 33.065 ESTABLISHMENT AND TITLE.
   The Eureka Energy Committee is hereby established. The Committee consists of
five or seven members appointed by the Mayor and subject to approval by the
City Council. Each Committee member will serve for a term of four years.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.066 ROLE OF THE COMMITTEE.
   The Eureka Energy Committee will:
   (A)   Serve in an advisory capacity to the Council and city staff in all
matters pertaining to climate change, energy efficiency, energy conservation
and conversion to greener energy sources within the community.
   (B)   Advise the City Council, Commissions, or city staff as appropriate on
the potential ways for the city to generate its own energy.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.067 MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the Commission will be scheduled at a time agreed upon
by the Commission which will facilitate the attendance and input of the public.
§ 33.068 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Energy Committee members will be selected for their interest, knowledge,
or experience in climate change, energy usage, conservation, regulation and/or
generation.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 33.075 CREATION.
   (A)   The Economic Development Commission is hereby created and consists of
either five, seven, or nine members, at the discretion of the Mayor, with the
approval of the City Council.
   (B)   The Commission composition will be chosen in compliance with §
33.002 of the Eureka Municipal Code. The following factors may be considered
when choosing Commission members:
      (1)   Owners of businesses within the city limits; or
      (2)   Residents who have specialized professional knowledge and
experience within the fields of economic development, real estate, banking/
lending/financing, construction, business establishment/ administration/
management, marketing, tourism-promotion, importing/exporting, housing and/or
other related fields; or
      (3)   Residents that own a business outside of the city limits.
   (C)   The City Manager or their designee will serve as an ex officio non-
voting member of the Commission.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.076 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   To advise the City Council, City Manager, and city staff in all
matters pertaining to Economic Development, including preparing:
      (1)   On-going analysis of economic development issues and opportunities
that have the potential to impact or influence the economy of the city;
      (2)   An annual status report to summarize the prior year's actions and
analyses; and
   (B)   To promote actions that maintain and create high quality jobs, build
the city's community assets including housing, create a diverse and resilient
economy, strengthen the city's revenue base.
   (C)   To serve as the city's Business Loan Committee, review funding
proposals, and make recommendations to the City Council. The City Council will
make the final decision on approval or denial of all loan applications
submitted, including terms and conditions of loan agreements.
   (D)   To perform such other duties relating to economic development matters
as may be prescribed by the Council.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 33.077 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Commission will be scheduled at a time agreed
upon by the Commission which will facilitate the attendance and input of the
public.
   (B)   Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairperson or three
or more members.
(Ord. 920-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
BOARD OF COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT ON POLICE PRACTICES
§ 33.200 CREATION.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Board of Community Oversight on Police
Practices (COPP or "Board") of not to exceed seven members, whose purpose is to
provide community-based accountability and transparency in policing through
public participation, the Independent Police Auditor (IPA), the Eureka Police
Department (EPD) and others.
   (B)   The COPP Board serves as an impartial and objectively independent body
which conducts audits and assessments of citizen's complaints and certain
specified critical incidents involving members of the Eureka Police Department
(EPD). This independent oversight will increase transparency, trust and respect
between the EPD and the community.
   (C)   Members of the EPD shall be subject to independent performance review,
including evaluation of complaints and certain specified critical incidents, in
order to ensure there has been fair, impartial, un-biased investigations
conducted by the EPD into every matter under the purview of COPP. The Board
will respond to community concerns, increase accountability at EPD and provide
transparency concerning police practices and policies.
   (D)   The COPP Board will promote and encourage open communication,
constructive dialogue, and cooperation between EPD and residents, recognizing
policing in the city is a shared responsibility.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.201 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The COPP Board will consist of either five or seven members at the
discretion of the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council.
   (B)   Appointment. Members are appointed by the Mayor subject to
confirmation by the City Council.
   (C)   Term. Two years, except for initial members. The initial appointments
will be staggered.
   (D)   Vacancies. Any unscheduled vacancy will be filled for the remainder of
the unexpired term per § 33.006.
   (E)   Officers. Annually, the Board must elect from its membership a
chairperson and vice-chairperson who will serve in their positions for one
year, or until their successors are elected, but for no more than three
consecutive one-year terms.
      (1)   The chairperson's duties include serving as the chair for all
meetings of the Board; acting as spokesperson for the Board; coordinating with
the Chief of Police and city staff on any communications between the Board and
the community.
      (2)   The vice chairperson's duties include serving as Chair for all
meetings of the Board in the absence of the Chair; and other duties as may be
requested by the Chair.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.202 LIAISONS.
   (A)   Law enforcement liaison. The Chief of Police or his or her designee
will serve as a liaison to the Board and point of contact responsible for
coordinating the Board's requests.
   (B)   Human resources liaison. The Human Resources Director will serve as a
liaison to the Board for the purpose of ensuring that employee matters adhere
to the city's Personnel Rules and Regulations and the Public Safety Officers
Procedural Bill of Rights Act (POBR).
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.203 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Board members will be eligible to serve in compliance with § 33.002;
and
   (B)   The following characteristics may be considered by the Mayor and City
Council when appointing members to the COPP.
      (1)   A demonstrated ability to be fair-minded, impartial, objective, and
unbiased;
      (2)   An absence of any real or perceived bias, prejudice or conflict of
interest;
      (3)   A record of community involvement;
      (4)   An ability to build constructive working relationships and
communicate effectively with diverse groups;
      (5)   A demonstrated commitment to the purpose of the COPP which may
include fostering positive police-community relationships;
      (6)   Reflect the diversity of the community.
   (C)   The candidate selection process should help achieve a balanced
membership representing a cross-section of the community. The diversity of the
board should closely mirror the diversity of the Eureka community to the extent
feasible and no more than one former law enforcement officer may be a member of
the Board at any given time.
   (D)   Able to pass a background investigation, as conducted by an outside
investigator, consistent with investigations conducted for other city
volunteers.
   (E)   Not involved with open litigation or claims against the city or its
employees.
   (F)   The following individuals are not eligible to serve as a Commissioner:
      (1)   Current sworn police officer;
      (2)   Current city employee;
      (3)   Former EPD sworn employee;
      (4)   Immediate family members of a current EPD employee as defined by
the city's nepotism policy.
   (G)   Board members will receive training after appointment on the policies,
procedures, and practices of the law enforcement agency, implicit bias training
and the authority and responsibilities associated with their role as a board
member, as well as any other training deemed appropriate by a majority vote of
the Board.
   (H)   Members of the board must agree in writing to a Statement of
Principles and Code of Conduct such as the National Association for Civilian
Oversight of Law Enforcement (NACOLE) Code of Ethics, and sign a non-disclosure
agreement.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.204 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   A member of the COPP may be removed from office per § 33.006 prior to the
normal expiration of their term for reasons including but not limited to the
following:
   (A)   Prevalent failure to perform their board member duties;
   (B)   Violation of the Statement of Principles/Code of Conduct (NACOLE Code
of Ethics) or the non-disclosure agreement;
   (C)   Misuse of position or mishandling of police documents;
   (D)   Violations of state laws or city policy concerning confidentiality;
   (E)   Arrest or conviction of any felony crime or crime related to violence
or sexual misconduct.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.205 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   In addition to adhering to the above-referenced code of conduct and non-
disclosure agreement, members of the Board must adhere to all applicable local,
state, and federal laws regarding confidentiality.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.206 MEETINGS.
   The Board will hold regular meetings and establish a regular time and place
of meeting. The Board will meet not less than quarterly and may hold additional
meetings as necessary. Special meetings of the Board may be called by the
chairperson or three members of the Board. The Board meetings will comply with
the Ralph M. Brown Act.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.207 PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   The Community Oversight on Police Practices Board will give counsel,
support, advice, and recommendations to the City Manager and Chief of Police
for the purpose of improving transparency and accountability while building
trust and fostering strong police-community relations. The Board serves as a
mechanism for meaningful communication and interaction between the police and
community. The Board's purpose and objectives include:
   (A)   Increasing police accountability;
   (B)   Increasing the transparency of police policy and operations;
   (C)   Educating and involving the community in the creation of policing
standards and expectations;
   (D)   Creating additional community access to public safety information;
   (E)   Building trust between the community and police;
   (F)   Fostering strong police-community relationships and partnerships;
      (1)   Establish a standing item on each meeting agenda for community
based organizations input/ reports.
   (G)   Increasing connections and engagement from those segments of the
community that might be apprehensive to approach or interact with uniformed
police officers;
   (H)   Demystifying police internal affairs/complaint investigations;
   (I)   Ensuring due process of law for all involved parties;
   (J)   Deterring potential police misconduct.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.208 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Community Oversight on Police Practices Board will have the
responsibilities as provided in this section and other duties as the Council
may decide.
   (A)   Coordinate with the Independent Police Auditor (IPA) to identify and
prioritize topics for the Independent Police Auditor. The IPA will conduct the
audits with input and recommendation from the Board.
   (B)   Recommend changes/improvements to policy, procedures or training:
      (1)   With IPA input, systematically review EPD policies and procedures
and analyze new or changed policies and procedures including, but not limited
to: incidents involving use of force, homeless individuals, mentally distressed
individuals, general community relations, and a transparent publicly accessible
database of EPD activity and performance.
      (2)   Recommend, for the IPA's consideration, further analysis of
completed EPD Internal Affairs (IA) investigations in regards to officer
involved shootings, a death while in the custody of EPD, any police action
resulting in a reportable serious injury as defined by DOJ, as well as any
reportable sustained findings that are releasable under law, such as:
complaints of unreasonable or excessive force, failure to intervene, bias and
unlawful arrest/search.
      (3)   Provide input to the IPA on recommendations for improvement to EPD
policy, procedure and training.
   (C)   Review IPA reports on misconduct complaints:
      (1)   Receive EPD IA reports on internal investigations and the
investigation of citizen complaints involving misconduct.
      (2)   Recommend, for the IPA's consideration, further analysis of
completed EPD IA complaints or the complaint process.
      (3)   Work with the IPA and EPD to promote an alternative dispute
resolution or mediation process as a complaint resolution option.
      (4)   Request further investigation by the IPA.
   (D)   Provide input to the IPA into reports on an annual basis to include
information about:
      (1)   Misconduct complaint investigations and trends.
       (2)   Recommendations concerning improvements to EPD policy, procedures
or training, and results of audits.
   (E)   Assess the work of the IPA:
      (1)   Provide annual written input to the City Manager and the City
Council on the effectiveness of the IPA.
   (F)   Provide input and recommendation to the City Manager prior to the
implementation of new EPD programs with an emphasis on equity as it relates to
the impact new programs will have on disenfranchised and marginalized
communities within Eureka.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
§ 33.209 APPEAL.
   Upon a majority vote by the COPP of their disagreement with the findings or
review of any EPD IA investigative report and/or IPA review of same, the
Chairperson will prepare and present a formal written appeal to the City
Manager to review the investigations and findings. The City Manager will review
all findings by EPD, the Independent Police Auditor and the COPP and respond to
the Board in writing regarding his or her findings. The City Manager review
will be final. The determination and implementation of discipline will be made
in accordance with the city's personnel policy.
(Ord. 922-C.S., passed 4-19-22)
CHAPTER 34: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
Personnel System
   
34.01   Adoption of system
   
34.02   Definitions
   
34.03   Equal employment opportunity
   
34.04   Personnel Director
   
34.05   Personnel Board
   
34.06   Competitive service
   
34.07   Personnel rules and regulations
   
34.08   Appointments
   
34.09   Contracts for special services
   
34.10   Dismissals, demotions, and suspensions
   
34.11   Right to appeal
   
34.12   Probationary period
   
34.13   Administrative leaves of absence
   
34.14   Abolition of positions and layoffs
   
34.15   Right to strike
   
34.16   Applicability of attendance and leave of absence provisions
   
34.17   Solicitation of contributions
   
34.18   Political activities
   
34.19   Criminal conduct
   
34.20   Unfair labor practices
Compensation and Benefits
   
34.30   Initial salaries
   
34.31   Temporary duty assignments
   
34.32   Salary ranges
   
34.33   Increases in salaries
   
34.34   Advances in classification
   
34.35   Group insurance and retirement
   
34.36   Unclassified positions
   
34.37   Vacation and sick leaves
   
34.38   Holidays
   
34.39   Uniform allowances
   
34.40   Overtime
   
34.41   Number of employees authorized
   
34.42   Class titles
   
34.43   Severance pay
   
34.44   Personnel rules and regulations
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
§ 34.01 ADOPTION OF SYSTEM.
   Pursuant to the provisions of City Charter, Art. VII and the authority
therein granted to the Council, and in order to establish an equitable and
uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to the
municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to assure that
appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness as
determined by competitive test, to provide a reasonable degree of security for
qualified employees, and to provide a fair and just approach to municipal
employment, giving due consideration to the relative interests of the city as
an employer and of its employees so as not to impair the efficiency of the
municipal service, there is hereby established a personnel system in the city,
a Personnel Board with powers and duties as set forth in this subchapter, the
office of Personnel Director, and the authority to adopt and maintain Personnel
Rules and Regulations.
('63 Code, § 2-5.101) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73)
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPOINTING AUTHORITY. That person responsible for making appointments within
the competitive service, in all cases, the City Manager or Council.
   BOARD. The Personnel Board of the city.
   CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Eureka.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, California.
   COMPENSATION PLAN. The system of compensation covering all classes and
positions within the city service and intended to provide fair compensation for
all classes in the position classification plan with the range of compensation
of each class being relative to all other classes.
   COMPETITIVE SERVICE. The positions and employment which are included or
which may hereafter be included under the personnel system by the provisions of
this subchapter or the personnel rules and regulations.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Eureka.
   DAY. Calendar day unless otherwise stated.
   PROBATIONARY PERIOD. A working test period during which an employee is
required to demonstrate their fitness for the duties to which they are
appointed by the actual performance of the duties of the position, and prior to
attaining permanent status.
   SUSPENSION. The temporary removal from duty of an employee without pay for
disciplinary reasons.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.102) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.03 EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY.
   No question in any test, or in any application form, or by any interviewer
or appointing authority during any personnel proceedings shall be so framed as
to attempt to elicit information concerning the race, color, ancestry, national
origin, age, physical or mental disabilities, or political or religious
opinions of applicants. No person in the employ of the city, or seeking
admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted, or discharged, or in
any way favored or discriminated against, based on race, color, creed, sex,
marital status, age, national origin, physical or mental disability, medical
condition or ancestry, or any other consideration made unlawful by federal,
state or local laws.
('63 Code, § 2-5.103) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96)
§ 34.04 PERSONNEL DIRECTOR.
   The City Manager is the ex officio Personnel Director. The City Manager may
delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon them as Personnel Director
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to any other officer or employee
of the city, or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under
contract as provided in §
34.09 of this subchapter. The City Manager will:
   (A)   Attend all meetings of the Personnel Board and serve as its secretary.
If the City Manager appoints another person to the position of Personnel
Director, the Personnel Director will attend the meetings of the Personnel
Board when requested by the Personnel Board;
   (B)   Administer all the provisions of this subchapter and of the Personnel
Rules and Regulations not specifically reserved to the Council or to the
Personnel Board;
   (C)   Prepare and recommend to the Council revisions and amendments to the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. The City Attorney approves the legality of
such revisions and amendments prior to their submission to the Council;
   (D)   Prepare a position classification plan, including new class
specifications and revisions of the plan. The plan, new classifications, and
any major revisions to the plan, become effective upon approval by the Council.
Minor revisions to individual class specifications that do not change the
character or the salary of the class may be made by the Personnel Director. The
plan will follow those guidelines set forth in the personnel rules and
regulations; and,
   (E)   Prepare a plan of compensation, and revisions thereof, covering all
classifications in the competitive service as described in the Personnel Rules
and Regulations. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective
upon approval by the Council.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.104) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.05 PERSONNEL BOARD.
   (A)   Creation; membership. There is hereby created a Personnel Board to
consist of five members, who shall serve without compensation, who are known to
be in sympathy with the merit system principles, and who shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The members of the Personnel Board
will continue to serve as members of the Board until their successors are
appointed and qualified. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, the
Board will be organized and governed as to procedure in accordance with the
provisions of §§
33.001 through
33.013 of this title.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.105)
   (B)   Council liaison representative. The Council will appoint one of its
members to act as a liaison representative to the Personnel Board. Such liaison
representative will attend the meetings of the Personnel Board, advise the
Council of the background, attitudes, and reasoning behind decisions and
recommendations of the Personnel Board, and, on the request of any member of
the Personnel Board, advise the Personnel Board of the policies, procedures,
and decisions of the Council which may bear on matters under discussion by the
Personnel Board. The Council liaison representative will be without power to
vote.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.106)
   (C)   Meetings. The Personnel Board will meet upon notification of pending
appeals or personnel administration matters, or upon call by the Chairperson or
three members of the Board.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.107)
   (D)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Personnel Board will
be as follows:
      (1)   As provided by this subchapter and by the personnel rules and
regulations, to hear appeals submitted by any person in the competitive service
relative to conditions of employment, disciplinary actions, dismissals,
demotions, suspensions, or alleged violations of the provisions of this
subchapter or the personnel rules and regulations, and to certify its findings
as provided in this subchapter;
      (2)   Except in matters of employee appeals in regard to those matters
set forth in division (D)(1) of this section, the authority of the Personnel
Board will be advisory only and not controlling as to any other phase of the
personnel operations of the city;
      (3)   In any investigation or hearing conducted by the Personnel Board,
to have the power to examine witnesses under oath and to compel their
attendance or the production of evidence by subpoenas issued in the name of the
city and attested by the City Clerk. It will be the duty of the Chief of Police
to cause all such subpoenas to be served, and the refusal of a person to attend
or to testify in answer to such a subpoena will subject the person to
prosecution in the same manner set forth by law for failure to appear before
the Council in response to a subpoena issued by the Council. Each member of the
Board will have the power to administer oaths to witnesses; and
      (4)   When requested by the Council or the City Manager, to hold hearings
and make recommendations on any matters of personnel administration or policy
within the limits of a request of the Council or the City Manager.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.108)
(Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-
C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.06 COMPETITIVE SERVICE.
   The merit system of the city includes all officers and employees in the city
government except:
   (A)   Offices required by the Charter to be filled by election or
appointment by the Mayor or Council;
   (B)   Offices required by the Charter to be filled by appointment by the
City Manager subject to the approval of the Council;
   (C)   Temporary, extra-help and seasonal employees employed in other than
Council allocated regular positions. These positions are intended to be
occupied on less than a year-round basis to cover seasonal peak work loads,
unanticipated workloads or limited duration, and normal relief work situations;
and,
   (D)   Those persons engaged by contract for special services of a
professional, scientific, or technical nature or where the service is
essentially nonpersonal in character.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.109) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.07 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Procedures and regulations. Personnel rules and regulations, prepared
by the City Manager subject to the provisions of this subchapter and to
revision by the Council, will be adopted by resolution by the Council. The
personnel rules and regulations will establish specific procedures and
regulations governing the personnel system, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a
position classification plan covering all positions in the competitive service,
including employment standards and qualifications for each class;
      (2)   The preparation, revision, and administration of a plan of
compensation, directly correlated with the position classification plan,
providing a rate or range of pay for each class;
      (3)   The public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of
applications for employment;
      (4)   The preparation and conduct of competitive tests and examinations
and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing the
names of persons eligible for appointment. Such tests and examinations will
consist of job-related test instruments such as, but not limited to, written
tests, oral examinations, physical agility tests, performance tests, the
evaluation of daily performance, work samples or any combination of these which
will, in the opinion of the Personnel Director, test fairly the qualifications
of candidates for appointment or promotion. Physical and medical tests may be
given as a part of any pre-employment offer. The Personnel Director may
include, in addition to competitive tests, qualifying tests to establish
minimum standards;
      (5)   The certification and appointment of persons from employment lists
and the making of temporary and emergency appointments;
      (6)   The establishment of probationary periods and the evaluation of
employees during the probationary period;
      (7)   The transfer, promotion, demotion, and reinstatement of employees
in the competitive service;
      (8)   The separation of employees from the city service through layoffs,
suspensions, and dismissals;
      (9)   The standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave
regulations, working conditions, and the development of employee morale,
welfare, and training;
      (10)    Suitable provisions for orderly and equitable presentations to
the City Manager and to the Council by employees or their representatives
relating to general conditions of employment;
      (11)    The contents, maintenance, and use of personnel records and
forms;
      (12)    The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the
interpretation or application of the provisions of this subchapter and any
rules adopted hereunder; and,
      (13)    Such other matters as may be necessary and proper to carry out
the intent and purpose of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 2-5.110)
   (B)   Supplemental provisions. The personnel rules and regulations
establishing specific procedures and regulations governing the personnel system
of the city will be deemed to be supplemental to the provisions of this
subchapter. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.129)
(Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-
C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.08 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   Basis for appointments. Appointments to vacant positions in the
competitive service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules and
regulations. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness.
Merit and fitness will be ascertained in competitive examinations as defined in
the personnel rules and regulations and in §
34.07(A) of this subchapter. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.111)
   (B)   Appointing authority. The City Manager, who shall be known as the
appointing power or authority, will make all appointments within the
competitive service following the procedures set forth in the personnel rules
and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.112)
   (C)   Appointment of department directors. Department directors will be
appointed by the City Manager pursuant to the provisions of Charter, Art. VI, §
602(f) and with due regard for the provisions of this subchapter and the
personnel rules and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.113)
   (D)   Appointments subject to other laws. The Council, the City Manager, and
any officer in whom is vested the power to appoint, make transfers, promotions,
demotions, reinstatements, layoffs, and suspend or dismiss employees retain
such power, subject to the provisions of the Charter, this subchapter, and the
personnel rules and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.114)
(Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-
C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.09 CONTRACTS FOR SPECIAL SERVICES.
   The City Manager will consider and make recommendations to the Council
regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of
technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the
personnel system. The Council may contract with any qualified person or agency
for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties
imposed by the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   The preparation of the personnel rules and regulations and subsequent
revisions;
   (B)   The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;
   (C)   The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
   (D)   The preparation, conduct, and grading of competitive tests; and,
   (E)   Special and technical services of an advisory or informational
character on matters relating to personnel administration.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.115) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed
9-5-23)
§ 34.10 DISMISSALS, DEMOTIONS, AND SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Any person holding a position of employment in the
competitive service or under the jurisdiction of the City Manager may be
suspended without pay, demoted, or removed from their position for those
reasons provided in the personnel rules and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.116)
   (B)   Authority of City Manager to suspend employees. The City Manager may
suspend any person holding a position of employment in the competitive service
or under their jurisdiction for a period not to exceed 30 days as provided in
the personnel rules and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.117)
   (C)   Authority of department directors to suspend employees. A department
director has the authority to suspend without pay any person under their
jurisdiction for a period not to exceed 15 days as provided in the personnel
rules and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.118)
   (D)   Requests for hearings and filing answers. Any officer or employee of
the city in the competitive service and any other permanent employee not
excluded by the provisions of Charter, § 800 who are demoted, dismissed, or
suspended have the right to receive a written notice to appeal such action and
to file an answer to such charges as provided in the personnel rules and
regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.119)
   (E)   Removal or suspension of officers appointed by the Council or City
Manager. Any officer of the city appointed by the Council, or appointed by the
City Manager subject to the approval of the Council, who is removed or
suspended by the Council or the City Manager will have a written notice of the
cause of their removal or suspension from duty, and they will have the
opportunity to be heard on the cause of the suspension or removal before a
public hearing of the Council. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.120)
(Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-
C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.11 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Any officer or employee in the competitive service and any other permanent
employee not excluded by the provisions of Charter, § 800 have the right to
appeal to the Personnel Board relative to any situation affecting their
employment status or conditions of employment as provided in the personnel
rules and regulations.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.121) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.12 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a
probationary period of not less than six months nor more than two years as
provided in the personnel rules and regulations.
('63 Code, § 2-5.122) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73)
§ 34.13 ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   The City Manager, when he deems it necessary in the interests or protection
of the city, shall have the authority to grant an administrative leave of
absence with or without pay to any permanent employee or officer of the city.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.123) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.14 ABOLITION OF POSITIONS AND LAYOFFS.
   Whenever in the judgment of the Council it becomes necessary in the
interests of economy or because the necessity for the position or employment no
longer exists, the Council may abolish any position or employment in the
competitive service as provided in the personnel rules and regulations.
('63 Code, § 2-5.124) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73)
§ 34.15 RIGHT TO STRIKE.
   City of Eureka employees are essential to the continuity of operations and
maintenance of systems and infrastructure that sustain public health and
safety. No employee will have the right to strike against the city or refuse to
take any action required to be taken in the course of the performance of their
required duties. Such strike by any city employee will be considered an
unauthorized leave of absence and be grounds for dismissal.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.125) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed
9-5-23)
§ 34.16 APPLICABILITY OF ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE OF ABSENCE PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of the Personnel Rules and Regulations relating to attendance
and leaves of absence will apply to the incumbents of full-time positions not
within the competitive service.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.126) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed
9-5-23)
§ 34.17 SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS.
   No officer, agent, clerk, or employee of the city and no candidate for any
city office will, directly or indirectly, solicit or receive, or be in any
manner concerned with soliciting or receiving, any assessment, subscription,
contribution, or political service, whether voluntary or involuntary, for any
political purpose whatsoever from anyone on the employment list or holding any
position pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.127) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed
9-5-23)
§ 34.18 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   The political activities of city employees will conform to the provisions of
Cal. Gov’t Code Title 1, Div. 4, Chapter 9.5, and other applicable provisions
of state laws, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended or superseded.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.128) (Ord. 203-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.19 CRIMINAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person convicted (including pleas of guilty and nolo contendere),
of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude will be eligible for
employment by any department of the city; provided, however, that the
appointing authority may disregard such conviction if it is found and
determined by such appointing authority that mitigating circumstances exist,
such as, but not limited to, evidence of rehabilitation, length of time elapsed
since such conviction, the age of such person at the time of conviction, or the
fact that the classification applied for is unrelated to such conviction.
   (B)   The City Manager, Assistant to the City Manager, Personnel Director,
Chief of Police, City Attorney, and each department director of the city, are
hereby authorized to have access to the “State Summary Criminal History
Information” as provided for in Cal. Penal Code § 11105 when it is required to
assist such individual to fulfill employment responsibilities set forth in this
section.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.130) (Ord. 314-C.S., passed 8-21-79; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed
9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.20 UNFAIR LABOR PRACTICES.
   (A)   (1)   During the meet and confer process for adoption for a Memorandum
of Understanding, it will be an unfair labor practice for an elected city
official or any employee, in a management/confidential classification, or any
person who might reasonably be inferred to be a representative thereof other
than the individual designated by the city’s Employee Relations Officer to
discuss, attempt to discuss, consult, advocate or meet and confer with an
employee organization representative or a person who might reasonably be
inferred to be a representative thereof on any matter within the scope of
representation regarding wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of
employment at other than a public meeting of the City Council.
      (2)   It will, however, not be an unfair labor practice for the city to
distribute information on its positions in meetings and conferring to its
managers and other employees.
   (B)   (1)   During the meet and confer process for the adoption of a
Memorandum of Understanding, it will be an unfair labor practice for an
employee organization representative or a member of such employee organization
or a person who might reasonably be inferred to be a representative thereof to
discuss, attempt to discuss, consult, advocate, or meet and confer with an
elected city official or any employee in a management/confidential
classification or any person who might reasonably be inferred to be a
representative thereof other than the individual designated by the city’s
Employee Relations Officer on any matter within the scope of representation
regarding wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment at other
than a public meeting of the City Council.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (B) will not apply to an employee,
an employee organization, an employee representative or any person who might
reasonably be inferred to be a representative thereof who desires to
communicate with any elected city official or any employee in a management/
confidential classification during the meet and confer process and does so in
writing with the request that the Mayor, all members of the Council, and the
city’s Employee Relations Officer be provided with copies of the communication.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.131) (Ord. 335-C.S., passed 2-17-81; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed
9-5-23)
COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
§ 34.30 INITIAL SALARIES.
   The initial compensation to be paid for employment will be as provided in
the personnel rules and regulations.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.304) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 204-C.S., passed 4-6-
73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.31 TEMPORARY DUTY ASSIGNMENTS.
   (A)   Compensation, generally. Whenever the City Manager assigns duties and
responsibilities to an employee which are in addition to the duties and
responsibilities assigned to and customarily performed by the employee in their
position of employment, and such assignment of additional duties and
responsibilities is for a period in excess of 30 days, the City Manager may
authorize the payment of additional compensation, not to exceed 10% above the
employee’s base monthly salary, for each month during which the employee is
assigned to perform and performs such additional duties and responsibilities.
This provision will not apply to those employees who are compensated in
accordance with a current Memorandum of Understanding. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.304.1)
   (B)   Police officer temporary duty assignments; compensation. Any police
officer below the rank of sergeant who is assigned to the temporary duty
position of investigator, training officer, or motorcycle officer, or other
specialist assignment, will receive additional compensation as provided by the
applicable Memorandum of Understanding during the period such officer is
assigned to such temporary duty position. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.304.2)
(Ord. 175-C.S., passed 10-22-71; Am. Ord. 258-C.S., passed 11-14-75; Am. Ord.
297-C.S., passed 10-17-78; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S.,
passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.32 SALARY RANGES.
   (A)   Employees under five-step salary schedules.
      (1)   Generally. Except for Council appointed positions, all officers and
employees of the city shall be assigned to a salary range schedule consisting
of five steps within each range. Changes in the salary range schedule shall be
approved by resolution by the City Council.
      (2)   General service employees. General service employees represented by
the Eureka City Employees’ Association (E.C.E.A.) will be assigned to a salary
range schedule consisting of five steps within each range. Changes in the
salary range schedule will be approved by resolution by the City Council.
      (3)   Management staff assignments. Except for Council appointed
positions, management, professional, technical and confidential employees will
be assigned to a salary range consisting of five steps within each range.
Changes in the salary range schedule will be approved by resolution by the City
Council.
      (4)   Employees represented by the Eureka Police Officers’ Association.
Employees represented by the Eureka Police Officers’ Association (E.P.O.A.)
will be assigned to a salary schedule consisting of five steps within each
range. Changes in the salary range schedule will be approved by resolution by
the City Council.
   (B)   Temporary, seasonal and extra help positions. Those persons employed
by the city on a temporary, seasonal or extra help basis will be paid on an
hourly basis. Employees will be assigned to an hourly salary range schedule
consisting of five steps. Changes in the hourly salary range schedule will be
approved by resolution by the City Council.
   (C)   City Manager. The salary of the City Manager will be established by
resolution approved by the City Council. Changes in the salary of the City
Manager will be approved by resolution by the City Council.
   (D)   City Attorney. The salary of the City Attorney will be established by
resolution approved by the City Council. Changes in the salary of the City
Attorney will be approved by resolution by the City Council.
   (E)   City Clerk. The salary of the City Clerk will be established by
resolution approved by the City Council. Changes in the salary of the City
Clerk will be approved by resolution approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.33 INCREASES IN SALARIES.
   (A)   Conformity with rules and regulations. All increases in salary will be
made in accordance with the applicable provisions of the personnel rules and
regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.306)
   (B)   Accelerated increases in salaries. The City Manager may accelerate the
step advancement of any employee pursuant to the provisions of the personnel
rules and regulations. (‘63 Code, § 2-5.307)
(Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 204-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S.,
passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.34 ADVANCES IN CLASSIFICATION.
   When an employee is advanced from one classification to a higher
classification, the employee will be placed in the step for which the salary is
at least one step higher than the salary paid to such employee in the lower
classification, or as provided by the applicable Memorandum of Understanding.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.308) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-
96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.35 GROUP INSURANCE AND RETIREMENT.
   All appointive officers and full-time employees of the city, in addition to
other compensation provided, may receive the benefits to be derived from any
group insurance plan or retirement system which is, or may be, authorized by
the Council and under which a portion of the cost may be paid by the city.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.309) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-
23)
§ 34.36 UNCLASSIFIED POSITIONS.
   Whenever the Council determines that the creation of an office or employment
is necessary, the Council is hereby authorized to establish such office or
employment and to provide for the powers, duties, and compensation thereof by
resolution. In the event such office or employment is not classified under the
provisions of this chapter, the Council by resolution will assign such position
a salary range number.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.310) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-
23)
§ 34.37 VACATION AND SICK LEAVES.
   The provisions of this chapter are subject to such vacation and sick leave
allowances as may be authorized from time to time by the Council, and the
privileges granted by the provisions of this chapter are or will be included
within the remuneration established by the applicable Memorandum of
Understanding.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.311) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-
96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.38 HOLIDAYS.
   The provisions of this chapter are subject to such holiday leave as provided
by the Personnel Rules and Regulations, or by the applicable Memorandum of
Understanding.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.312) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 19-C.S., passed 8-6-
64; Am. Ord. 116-C.S., passed 3-7-69; Am. Ord. 162-C.S., passed 2-3-71; Am.
Ord. 189-C.S., passed 8-31-72; Am. Ord. 270-C.S., passed 2-4-77; Am. Ord. 609-
C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.39 UNIFORM ALLOWANCES.
   Whenever an officer or employee of the city is required to have, or while on
duty to wear, a full distinctive uniform, the Council is hereby authorized to
establish a schedule of allowances to be paid to such officer or employee for
the maintenance, repair, and replacement of such distinctive uniform. Such
payments for uniform allowances will be deemed to be made solely for the
benefit of the city and in no case be deemed compensation for services
rendered.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.313) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-
23)
§ 34.40 OVERTIME.
   Overtime will be authorized in a manner to conform with the provisions of
the personnel rules and regulations and applicable federal, state and local
laws.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.314) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 204-C.S., passed 4-6-
73; Am. Ord. 609-C.S., passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.41 NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES AUTHORIZED.
   The number of persons who may be employed in any of the offices or
employments of the city will be determined in the preparation of the annual
budget. Such determination, however, does not preclude the employment of such
additional persons during the fiscal year as may be needed in the service of
the city provided the necessary funds to cover the expense of such employment
are transferred from one of the existing appropriations, or from the
unappropriated reserve, to the appropriation applicable to such employment. The
Council is hereby authorized to provide for such employment by resolution or
motion and will be deemed to have done so in the resolution adopting the annual
budget.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.315) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-
23)
§ 34.42 CLASS TITLES.
   The class title of each position as classified by this subchapter will be
used to designate such position in all budget estimates, payrolls, and other
official records, documents, vouchers, and communications and in all personnel
matters.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.316) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-
23)
§ 34.43 SEVERANCE PAY.
   The Council will have the authority to grant severance pay to any officer of
the city who is dismissed, asked to resign, or laid off from the city service.
The Council also has the authority to establish a program of severance pay for
permanent employees laid off, asked to resign, or dismissed from the city
service.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.316.1) (Ord. 204-C.S., passed 4-6-73; Am. Ord. 950-C.S.,
passed 9-5-23)
§ 34.44 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Personnel rules and regulations establishing specific procedures and
regulations governing the personnel system of the city and adopted by the
Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter will be deemed supplemental
to the provisions of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 2-5.317) (Ord. 2936, passed 8-9-63; Am. Ord. 950-C.S., passed 9-5-
23)
CHAPTER 35: FINANCE, REVENUE AND TAXATION
Section
Fees from Permits and Certificates
   
35.001   Definition
   
35.002   Permits and certificates not licenses; validity; transferability
   
35.003   Fees; deposit
Funds
   
35.015   Sewer service funds
   
35.016   Water service funds
   
35.017   Recreation fund
   
35.018   Special gas tax street improvement fund
Property Taxes
   
35.030   Transfer of assessment and tax collection duties
   
35.031   Collection of special assessments
   
35.032   Compensation
   
35.033   Filing description of boundaries
   
35.034   Fixing amount to be raised by taxation and tax rate
   
35.035   Abolition of offices of Assessor and Tax Collector
   
35.036   Repeal
Sales and Use Tax
   
35.050   Title; operative date
   
35.051   Rate
   
35.052   Purpose
   
35.053   Contract with state
   
35.054   Sales tax; place of sale
   
35.055   Use tax
   
35.056   Adoption of provision of state law; limitation
   
35.057   Permit not required
   
35.058   Exclusions and exemptions
   
35.059   Amendments
   
35.060   Enjoining collection forbidden
Transient Occupancy Tax
   
35.070   Short title
   
35.071   Definitions
   
35.072   Tax imposed
   
35.073   Exemptions
   
35.074   Operator's duties
   
35.075   Registration
   
35.076   Reporting and remitting
   
35.077   Penalties and interest
   
35.078   Failure to collect and report tax
   
35.079   Appeals
   
35.080   Records
   
35.081   Refunds
   
35.082   Actions to collect
   
35.083   Payment of taxes prior to refund or judicial relief
   
35.084   Violations of provisions
Real Property Transfer Tax
   
35.095   Short title and authority
   
35.096   Tax imposed; obligation for tax
   
35.097   Exemptions
   
35.098   Administration by County Recorder
   
35.099   Refunds
Business Improvement District
   
35.110   Definitions
   
35.111   Purpose, intent and use of revenue
   
35.112   Expenditure of funds
   
35.113   Procedure for establishment of district
   
35.114   Notices and hearings
   
35.115   District established
   
35.116   Separate benefit area
   
35.117   Rate of additional charges or assessments; collection
   
35.118   Changes of rate of additional charges and assessments
   
35.119   Changes in district or area boundaries
   
35.120   District and area disestablishment
Transactions and Use Tax
   
35.160   Title
   
35.161   Operative date
   
35.162   Purpose
   
35.163   Contract with state
   
35.164   Transactions tax rate
   
35.165   Place of sale
   
35.166   Use tax rate
   
35.167   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
35.168   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
35.169   Permit not required
   
35.170   Exemptions and exclusions
   
35.171   Amendments
   
35.172   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
35.173   Severability
Supplemental Transactions and Use Tax
   
35.175   Title
   
35.176   Definitions
   
35.177   Purpose
   
35.178   Contract with state
   
35.179   Transactions tax rate
   
35.180   Place of sale
   
35.181   Use tax rate
   
35.182   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
35.183   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
35.184   Permit not required
   
35.185   Exemptions and exclusions
   
35.186   Amendments
   
35.187   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
35.188   Severability
   
35.189   Effective date
   
35.190   Termination date
   
35.191   Fiscal accountability provisions
 
   
35.999   Penalty
   
Appendix: Eureka Business Improvement District
FEES FROM PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES
§ 35.001 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, FEE shall mean those charges authorized
by law and made collectible for services rendered or to be rendered or for the
issuance of permits or certificates of inspection by officers and departments
of the city.
('63 Code, § 8-1.01) (Ord. 2146, passed - - )
§ 35.002 PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES NOT LICENSES; VALIDITY; TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   Permits and certificates not construed to be licenses. No permit or
certificate of inspection required by this subchapter for which a fee is
collected shall be construed to be a license to engage in any business for
which a license is required by law.
('63 Code, § 8-1.02)
   (B)   Validity. The validity of permits and certificates of inspection
issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall remain contingent
upon strict compliance with the laws of the state and the city, and such
permits and certificates of inspection may be revoked or canceled when it
becomes evident that such laws are not being strictly complied with.
('63 Code, § 8-1.03)
   (C)   Transferability. No permit or certificate of inspection issued
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall be transferable, nor shall
any such permit or certificate of inspection be assignable.
('63 Code, § 8-1.04)
(Ord. 2146, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 35.999
§ 35.003 FEES; DEPOSIT.
   The following fees, unless otherwise specifically provided, shall be
deposited into the general fund of the city not later than the fifth day of the
month following the month in which any such fee was collected:
   (A)   Fees of the Building Inspector as provided by
Chapter 150 of this code;
   (B)   Fees of the Plumbing Inspector and Examining Board of Plumbers;
   (C)   Fees of the Electrical Inspector;
   (D)   Fees of the Poundmaster and pound as provided by
Chapter 91 of this code;
   (E)   Fees of the Water Department as provided by
Chapter 53 of this code.
('63 Code, § 8-1.05) (Ord. 2146, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2169, passed - - )
FUNDS
§ 35.015 SEWER SERVICE FUNDS.
   (A)   A sewer service fund is hereby established. It shall consist of
revenue from sewer service fees and revenues from sewer connection charges.
   (B)   All revenue obtained from sewer service fees shall be deposited into
said fund, shall be accounted for separately, and shall be expended for the
acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of
wastewater facilities, including payment of interest and principal on bonds
issued for such purposes.
   (C)   All revenue obtained from sewer connection charges shall be deposited
into said fund, shall be accounted for separately and shall be expended for the
acquisition, construction, and reconstruction of the wastewater system,
including payment of interest and principal on bonds issued for such purposes.
Said fund may also provide a capital reserve for depreciation and enlargement
of the wastewater system.
   (D)   The terms “sewer service fees” and “sewer connection charges” as used
herein shall apply to those funds collected for the use of the wastewater
system and shall not be construed to affect revenues derived from the plumbing
permit fees.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to restrict or
prohibit the making of transfers from said sewer service fund for the purpose
of making loans to one or more of the various departments of the city providing
the Council first finds, after a public hearing, that a fiscal emergency does
exist. Loans shall be restored annually to the sewer service fund on or before
the last day of each fiscal year along with interest charged at a rate
consistent with that earned by reserves held in deposit by the sewer fund.
   (F)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the pooled investment of sewer funds.
('63 Code, § 8-2.101) (Ord. 414-C.S., passed 10-2-84)
Cross-reference:
   Sewers, see
Ch. 50
§ 35.016 WATER SERVICE FUNDS.
   (A)   A water service fund is hereby established. It shall consist of
revenue from water service fees and revenues from water connection charges.
   (B)   All revenue obtained from water service fees shall be deposited into
said fund, shall be accounted for separately, and shall be expended for the
acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, and operation of water
facilities, including payment of interest and principal on bonds issued for
such purposes.
   (C)   All revenue obtained from water connection charges shall be deposited
into said fund, shall be accounted for separately and shall be expended for the
acquisition, construction and reconstruction of the water system, including
payment of interest and principal on bonds issued for such purposes. Said fund
may also provide a capital reserve for depreciation and enlargement of the
water system.
   (D)   The terms “water service fees” and “water connection charges” as used
herein shall apply only to those funds collected for the use of the water
system and shall not be construed to affect revenues derived from the plumbing
permit fees.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to restrict or
prohibit the making of transfers from said water service fund for the purpose
of making loans to one or more of the various departments of the city providing
the Council first finds, after a public hearing, that a fiscal emergency does
exist. Loans shall be restored annually to the water service fund on or before
the last day of each fiscal year along with interest charged at a rate
consistent with that earned by reserves held in deposit by the water fund.
   (F)   Nothing herein shall prohibit the pooled investment of water funds.
('63 Code, § 8-2.102) (Ord. 414-C.S., passed 10-2-84)
Cross-reference:
   Water, see
Ch. 53
§ 35.017 RECREATION FUND.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created a fund to be known as the Recreation
Fund.
('63 Code, § 8-2.201)
   (B)   Deposits and withdrawals. All tax moneys received from the special
recreation tax, as authorized by the vote of the electorate of the city, shall
be deposited in the Recreation Fund, and all claims, demands, or warrants
against the Recreation Department shall be drawn from such fund.
('63 Code, § 8-2.202)
(Ord. 2349, passed - - )
§ 35.018 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   Creation. In order to comply with the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High.
Code Divs. 1 and 3, Art. 5 with particular reference to the amendments made
thereto by Cal. Sts. & High. Code § 2113, there is hereby created in the city
treasury a special fund to be known as the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement
Fund.
('63 Code, § 8-2.301)
   (B)   Deposits. All moneys received by the city from the state under the
provision of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property
or interests therein for, or the construction, maintenance, or improvement of
streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the Special
Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.
('63 Code, § 8-2.302)
   (C)   Use of fund. All moneys in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
shall be expended exclusively for, the purposes authorized by, and subject to,
all the provisions of Cal. Sts. & High. Code Divs. 1 and 3, Art. 5.
('63 Code, § 8-2.303)
(Ord. 2049, passed - - )
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, see
Ch. 98
PROPERTY TAXES
§ 35.030 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES.
   The duties of assessing property for the purpose of taxation and of
collecting taxes, now performed by the City Assessor and the Director of
Finance as ex officio Tax Collector of the city under the direction of the City
Manager, are hereby transferred to the Assessor and the Tax Collector,
respectively, of the County, and from and after the effective date of this
subchapter, all property in the city shall be assessed and all taxes thereon
shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code Title
5, Div. 1, Part 2, Ch. 2, Art. 2 (commencing with § 51540).
('63 Code, § 8-3.01) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65; Am. Ord. 384-C.S., passed
5-17-83)
§ 35.031 COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The Council, by resolution, is hereby authorized to provide for the
collection of special assessments heretofore or hereafter levied for municipal
improvements and other purposes at the same time and in the same manner as
county taxes are collected, and all laws applicable to the levy, collection,
and enforcement of county taxes shall be and are hereby made applicable to such
special assessments.
('63 Code, § 8-3.02) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65)
§ 35.032 COMPENSATION.
   The amount of compensation to be charged by and paid to the county for the
performance of services under the provisions of this subchapter shall be fixed
by agreement between the Board of Supervisors of the county and the Council.
('63 Code, § 8-3.03) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65)
§ 35.033 FILING DESCRIPTION OF BOUNDARIES.
   On or before the first Monday of July of each year, the Council shall cause
to be filed with the County Auditor a description of the exterior boundaries of
each district or portion of the city in which a rate of taxation is to be
levied which is different from the rate to be levied in any other district or
portion of the city.
('63 Code, § 8-3.04) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65)
§ 35.034 FIXING AMOUNT TO BE RAISED BY TAXATION AND TAX RATE.
   Annually, after adoption of the budget and before fixing the rate of taxes,
the Council shall fix by ordinance or resolution the amount of revenue from
property taxes necessary to carry on the functions and activities of the city
and of its various departments and to pay the bonded or other indebtedness of
the city or any portion or district of the city. After receiving from the
County Auditor a written statement showing separately the total value of all
property within the city and the total value of all property in each district
or portion of the city in which a different rate of taxation is to be levied,
but not later than the last Tuesday in August, the Council shall fix by
ordinance or resolution the rate of taxes, or rates of taxes, if different
portions or districts require different rates, designated in the number of
cents upon each $100, using as a basis the value of the property assessed and
equalized by the county. The rates shall be sufficient to raise the amount
fixed by ordinance or resolution and the expense of collection. The Council
shall immediately transmit to the County Auditor a statement of the rates
fixed.
('63 Code, § 8-3.05) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65)
§ 35.035 ABOLITION OF OFFICES OF ASSESSOR AND TAX COLLECTOR.
   The offices of Assessor and Tax Collector of the city are hereby abolished.
All duties performed by the City Assessor, other than the assessing of city
property, are hereby transferred to and are to be performed by the City
Manager. All duties performed by the City Tax Collector, other than the
collection of taxes, are hereby transferred to and are to be performed by the
Director of Finance of the city under the direction of the City Manager.
('63 Code, § 8-3.06) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65)
§ 35.036 REPEAL.
   Ordinance Nos. 294, 2069, 2094, 2102, 2110, 2199, 2412, and 2415, relating
to property taxation, and all ordinances amendatory thereof, are repealed only
to the extent that the same are in conflict with this subchapter, the express
intention being that all the provisions of said ordinances shall remain in
effect insofar as the same relate or apply to the collection of special
assessments for municipal improvements or other purposes heretofore or
hereafter levied, unless the Council has adopted a resolution pursuant to §
35.031 of this subchapter transferring the city's duties of collection to the
county, and to the collection of taxes heretofore levied or installments
thereof heretofore be made.
('63 Code, § 8-3.07) (Ord. 63-C.S., passed 12-2-65)
SALES AND USE TAX
§ 35.050 TITLE; OPERATIVE DATE.
   (A)   Short title. This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales
and Use Tax Ordinance.
('63 Code, § 8-4.01)
   (B)   Operative date. This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1984.
('63 Code, § 8-4.03)
(Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.051 RATE.
   The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this subchapter shall be 1%.
('63 Code, § 8-4.02) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.052 PURPOSE.
   The City Council hereby declares that this subchapter is adopted to achieve
the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part
1.5;
   (B)   To adopt a sales aid use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5;
   (C)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State
Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable
to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;
   (D)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Div. 2, Part 1.5, minimize the cost of collecting city
sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping
upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-4.04) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.053 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date of this subchapter, this city shall contract
with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the
administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided,
that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of
Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and
in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of
the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-4.05) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.054 SALES TAX; PLACE OF SALE.
   (A)   Sales tax. For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at
retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate
stated in § 35.051 of this subchapter of the gross receipts of the retailer
from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on
and after the operative date.
('63 Code, § 8-4.06)
   (B)   Place of sale. For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales
are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible
personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-
state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state
destination. The gross receipts from such sale shall include delivery charges,
when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the
place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place
of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or
places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under
rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of
Equalization.
('63 Code, § 8-4.07)
(Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.055 USE TAX.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in
this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and
after the operative date for storage, use, or other consumption in this city at
the rate stated in §
35.051 of this subchapter of the sales price of the property. The sales price
shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or
use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
('63 Code, § 8-4.08) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.056 ADOPTION OF PROVISION OF STATE LAW; LIMITATION.
   (A)   Adoption of provision of state law. Except as otherwise provided in
this subchapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions
of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.5 of Division 2, all of the provisions of Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 of Division 2 are hereby adopted and made a part of
this subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
('63 Code, § 8-4.09)
   (B)   Limitation on adoption of state law. In adopting the provisions of
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 of Division 2, wherever the state is named or
referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted
therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is
used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the
State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or
the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made
when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or
against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State
Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this subchapter; the substitution shall not be
made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections
referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the
substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property
which would otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use,
or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 of Division 2 or to impose this tax with respect
to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said
provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code, §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737,
6797 or 6828; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in
the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §
6203.
('63 Code, § 8-4.10)
(Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.057 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code, § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this
subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-4.11) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.058 EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state on a retailer or consumer.
   (B)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
Part 1.5 of Division 2 by any city and county, county, or city in this state
shall be exempt from the tax due under this subchapter.
   (C)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States, or any foreign government.
   (D)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, §§
6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal
property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such
operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the
United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax.
   (E)   This section shall be operative January 1, 1984.
('63 Code, § 8-4.12) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.059 AMENDMENTS.
   All subsequent amendments of the Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code which relate to the
sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
Part 1.5 of Division 2 shall automatically become a part of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-4.13) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 35.060 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code, Part 1.5 of
Division 2, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
('63 Code, § 8-4.14) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
Penalty, see § 35.999
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 35.070 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Transient Occupancy Tax
Law” of the city.
('63 Code, § 8-5.01) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83)
§ 35.071 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any
public or private campground, of any room, or portion thereof, in any transient
accommodation for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the transient accommodation,
whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession,
licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions
through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the
managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this
subchapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal.
Compliance with the provisions of this subchapter by either the principal or
the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a transient accommodation valued in money, whether to be received
in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits,
property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
   TRANSIENT ACCOMMODATION. Any structure, or any portion of any structure, or
public or private campground which is occupied, or intended or designed for
occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes and shall
include any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor
hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or
private club, mobile home or house trailer at a fixed location, or other
similar structure, or public or private campground, or portion thereof.
   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by
reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for
a period of 30 consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar
days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in transient
accommodation shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of 30 days has
expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and
occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a
person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and
subsequent to the effective date of the provisions of this subchapter may be
considered.
('63 Code, § 8-5.02) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 400-C.S., passed 3-6-84)
§ 35.072 TAX IMPOSED.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any transient accommodation, each
transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10% of the
rent charged by the operator on or after January 1, 2009. Such tax shall
constitute a debt owed by the transient to the city, which debt shall be
extinguished only by paying to the operator or to the city. The transient shall
pay the tax to the operator of the transient accommodation at the time rent is
paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax
shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the
transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the transient accommodation. If for any
reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the transient accommodation,
the Director of Finance may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the
Director of Finance.
(‘63 Code, § 8-5.03) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; Am. Ord. 106-C.S., passed
6-15-68; Am. Ord. 234-C.S., passed 8-16-74; tax operative, passed 10-1-74; Am.
Ord. 371-C.S., passed 9-2-82; tax operative passed 1-1-83; Am. Ord. 382-C.S.,
passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 400-C.S., passed 3-6-84; Am. Ord. 546-C.S., passed 7-
2-92; Am. Ord. 733-C.S., passed 12-16-08; Am. Ord. 840-C.S., passed 7-5-16)
Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.073 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No tax shall be imposed upon:
      (1)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond
the powers of the city to impose the tax provided for in this subchapter; or,
      (2)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.
   (B)   No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefore made at
the time the rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form
prescribed by the Director of Finance.
('63 Code, § 8-5.04) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 60-C.S., passed 11-5-65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83)
Penalty, see § 35.999
§ 35.074 OPERATOR'S DUTIES.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this
subchapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected
from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the
amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for
payment from the operator. No operator shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent,
or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in
this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-5.05) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 400-C.S., passed 3-6-84)
Penalty, see § 35.999
§ 35.075 REGISTRATION.
   On or before January 1, 1983, or within 30 days after commencing business,
whichever is later, each operator of a hotel renting an occupancy to transients
shall register such transient accommodation with the Director of Finance and
obtain from him a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate” which shall at
all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate
shall, among other things, set forth the following information:
   (A)   The name of the operator;
   (B)   The address of the transient accommodation;
   (C)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and,
   (D)   A statement as follows: “This Transient Occupancy Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of the Transient Occupancy Tax regulations by registering with
the Director of Finance for the purpose of collecting from transients the
Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting such tax to the Director of Finance. This
certificate shall not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or
to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, not to operate a
transient accommodation without strictly complying with all local applicable
laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board,
commission, department, or office in this city. This certificate shall not
constitute a permit.”
('63 Code, § 8-5.06) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-3-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 400-C.S., passed 3-6-84)
§ 35.076 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the Director of Finance, make a return to the
Director of Finance, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time
the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to
the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance may establish shorter
reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order
to insure collection of the tax, and he may require further information in the
return. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter shall be held in trust for the account of the
city until payment thereof is made to the Director of Finance.
('63 Code, § 8-5.07) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83)
§ 35.077 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Original delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any tax
imposed by the provisions of this subchapter within the time required shall pay
a penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   (B)   Continued delinquency. Any operator who shall fail to remit any
delinquent remittance, on or before a period of 30 days following the date of
which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty in the amount of 10% of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax
and the 10% penalty first imposed.
   (C)   Fraud. If the Director of Finance shall determine that the nonpayment
of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter is due to
fraud, a penalty in the amount of 25% of the amount of the tax shall be added
thereto in addition to the penalties set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section.
   (D)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall
fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this subchapter shall pay
interest at the rate of 1.5% per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of
the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent until paid.
   (E)   Penalties and interest merged with tax. Every penalty imposed, and
such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (F)   Waiver of penalties and interest. Any other provision of this section
to the contrary notwithstanding, if any operator shall fail to remit any tax
imposed by this subchapter within the time required, the Director of Finance,
on written application therefor and good cause shown, may waive any penalties
and interest imposed under this section provided the operator remits any tax
imposed by this subchapter within 72 hours following the time the remittance
first became delinquent.
('63 Code, § 8-5.08) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; Am. Ord. 84-C.S., passed 1-
26-67, operative 10-1-66; tax operative, passed 3-1-65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S.,
passed 5-17-83)
§ 35.078 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX.
   If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect such tax and to make within
the time provided in this subchapter, any report and remittance of such tax, or
any portion thereof required by the provisions of this subchapter, the Director
of Finance shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain the facts
and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the
Director of Finance shall procure such facts and information as he is able to
obtain upon which to base the assessments of any such tax imposed by the
provisions of this subchapter and payable by any operator who has failed or
refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the
Director of Finance shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator
the tax, interest, and penalties provided for by the provisions of this
subchapter. In the event such determination is made, the Director of Finance
shall give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by
depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may,
within ten days after the service or mailing of such notice, make an
application in writing to the Director of Finance for a hearing on the amount
assessed. If an application by the operator for a hearing is not made within
the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by
the Director of Finance shall become final and conclusive and immediately due
and payable. If such an application is made, the Director of Finance shall give
not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in this
section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in notice why
the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and
penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and offer evidence why such
specified tax, interest, and penalties shall not be so fixed. After such
hearing the Director of Finance shall determine the proper tax to be remitted
and shall thereafter give written notice to the operator in the manner
prescribed in this section of such determination and the amount of such tax,
interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable 15
days after the service or mailing of such notice unless an appeal is filed as
provided in § 35.079 of this section.
('63 Code, § 8-5.09) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83)
Penalty, see § 35.999
§ 35.079 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the Director of Finance with
respect to the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties, if any, may appeal
to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days
after the service or mailing of the determination of the tax due. The Council
shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall
give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The
findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon
the appellant in the manner prescribed in this subchapter for the service of a
notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and
payable upon the service of notice.
   (B)   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process
shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the city or
an officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be
collected pursuant to this chapter and payment of all tax, interest and
penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review
of any tax liability.
('63 Code, § 8-5.10) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 744-C.S., passed 10-20-09)
§ 35.080 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the city of any tax imposed by the provisions of this subchapter to keep and
preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection
of any payment to the city, which records the Director of Finance shall have
the right to inspect at all reasonable times.
('63 Code, § 8-5.11) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83)
§ 35.081 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been
overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, such amount
may be refunded as provided in divisions (B) and (C) of this section provided a
claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific
grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Director of Finance
within three years after the date of payment. This claim shall be on forms
furnished by the Director of Finance.
   (B)   Any operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Director of Finance that the person from whom the tax has
been collected was not a transient; provided, however, neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   (C)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than
once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a
claim in the manner provided in division (A) of this section but only when the
tax was paid by the transient directly to the Director of Finance or when the
transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction
of the Director of Finance that the transient has been unable to obtain a
refund from the operator who collected the tax.
   (D)   No refund shall be paid pursuant to the provisions of this section
unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
('63 Code, § 8-5.12) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83)
§ 35.082 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   (A)   Actions to collect. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to
the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the
city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing
money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an
action brought in the name of the City of Eureka for the recovery of such
amount.
   (B)   Recording tax lien. If any amount required to be paid to the city
under this chapter is not paid when due, the Finance Director may record in the
Office of the Humboldt County Recorder a certificate which specifies the amount
of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address of the operator owing
the tax and liable therefor as it appears on the tax assessment roll, and the
fact that the Finance Director has complied with all provisions of this chapter
in the determination of the tax, interest and penalties required to be paid.
From the date of recording in the Office of the Humboldt County Recorder, the
amount to be paid together with interest and penalties shall constitute a lien
upon the real property in the county owned by the operator or acquired by the
operator afterwards and before the lien expires. The lien shall have the force,
effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from
the time of recordation of the lien unless sooner released or otherwise
discharged.
   (C)   Assessment and lien. Whenever delinquent taxes and penalties are not
paid to the city after proper notice, the total uncollected amount including
tax, penalties and administrative fees may become assessments, and the City
Clerk may compile a list of such assessments together with parcel number
designations and addresses upon which the assessments are being fixed. After
notice and hearing, and upon confirmation of the imposition of the liens by
resolution of the City Council, the City Clerk shall file a certified copy of
the approved resolution with the Humboldt County Tax Collector, directing that
all unpaid transient occupancy taxes, penalties and administrative fees be
entered as lien charges against said property as it appears on the current
assessment roll. Liens shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner, subject to the same penalties and interest upon delinquencies, as the
general real property taxes are collected for the city. The City Clerk shall
present for recording appropriate notices of the imposition of these liens with
the Humboldt County Recorder.
   (D)   No lien preference. Nothing in this chapter shall give the city a
preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the
amounts required to be paid became a lien.
   (E)   Remedies not exclusive. The remedies and penalties provided for in
this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive, and shall not supersede or
limit any and all other remedies that may be available.
('63 Code, § 8-5.13) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 766-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 35.083 PAYMENT OF TAXES PRIOR TO REFUND OR JUDICIAL RELIEF.
   No legal or equitable process shall be issued in any proceeding in any court
against the city or any officer to prevent or enjoin the collection of any tax
sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter, and payment of all tax,
interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking
judicial review of any tax liability.
(Ord. 766-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
§ 35.084 VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS.
   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required,
or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to
furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Director of
Finance, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign, or verity any
report or claim and who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with
intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by the
provisions of this subchapter to be made shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 8-5.14) (Ord. 30-C.S., passed 1-30-65; tax operative, passed 3-1-
65; Am. Ord. 382-C.S., passed 5-17-83; Am. Ord. 766-C.S., passed 3-1-11)
Penalty, see § 35.999
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 35.095 SHORT TITLE AND AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax of the
City of Eureka.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Rev.
& Tax. Code Part 6.7 (commencing with § 11901) of Division 2.
('63 Code, § 8-6.01) (Ord. 98-C.S., passed 1-1-68)
§ 35.096 TAX IMPOSED; OBLIGATION FOR TAX.
   (A)   Tax imposed. There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or
writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city
shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested
in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or
their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property
conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon
at the time of sale) exceeds $100 a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or
fractional part thereof.
('63 Code, § 8-6.02)
   (B)   Obligation of tax. Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of
division (A) of this section shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or
issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or
benefit the same is made, signed, or issued.
('63 Code, § 8-6.03)
(Ord. 98-C.S., passed 1-1-68)
§ 35.097 EXEMPTIONS.
   The exemptions contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax Code §§ 11921 through 11929 are
hereby adopted by reference and shall apply as if set forth in full in this
code.
§ 35.098 ADMINISTRATION BY COUNTY RECORDER.
   The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this subchapter in
conformity with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 6.7 of Division 2
and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
('63 Code, § 8-6.09) (Ord. 98-C.S., passed 1-1-68)
§ 35.099 REFUNDS.
   Claims for the refund of taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter shall be governed by the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code,
Chapter 5 (commencing with § 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1.
('63 Code, § 8-6.10) (Ord. 98-C.S., passed 1-1-68)
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 35.110 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDITIONAL CHARGES or ASSESSMENTS. The rate of increase or additional charge
based upon the business license tax and established pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter and of the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1979.
   BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT. An area in the city which has been designated
a Business Improvement District pursuant to the procedure set forth in this
subchapter and in the Parking and Business Improvement Area Law of 1979.
   BUSINESS. All types of businesses, including professions.
   MODIFIED BUSINESS LICENSE FEE. The tax or levy ordinarily required by the
city for the operation of a business pursuant to Chapter 110 of the Eureka
Municipal Code modified as follows:
      Regular business license fee: $10 - ($2 x number of employees).
('63 Code, § 8-7.01) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
§ 35.111 PURPOSE, INTENT AND USE OF REVENUE.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to impose an additional charge
or assessment upon those businesses in a Business Improvement District which is
in addition to the regular business license tax of the city, and to use the
proceeds from the additional charges or assessments for the betterment of
business activity within the Business Improvement District. Such activities
are:
   (A)   The acquisition, construction, or maintenance of parking facilities
for the benefit of the district.
   (B)   Decoration of any public place in the district.
   (C)   Promotion of public events which are to take place on or in public
places in the district.
   (D)   Furnishing of music in any public place in the district.
   (E)   The general promotion of business activities in the district.
('63 Code, § 8-7.02) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.112 EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   The City Council will have sole discretion to expend the revenues derived
from the additional charges or assessments within the scope of the purpose of
this chapter; however, it is the intent of the city to contract with the Eureka
Business Improvement District Association for the implementation on behalf of
the city of the Business Improvement District, consistent with this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-7.03) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.113 PROCEDURE FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT.
   The Council may establish a Business Improvement District by the following
procedure:
   (A)   Adoption of a resolution of intention to establish a Business
Improvement District which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   A description of the proposed boundaries of such district.
      (2)   The time and place when a hearing shall be held by the Council to
determine whether or not to adopt an ordinance to establish such district.
      (3)   The uses to which the additional revenue derived from the
additional charges or assessment for a business license will be put which shall
be the same as those provided for by this chapter.
      (4)   A statement that the establishment of a Business Improvement
District shall cause an additional charge or assessment for business licenses
for those businesses conducting their activities in such district, and that
such increase shall be in accordance with the schedule provided by this
subchapter, which schedule shall be set forth in the resolution.
      (5)   A statement that any interested person may file a written protest
prior to the hearing and may also appear at the hearing and present evidence.
   (B)   Notice of hearing provided for by the resolution of intention shall be
published and mailed in accordance with §
35.114 of this subchapter. Such notice shall consist of a complete copy of the
resolution of intention to establish a Business Improvement District.
   (C)   The hearing specified in the resolution of intention shall be held
prior to the adoption of an ordinance establishing a Business Improvement
District. Such hearing shall be held in accordance with §
35.114 of this subchapter.
   (D)   If it is determined by the Council after the hearing that such a
district should be established, the Council shall approve such a district by
adopting an ordinance establishing the district. This ordinance shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The number, date, and title of the resolution of intention pursuant
to which it was adopted.
      (2)   The time and place the hearing was held concerning the formation of
such district.
      (3)   The description of the boundaries of such district.
      (4)   A statement that the businesses in the district established by the
ordinance shall be subject to the provisions of the additional charges or
assessments provided by this chapter.
      (5)   A statement that a Business Improvement District has been
established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The Council may,
however, modify the boundaries of the district as described in the resolution
of intention based upon the evidence presented, provided the Council proposes
such change and continues the hearing until a later time and notice of the
proposed change and the time and a place of the continued hearing is given in
accordance with §
35.114 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-7.04) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.114 NOTICES AND HEARINGS.
   (A)   Whenever this subchapter provides for a hearing and a notice, the city
shall give notice as follows:
      (1)   One publication in a newspaper published and circulated in the
city; and,
      (2)   Mailing of such notices, postage prepaid, in a sealed envelope, by
the United States mail, addressed to all businesses which conduct activities
within any proposed or established Business Improvement District as shown upon
the active business licenses on file with the Director of Finance.
   (B)   Both publication and mailing of notices shall be completed at least
ten days prior to the holding of any hearing required by this subchapter, and
such notices shall contain the designation of the time and place of the hearing
and a statement describing the subject matter of such hearing.
   (C)   Personal service may be substituted for mailed notice.
   (D)   Whenever a hearing is held under this subchapter, the Council shall
hear all protests and receive evidence for or against the proposed action; the
Council shall also rule upon all protests which determination shall be final;
and the Council may continue the hearing from time to time.
('63 Code, § 8-7.05) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.115 DISTRICT ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   A Business Improvement District and benefit areas are established in
the city within the boundaries as shown in the Appendix of this chapter and
legally described in the Appendix of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council finds that businesses lying within the Business and
Improvement District herein established will be benefitted by the expenditure
of the funds to be raised by the assessments or charges that will be levied and
that are now proposed to be levied.
   (C)   Businesses in the district established by this ordinance shall be and
remain subject to any amendments to Cal. Sts. & High. Code, Part 6 (commencing
with § 36500).
('63 Code, § 8-7.06) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.116 SEPARATE BENEFIT AREA.
   (A)   The City Council may, for each of the purposes set out in §
35.111 of this subchapter, establish and modify one or more separate benefit
areas based upon the degree of benefit derived from the purpose, and may impose
a different rate of charges or assessment within each such benefit area.
   (B)   All provisions of this subchapter applicable to the establishment or
disestablishment of the district also apply to the establishment, modification
or disestablishment of benefit areas pursuant to this section. The
establishment or the modification of any such area shall follow the same
procedure as provided for the establishment of a Business Improvement District
and the disestablishment shall follow the same procedure as provided for
disestablishment.
('63 Code, § 8-7.07) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.117 RATE OF ADDITIONAL CHARGES OR ASSESSMENTS; COLLECTION.
   (A)   Rate of additional charges or assessments. Effective January 1, 1984,
there will be imposed the following charge for a business license for all
businesses conducting their activities in a Business Improvement District,
which is in addition to the regular license tax imposed upon various businesses
generally not in such Business Improvement District.
      (1)   All businesses in such district shall be subject to additional
charges and assessments if they are subject to taxation by the city under
Chapter 110 of this code.
      (2)   The charge imposed by this chapter as an additional charge or
assessment for a business license shall be based upon the classification
business and establishment of schedule of additional charges and assessments
described as follows:
         (a)   Business classification.
            1.   Retail. The following business types for the purpose of this
chapter shall be considered retail and/or service retail business and if
located in Areas I and II they shall be assessed at a rate of 1½ times or 150%
as an additional charge to their modified business license fee as defined in
this chapter.
Appliance sales
Antiques sales
Bars and notions
Book stores
Catalog merchandising
Children's shops
Clothing stores
Computer sales
Delicatessens
Department stores
Dress shops
Electrical appliance and fixture sales
Floor covering sales
Florists
Food stores, food vending
Fur shops
Furniture sales
General appliances
General merchandise
Gift shops
Grocery stores
Gunsmith, gun sales
Hardware stores
Jewelry stores
Medicines and drug stores
Men's wear
Musical instrument, supplies, sales
Office supplies, equipment sales
Paint, glass, wallpaper sales
Photographer supplies, sales
Pawn shops
Restaurants
Secondhand stores, dealers
Shoe repair
Shoe sales
Soda fountain
Souvenir shops
Specialty shops
Sporting goods
Stationary store
Tailors
Theaters
Tire dealers, sales
Variety shops
Wearing apparel
            2.   Any other business of similar nature not specifically
identified herein as determined by the Director of Finance to be “retail” in
nature.
         (b)   All other business in Areas I, II, and III including
professional, who pay a business license fee consistent with
Chapter 110 of this code, shall be considered non-retail business for the
purposes of this subchapter and be assessed at the rate of ¾ times or 75% as an
additional charge on the modified business license fee.
         (c)   All retail business located in Area I and Area II as delineated
in the Appendix of this subchapter in addition to the assessment rate specified
in division (A)(2) of this section shall be further assessed at the rate of ½
times or 50% of the modified business license fee to be used for special
promotions as specified in the Bylaws of the Eureka Business Improvement
District Association.
      (3)   The charge imposed by this subchapter as an additional charge or
assessments for a business license shall be subject to the location of the
business. Businesses located within benefit Area I and Area II shall be charged
or assessed an additional amount based on the schedule as described in division
(A)(2) of this section.
      (4)   If additional charges or assessments imposed under this subchapter
become delinquent, penalties and interest charges shall be imposed therein in
the same manner, in the same amount and at the same time as the delinquent
business license taxes.
      (5)   Any business, or person or institution located within the Business
Improvement District which is exempt from the payment of a business license tax
pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code, is not taxed under this chapter but may
make a contribution to the district for the purposes provided by this chapter.
('63 Code, § 8-7.08)
   (B)   Collection of additional charges and assessments.
      (1)   The collection of additional charges or assessments imposed by this
subchapter shall be made at the same time and in the same manner as the regular
business license tax pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code.
      (2)   The city shall segregate all revenue generated from this part in a
separate fund of the city to be used solely for implementation of the Business
Improvement District consistent with this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-7.09)
(Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83; Am. Ord. 534-C.S., passed 12-21-91)
§ 35.118 CHANGES OF RATE OF ADDITIONAL CHARGES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   Changes may be made in the rate of additional charges and assessments, only
after a hearing is held and notice thereof is given in accordance with §
35.114 of this subchapter. Such notice shall contain the time and place where
the hearing shall be held and a description of the proposed change in the rate
of additional charges or assessments. Changes in the regular business license
tax may be made without such a hearing.
('63 Code, § 8-7.10) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.119 CHANGES IN DISTRICT OR AREA BOUNDARIES.
   Changes may be made in the boundaries of any Business Improvement District
or area, by ordinance of the Council; however, no changes shall be made unless
and until a hearing is held and notice thereof is given in accordance with §
35.114 of this subchapter. Such notice shall contain the time and place when
the hearing shall be held and a description of the proposed change of the
district or area boundary.
('63 Code, § 8-7.11) (Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
§ 35.120 DISTRICT AND AREA DISESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   District and area disestablishment. The City Council may disestablish
the district or area or any part thereof, by ordinance after a hearing before
the City Council. The City Council shall adopt a resolution of intention to
disestablish the district or area at least 15 days prior to the hearing
required by this section. The resolution shall give the time and place of the
hearing, and notice shall be given thereof in manner and form as provided by §
35.114 of this subchapter. Upon disestablishment of the district or area, or
any part thereof, any proceeds of the tax, or assets acquired with such
proceeds, shall be subject to disposition as the City Council shall determine;
and the additional charge assessed on the business license for the purpose of
this subchapter, shall no longer be assessed or collected by the city.
('63 Code, § 8-7.12)
   (B)   Petition to disestablish.
      (1)   The Council shall disestablish the district upon receipt of a
written petition signed by 51% of the businesses within the district.
      (2)   For each business, the petition shall state the name and address of
the business and the city business license number of the business. The petition
may be signed by the owner of the business, an officer of a corporation, or on
behalf of the owner by an agent authorized in writing by the owner to act as
his agent.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall review and certify the adequacy of the
petition to the Council. Only those businesses holding a current business
license shall be recognized for the purpose of this section.
      (4)   The disestablishment hearing shall be called in the same manner
specified in §
35.114 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 8-7.12)
(Ord. 385-C.S., passed 7-21-83)
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
§ 35.160 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Eureka Transactions and Use Tax
Ordinance. The city of Eureka hereinafter shall be called “city.” This
subchapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.161 OPERATIVE DATE.
   OPERATIVE DATE means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than 110 days after the adoption. The election was held November 4, 2008
and the operative date is April 1, 2009.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.162 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of
Division 2 and Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the city to adopt this tax which shall be operative if a majority of
the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at
an election called for that purpose.
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 of
Division 2.
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes.
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax that can be administered in
a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the
provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 of Division 2, minimize the cost
of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize
the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.163 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax; provided, that if the City shall
not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative
date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date
shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of
such a contract.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.164 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at
the rate of 0.25% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the
operative date of this subchapter. The tax in addition the city's existing
sales and use tax set forth in §§
35.050 through
35.060.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.165 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.166 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of 0.25% of the sales price of the property. The
sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to
state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.167 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 of
Division 2, all of the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 (commencing
with § 6001) of Division 2 are hereby adopted and made a part of this
subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.168 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 of Division 2:
   (A)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of
Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this subchapter.
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         (a)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 of Division 2, or;
         (b)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      (4)   In Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828.
   (B)   The word “City” shall be substituted for the word “State” in the
phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code § 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §
6203.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.169 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Rev. & Tax.
Code §6067, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this
subchapter.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.170 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
division, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code Chapter 1 (commencing with §
4000) of Division 3, aircraft licensed in compliance with Cal. Pub. Util. code
§ 21411, and undocumented vessels registered under Cal. Veh. Code Division 3.5
(commencing with § 9840) by registration to an out-of-city address and by a
declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such
address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this subchapter.
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this subchapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of division (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this subchapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax.
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1.
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
subchapter.
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this subchapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (B)(7), a retailer engaged in
business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor,
subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
      (7)   A RETAILER ENGAGED IN BUSINESS IN THE CITY shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Cal. Veh. Code Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3, aircraft
licensed in compliance with Cal. Pub. Util. Code § 21411, or undocumented
vessels registered under cal. veh. code Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840).
That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who
registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the
city.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this subchapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 of Division 2 with respect to the sale to the person
of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to
the use tax.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.171 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this subchapter to Cal.
Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1 of Division 2 relating to sales and use taxes and which
are not inconsistent with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2, and all amendments to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 and Part 1.7
of Division 2, shall automatically become a part of this subchapter, provided
however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax
imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.172 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this subchapter, or Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code Part 1.6 of Division
2, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
§ 35.173 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. 734-C.S., passed 12-16-08)
SUPPLEMENTAL TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
§ 35.175 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the "Supplemental Transactions and Use
Tax". The City of Eureka hereinafter shall be called "city." This subchapter
will be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. This subchapter
shall complement, and not replace or supersede, the city's existing
Transactions and Use Tax, as described in
Chapter 35, §§
35.160 through
35.173 of the Eureka Municipal Code. This subchapter replaces "Measure Q," a
prior Supplemental Transactions and Use Tax that was approved by public
referendum on November 4, 2014, and which expired on June 30, 2021.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.176 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following words terms shall have the
meaning given in this section:
   IN THE CITY. Includes all territory within the city limits.
   OPERATIVE DATE. The first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more
than 110 days after the adoption. Since the measure was approved at the
November 3, 2020 election, the operative date shall be July 1, 2021.
   TERMINATION DATE. The date this subchapter is repealed by voters.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.177 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes,
and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish
those purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of Division 2 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a
majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition
of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts
itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation
from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the
California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and
collecting the California state sales and use taxes.
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use
taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.178 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to
the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance;
provided, that if the city shall not have contracted with the California
Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall
nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the
first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a
contract.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.179 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at
the rate of 1.25% of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all
tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the
operative date of this subchapter. The tax in addition the city's existing
sales and use tax set forth in §§
35.050 through
35.060 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.180 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax
and Fee Administration.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.181 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this subchapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of 1.25% of the sales price of the property. The
sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to
state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.182 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with §
6001) of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this subchapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.183 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code:
   (A)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
subchapter;
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         (a)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code; or
         (b)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code; or
      (4)   In §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (B)   (1)   The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in § 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in § 6203.
      (2)   "A retailer engaged in business in the district" shall also include
any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year,
has total combined sales of tangible personal property in this state or for
delivery in the state by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer
that exceed $500,000. For purposes of this section, a person is related to
another person if both persons are related to each other pursuant to § 267(b)
of Title 26 of the United States Code and the regulations thereunder.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.184 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under § 6067 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.185 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of
Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with §
21411 of the Cal. Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered
under Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle Code by
registration to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of
perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her
principal place of residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this subchapter.
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this subchapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of subsections (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this subchapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in §§ 6366
and 6366.1 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code.
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
subchapter.
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this subchapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (4) of this section,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      (6)   Except as provided in subsection (C)(7), a retailer engaged in
business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor,
subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
      (7)   "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal. Public Utilities Code,
or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840)
of the Cal. Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft
at an address in the city.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this subchapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the
sale to the person of the property, the storage, use or other consumption of
which is subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.186 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this subchapter to Part 1
of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use
taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2
of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part
1.7 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically
become a part of this subchapter, provided however, that no such amendment
shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.187 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this subchapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.188 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this subchapter or the application thereof to any person
or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the subchapter and the
application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected thereby.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.189 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter relates to the levying and collecting of the city
transactions and use taxes and shall take effect immediately.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.190 TERMINATION DATE.
   The authority to levy the tax imposed by this subchapter shall expire when
rescinded by voters.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.191 FISCAL ACCOUNTABILITY PROVISIONS.
   Consistent with Eureka's value to be transparent, a Citizen's Oversight
Committee has been established to conduct annual audits of all expenditures of
revenues generated by the tax to ensure fiscal accountability and public
participation. The Oversight Committee may be the city's existing Finance
Advisory Committee.
(Ord. 808-C.S., passed 12-16-14; Am. Ord. 912-C.S., passed 12-15-20)
§ 35.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter for which
no other specific penalty is provided shall be subject to the penalty of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
35.050 through
35.060 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by
imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
('63 Code, § 8-4.15) (Ord. 397-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
APPENDIX: EUREKA BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6497.jpg]
 
Proposed Boundary Description
Eureka Business Improvement District
AREA I
BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of First Street and the
centerline of “E” Street;
   1.   Thence easterly along the centerline of First Street to the centerline
of “G” Street;
   2.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “G” Street to the centerline
of the alley between First and Second Streets;
   3.   Thence easterly along the centerline of the alley between First and
Second Streets to the centerline of “H” Street;
   4.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “H” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Second and Third Streets;
   5.   Thence westerly along the centerline of the alley between Second and
Third Streets to the centerline of “G” Street;
   6.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “G” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Third and Fourth Streets;
   7.   Thence westerly along the centerline of the alley between Third and
Fourth Streets to the centerline of “E” Street;
   8.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “E” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Second and Third Streets;
   9.   Thence westerly along the centerline of the alley between Second and
Third Streets to a point 180 feet westerly of the westerly line of “C” Street,
said point being at the westerly terminus of said alley;
   10.   Thence northerly, parallel with “C” Street to the centerline of the
alley between First and Second Streets;
   11.   Thence easterly along the centerline of the alley between First and
Second Streets to the centerline of “E” Street;
   12.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “E” Street to the point of
beginning.
AREA II
   BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of “E” Street and the
centerline of the alley between Third and Fourth Streets;
   1.   Thence easterly along the centerline of the alley between Third and
Fourth Streets to the centerline of “G” Street;
   2.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “G” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Fourth and Fifth Streets;
   3.   Thence easterly alone the centerline of the alley between Fourth and
Fifth Streets to the centerline of “H” Streets;
   4.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “H” Streets to a point 120
feet southerly of the southerly line of Fifth Street;
   5.   Thence westerly, parallel with Fifth Street, to the centerline of “G”
Street;
   6.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “G” Street to the centerline
of Sixth Street;
   7.   Thence westerly along the centerline of Sixth Street to the centerline
of “E” Street;
   8.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “E” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Fifth and Sixth Streets;
   9.   Thence westerly along the centerline of the alley between Fifth and
Sixth Streets to the centerline of “D” Street;
   10.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “D” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Fourth and Fifth Streets;
   11.   Thence easterly along the centerline of the alley between Fourth and
Fifth Streets to the centerline of “E” Street;
   12.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “E” Street to the point of
beginning.
   AREA III
   The following described area excluding Areas I and II described above:
   BEGINNING at the intersection of the centerline of “C” Street and the
centerline of Eighth Street;
   1.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “C” Street to the centerline
of Seventh Street;
   2.   Thence westerly along the centerline of Seventh Street to the
centerline of “A” Street;
   3.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “A” Street to the centerline
of the alley between Fourth and Fifth Streets;
   4.   Thence easterly along the centerline of the alley between Fourth and
Fifth Streets to the centerline of “B” Street;
   5.   Thence northerly along the centerline of “B” Street to the centerline
of Third Street;
   6.   Thence westerly 30 feet along the centerline of Third Street;
   7.   Thence northerly 160 feet parallel with “C” Street;
   8.   Thence westerly 60 feet parallel with Third Street;
   9.   Thence northerly, parallel with “C” Street, to the centerline of Second
Street;
   10.   Thence easterly 180 feet along the centerline of Second Street;
   11.   Thence northerly, parallel with “C” Street, 589 feet more or less to
the U.S. Bulkhead Line of Humboldt Bay;
   12.   Thence easterly along the U.S. Bulkhead Line to the northerly
prolongation of the centerline of “I” Street;
   13.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “I” Street to the centerline
of Seventh Street;
   14.   Thence westerly along the centerline of Seventh Street to the
centerline of “H” Street;
   15.   Thence southerly along the centerline of “H” Street to the centerline
of Eighth Street;
   16.   Thence westerly along the centerline of Eighth Street to the point of
beginning.
('63 Code, Title 8, Exhibits A, B)
CHAPTER 36: HEALTH FACILITY REVENUE BONDS
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Title
   
36.02   Purpose and authority
   
36.03   Definitions
   
36.04   Jurisdiction
   
36.05   Provisions supplemental to other laws; conflict
   
36.06   Invalidation
Financing Health Facilities
   
36.20   Loans; refunding and refinancing
   
36.21   Renovating, altering; owning and leasing
   
36.22   City may charge fees
   
36.23   Obtaining aid for payment
   
36.24   City may fix rates
   
36.25   Security
   
36.26   Employment of required services
   
36.27   Nondiscrimination
   
36.28   Additional powers
Bonds
   
36.40   Issuance; determination of amount
   
36.41   Type of bonds
   
36.42   Terms and conditions
   
36.43   Pledges to be binding
   
36.44   Nonliability
   
36.45   Power to purchase bonds
   
36.46   Bondholders rights protected
   
36.47   Refund outstanding bonds
   
36.48   Validity
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the “City of Eureka Health Facility Revenue
Bond Law.”
('63 Code, § 2-8.101) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.02 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The Council hereby finds and declares that it is necessary,
essential, a public purpose and a municipal affair for the city to be
authorized to provide financing to health institutions within the city that
provide essential services to residents of the city in order to aid such health
institutions in containing costs and thereby to enable such health institutions
to establish lower rates and charges than would otherwise prevail and to
provide better service at such rates and charges. Unless the city intervenes to
provide such financing, such rates and charges may increase at an ever
accelerated pace because such health institutions cannot obtain financing at
equivalent cost from private sources.
('63 Code, § 2-8.102)
   (B)   Construe liberally. This chapter, being necessary for the welfare of
the city and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect its
purposes.
('63 Code, § 2-8.401)
   (C)   Provisions full authority. This chapter is full authority for the
issuance of bonds by the city, for the purposes specified herein.
('63 Code, § 2-8.403)
(Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONDS. Any bonds, notes, certificates, debentures or other obligations
issued by the city pursuant to this chapter and payable exclusively from
revenues as in this chapter defined and from any other funds specified in this
chapter upon which such obligations may be made a charge and from which they
are payable.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, California.
   COST. The total of all costs incurred by or on behalf of a participating
health institution as are approved by the city as reasonable and necessary for
carrying out all works and undertakings necessary or incident to acquire,
construct, or rehabilitate a health facility. COST shall include all such
costs, including costs for construction or rehabilitation undertaken by a
participating health facility as its own contractor, which under generally
accepted accounting principles are not properly chargeable as an expense of
operation and maintenance.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Eureka, California.
   HEALTH FACILITY.
      (1)   Any facility, place, or building within the city which is
maintained and operated for the diagnosis, care, prevention and treatment of
human illness, physical or mental, and which provides and will continue
providing to residents of the city essential health care services designated as
such in an agreement between the city and the participating health institution
providing or operating such facility, place, or building.
      (2)    HEALTH FACILITY includes a portion of one of the above types of
facilities and includes the following facilities if operated in conjunction
with one of the above types of facilities: a laboratory, a laundry, a nurses'
or interns' residence, a housing facility for patients, staff, or employees and
the families of any of them, an administration building, a research,
maintenance, storage, utility or parking facility and all structures or
facilities related to any of the foregoing or required or useful for the
operation of a HEALTH FACILITY.
      (3)    HEALTH FACILITY shall not include any facility, place, or building
used or to be used primarily for sectarian instruction or study or as a place
for devotional activities or religious worship.
   PARTICIPATING HEALTH INSTITUTION. A private nonprofit corporation or
association authorized by the laws of the state to provide or operate a health
facility as defined in this chapter and which, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter, undertakes the financing of the acquisition and construction of a
health facility or undertakes the refunding or refinancing of obligations
incurred to finance the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of a
health facility.
   REVENUES. Amounts received by the city as repayment of principal, interest,
and all other charges with respect to a loan under this chapter, any proceeds
received by the city from mortgage, hazard or other insurance on or with
respect to such a loan, all other rents, charges, fees, income and receipts
derived by the city from the financing of a health facility under this chapter,
any amounts received by the city as investment earnings on moneys deposited in
a reserve fund or any similar fund securing bonds, and such other moneys as the
Council may, in its discretion lawfully designate as REVENUES.
('63 Code, § 2-8.103) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.04 JURISDICTION.
   If the jurisdiction of the Council to order the proposed act is not
affected, any omission of any officer or the city in proceedings under this
chapter or any other defect in the proceedings shall not invalidate such
proceedings or the bonds issued pursuant to this chapter.
('63 Code, § 2-8.402) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.05 PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER LAWS; CONFLICT.
   (A)   Compliance of issuance. This chapter shall be deemed to provide a
complete, additional, and alternative method for doing the things authorized
thereby, and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to the powers
conferred by other laws. The issuance of bonds under the provisions of this
chapter need not comply with the requirements of any other law applicable to
the issuance of bonds. The purposes authorized hereby may be effectuated and
bonds may be issued for any such purposes under this chapter notwithstanding
that any other law may provide for such purposes or for the issuance of bonds
for like purposes and without regard to the requirements, restrictions,
limitations, or other provisions contained in any other law.
('63 Code, § 2-8.404)
   (B)   Inconsistency. To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are
inconsistent with the provisions of any general statute or special act or parts
thereof the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed controlling.
('63 Code, § 2-8.405)
(Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.06 INVALIDATION.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any other
provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be severable. The Council hereby declares that it would
have adopted and passed this ordinance and each ordinance, section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase and word hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more of the other chapters, sections, subsections, sentences, causes,
phrases, or words hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
('63 Code, § 2-8.406) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
FINANCING HEALTH FACILITIES
§ 36.20 LOANS; REFUNDING AND REFINANCING.
   (A)   Loans for acquisition, construction or rehabilitation. The city may
make, purchase, or otherwise contract for the making of a mortgage or other
secured or unsecured loan, upon such terms and conditions as the city shall
deem proper, to any participating health institution for the cost of acquiring,
constructing or rehabilitating a health facility; provided, however, that no
such loan shall exceed the total cost of such health facility as determined by
the participating health institution and approved by the city.
('63 Code, § 2-8.201)
   (B)   Refunding and refinancing obligations. The city may make, purchase, or
otherwise contract for the making of a mortgage or other secured or unsecured
loan, upon such terms and conditions as the city shall deem proper, to any
participating health institution to refund or refinance outstanding obligations
of such participating health institution incurred to finance the cost of
acquiring, constructing or rehabilitating a health facility, whether such
obligations were incurred prior to or after the enactment of this chapter, if
the city finds that such refunding or refinancing is in the public interest and
either alleviates a financial or operating hardship of such participating
health institution, is in connection with other financing by the city for such
participating health institution or may be expected to result in lower costs of
health care than would otherwise prevail and a saving to third parties,
including government, and to others who must pay for care, or any combination
thereof.
('63 Code, § 2-8.202)
(Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.21 RENOVATING, ALTERING; OWNING AND LEASING.
   (A)   The city may acquire, construct enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter,
improve, furnish, equip, own, and lease as lessee a health facility for the
purpose of selling or leasing such health facility to a participating health
institution, and may designate such participating health institution as its
agent to undertake to construct, enlarge, remodel, renovate, alter, improve,
furnish, and equip such health facility.
   (B)   The city may sell or lease, upon such terms and conditions as the city
shall deem proper, to a participating health institution any health facility
owned by the city under this chapter, including a health facility conveyed to
the city in connection with a financing under this chapter but not being
financed or refinanced hereunder.
('63 Code, § 2-8.203) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.22 CITY MAY CHARGE FEES.
   The city may charge participating health institutions application,
commitment, financing and other fees, in order to recover all administrative
and other costs and expenses incurred in the exercise of the powers and duties
conferred by this chapter.
('63 Code, § 2-8.204) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.23 OBTAINING AID FOR PAYMENT.
   The city may obtain, or aid in obtaining, from any department or agency of
the United States or of the state or any private company, any insurance or
guarantee as to, or of, or for the payment or repayment of, interest or
principal, or both, or any part thereof, on any loan, lease or sale obligation
or any instrument evidencing or securing the same, made or entered into
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and may accept payment in such
manner and form as provided therein in the event of default by a participating
health institution, and may assign any such insurance or guarantee as security
for bonds.
('63 Code, § 2-8.205) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.24 CITY MAY FIX RATES.
   The city may fix rents, payments, fees, charges, and interest rates for
financing under this chapter and may agree to revise from time to time such
rents, payments, fees, charges and interest rates to reflect changes in
interest rates on bonds, losses due to defaults or changes in other expenses
related to this chapter, including city administrative expenses.
('63 Code, § 2-8.206) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.25 SECURITY.
   The city may hold deeds of trust or mortgages as security for loans under
this chapter and may pledge or assign the same as security for repayment of
bonds. Such deeds of trust or mortgages may be assigned to, and held on behalf
of the city by any bank or trust company appointed to act as trustee by the
city in any resolution or indenture providing for issuance of bonds.
('63 Code, § 2-8.207) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.26 EMPLOYMENT OF REQUIRED SERVICES.
   The city may employ such engineering, architectural, financial, accounting,
legal, or other services as may be necessary in the judgment of the city for
the purposes of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 2-8.208) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.27 NONDISCRIMINATION.
   The city shall require that services provided by health facilities finances
under this chapter shall be available to all regardless of race, sex, martial
status, color, religion, national origin or ancestry.
('63 Code, § 2-8.209) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.28 ADDITIONAL POWERS.
   In addition to all other powers specifically granted by this chapter, the
city may do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the purposes of
this chapter.
('63 Code, § 2-8.210) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
BONDS
§ 36.40 ISSUANCE; DETERMINATION OF AMOUNT.
   (A)   Issuance.
      (1)   The city may, from time to time, issue bonds for any of the
purposes specified in §§
36.20 through
36.21 of this chapter. Bonds shall be negotiable instruments for all purposes,
subject only to the provisions of such bonds for registration.
      (2)   (a)   Every issue of bonds shall be a limited obligation of the
city payable from all or any specified part of the revenues and the moneys and
assets authorized in this chapter to be pledged or assigned to secure payment
of bonds. Such revenues, moneys, or assets shall be the sole source of
repayment of such issue of bonds. Bonds issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall not be deemed to constitute a debt or liability of the city or a
pledge of the faith and credit of the city but shall be payable solely from
specified revenues, moneys and assets. The issuance of bonds shall not
directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the city to levy or pledge any
form of taxation or to make any appropriation for their payment.
         (b)   All bonds shall contain on the face thereof a statement to the
following effect: neither the faith and credit nor the taxing power of the city
is pledged to the payment of the principal of, or premium or interest on this
bond.
('63 Code, § 2-8.301)
   (B)   Determination of amount. In determining the amount of bonds to be
issued, the city may include all costs of the issuance of such bonds, reserve
funds, and capitalized bond interest.
('63 Code, § 2-8.302)
(Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.41 TYPE OF BONDS.
   Bonds may be issued as serial bonds, term bonds, installment bonds or pass-
through certificates or any combination thereof. Bonds shall be authorized by
resolution of the Council and shall bear such date or dates, mature at such
time or times, bear interest at such fixed or variable rate or rates, be
payable at such time or times, be in such denominations, be in such form,
either coupon or registered, carry such registration privileges, be executed in
such manner, be payable in lawful money of the United States at such place or
places, be subject to such terms of redemption and have such other terms and
conditions as such resolution or any indenture authorized by such resolution to
be entered into by the city may provide. Bonds may be sold at either a public
or private sale and for such prices as the city shall determine. Pending
preparation of definitive bonds, the city may issue temporary bonds, which
shall be exchanged for such definitive bonds when prepared.
('63 Code, § 2-8.303) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.42 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
   Any resolution authorizing any bonds or any issue of bonds, or any indenture
authorized by such resolution to be entered into by the city, may contain
provisions respecting any of the following terms and conditions, which shall be
a part of the contract with the holders of such bonds:
   (A)   The terms, conditions, and form of such bonds and the interest and
principal to be paid thereon;
   (B)   Limitations on the uses and purposes to which the proceeds of sale of
such bonds may be applied, and the pledge or assignment of such proceeds to
secure the payment of such bonds;
   (C)   Limitations on the issuance of additional parity bonds, the terms upon
which additional parity bonds may be issued and secured, and the refunding of
outstanding bonds;
   (D)   The setting aside of reserves and sinking funds and the regulation and
disposition thereof;
   (E)   The pledge or assignment of all or any part of the revenues and the
use and disposition thereof, subject to such agreements with the holders of
bonds as may then be outstanding;
   (F)   Limitation on the use of revenues for expenditures for operating,
administration or other expenses of the city;
   (G)   Specification of the acts or omissions to act which shall constitute a
default in the duties of the city to holders of such bonds, and providing the
rights and remedies of such holders in the event of default, including any
limitations on the right of action by individual bondholders;
   (H)   The appointment of a corporate trustee to act on behalf of the city
and the holders of its bonds, the pledge or assignment of loans, deeds of
trust, mortgages and any other contracts to such trustee, and the rights of
such trustee;
   (I)   The procedure, if any, by which the terms of any contract with
bondholders may be amended or abrogated, the amount of such bonds the holders
of which must consent thereto, and the manner in which such consent may be
given; and,
   (J)   Any other provisions which the Council may deem reasonable and proper
for the purposes of this chapter and the security of the bondholders.
('63 Code, § 2-8.304) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.43 PLEDGES TO BE BINDING.
   Any pledge of revenues or other moneys or assets pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall be valid and binding from the time such pledge is made.
Revenues, moneys and assets so pledged and thereafter received by the city
shall immediately be subject to the lien of such pledge without any physical
delivery thereof or further act, and the lien of any such pledge shall be valid
and binding as against all parties having claims of any kind in tort, contract,
or otherwise against the city, irrespective of whether such parties have notice
thereof. Neither the resolution nor any indenture by which a pledge is created
need be filed or recorded except in the records of the city.
('63 Code, § 2-8.305)
§ 36.44 NONLIABILITY.
   Neither the members of the Council, the officers or employees of the city,
nor any person executing any bonds shall be liable personally on the bonds or
be subject to any personal liability or accountability by reason of the
issuance thereof.
('63 Code, § 2-8.306) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.45 POWER TO PURCHASE BONDS.
   The city shall have the power out of any funds available therefor to
purchase its bonds. The city may hold, pledge, cancel, or resell such bonds,
subject to and in accordance with agreements with the bondholders.
('63 Code, § 2-8.307) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.46 BONDHOLDERS RIGHTS PROTECTED.
   Any holder of bonds issued under the provisions of this chapter or any of
the coupons appertaining thereto, and any trustee appointed pursuant to any
resolution authorizing the issuance of bonds, except to the extent the rights
thereof may be restricted by such resolution or any indenture authorized
thereby to be entered into by the city, may, either at law or in equity, by
suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect or enforce any and all
rights specified in law or in such resolution or indenture, and may enforce and
compel the performance of all duties required by this chapter or by such
resolution or indenture to be performed by the city or by any officer,
employee, or agent thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of
rates, fees, interest, and charges authorized and required by the provisions of
such resolution or indenture to be fixed, charged, and collected.
('63 Code, § 2-8.308) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.47 REFUND OUTSTANDING BONDS.
   (A)   The city may issue bonds for the purpose of refunding any bonds then
outstanding including the payment of any redemption premiums thereof and any
interest accrued or to accrue to the earliest or any subsequent date or dates
of redemption, purchase, or maturity of such bonds.
   (B)   All bonds issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to the
provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to the same extent as other
bonds issued pursuant to this chapter.
('63 Code, § 2-8.309) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
§ 36.48 VALIDITY.
   The validity of the authorization and issuance of any bonds is not dependent
on and shall not be affected in any way by any proceedings taken by the city
for the making of any loan or the entering into of any agreement, or by the
failure to make any loan or enter into any agreement, for which bonds are
authorized to be issued under this chapter.
('63 Code, § 2-8.310) (Ord. 318-C.S., passed 2-5-80)
CHAPTER 37: ELECTIONS
Section
Council Election Wards
   
37.01   Purpose
   
37.02   Council wards
Voting
   
37.20   Ranked choice voting
   
37.21   General provisions
   
37.22   Ranked choice voting ballot
   
37.23   Tabulation
Political Campaign Contributions; Reporting
   
37.50   Reserved
   
37.51   Reserved
   
37.52   Limitations on contributions by persons to candidates
   
37.53   Limitations on contributions by persons to independent committees that
support or oppose candidates
COUNCIL ELECTION WARDS
§ 37.01 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of electing the five members of the Council as provided by
the Charter of the city, the city is hereby divided into five wards which shall
be designated and constituted as described in this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 2-4.101) (Ord. 257-C.S., passed 1-2-76)
§ 37.02 COUNCIL WARDS.
   The boundaries and the number of each of the five wards for City Council are
set forth in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. 866-C.S., including a map of
the wards, which is incorporated herein by reference.
(‘63 Code, § 2-4.102) (Ord. 257-C.S., passed 1-2-76; Am. Ord. 866- C.S., passed
11-7-17)
VOTING
§ 37.20 RANKED CHOICE VOTING.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this subchapter, the following words,
terms and phrases have these definitions:
      CHOICE. An indication on a ballot of a voter's assigned ranking of
candidates (i.e., first choice, second choice, third choice, etc.) for any
single office, according to the voter's preference.
      CONTINUING BALLOT. A ballot that counts towards a continuing candidate.
      CONTINUING CANDIDATE. A candidate that has not been eliminated. In the
first round of counting, this means all candidates including write-ins.
      EXHAUSTED BALLOT. A ballot whose continuing candidates have all been
eliminated shall be declared "exhausted" and shall not count towards any
candidate in that round or in subsequent rounds.
      FINAL ROUND. The round in which there are only two continuing candidates.
      MAJORITY OF VOTES. Fifty percent of the votes plus one.
      NEXT RANKED. The highest ranked choice for a continuing candidate.
      OVERVOTING. An overvote occurs when an elector has ranked more than one
candidate for the same ranking. For example, if an elector selects more than
one candidate to be their first (or second, or third, etc.) choice.
      RANKED CHOICE VOTING. An election system in which voters rank the
candidates for office in order of preference, and the ballots are counted in
rounds that simulate a series of runoffs until the final round, whereupon the
one of those two candidates with the majority of votes is determined to be the
winner. RANKED CHOICE VOTING is also known as "instant runoff voting."
      ROUND OF COUNTING or ROUND. A step in the counting process during which
votes for all continuing candidates are tabulated for the purpose of
determining which candidate has achieved a majority of the votes cast for a
particular office, and, if no candidate has achieved a majority, which
candidate or candidates must be eliminated.
      SKIPPED RANKING. Occurs when an elector leaves a ranking blank and then
ranks a candidate in a subsequent ranking. For example, if an elector selects a
first-choice candidate and a third-choice candidate, but does not select a
second-choice candidate.
      UNDERVOTING. A ballot that has not candidates indicated at any ranking
shall be declared an "undervote" and shall not count towards any candidate in
that round or in subsequent rounds.
      VOTE.  A ballot choice that is counted toward the election of a
candidate. During each round of counting, each continuing ballot contains one
vote. All first choices are votes and lower ranked choices are potential runoff
votes that may, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, become
votes that are subsequently credited for a continuing candidate.
(Ord. 928-C.S., passed 12-7-21; Am. Ord. 955-C.S., passed 7-16-24)
§ 37.21 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Ranked choice voting elections for the offices of Mayor and City
Council member must be conducted according to the procedures in this chapter.
   (B)   Ranked choice voting will commence not later than the 2024 General
Municipal Election and continue thereafter for all general municipal elections.
   (C)   The City Elections Official must coordinate with the Humboldt County
Registrar of Voters to implement ranked choice voting in the 2022 General
Municipal Election if that implementation is feasible.
   (D)   The agreement of the Humboldt County Registrar of Voters is a
precondition to the election services that allow the city to use ranked choice
voting and to consolidate the city's municipal election with November General
Elections prior to the use of ranked choice voting.
   (E)   Once a candidate receives a majority of the votes, the County's
Registrar of Voters is not required to continue counting to determine the
candidate ranking beyond first place.
   (F)   The County's Registrar of Voters will report the results of the first
round of tabulations and the final round of tabulations. The County's Registrar
of Voters is not required to report every round of tabulations.
   (G)   In the event that any ballot reaches a ranking with two or more
different candidates indicated, that ballot shall immediately be declared an
"overvote" and that ballot shall not count as a vote for any candidate in that
round or in subsequent rounds.
(Ord. 928-C.S., passed 12-7-21; Am. Ord. 955-C.S., passed 7-16-24)
§ 37.22 RANKED CHOICE VOTING BALLOT.
   (A)   In any Mayoral or Council member election conducted by ranked choice
voting, the ballot must allow voters to rank not less than three candidates,
including write-in candidates, in order of preference.
   (B)   The ballot must not interfere with a voter's ability to rank up to
three write-in candidates.
(Ord. 928-C.S., passed 12-7-21; Am. Ord. 955-C.S., passed 7-16-24)
§ 37.23 TABULATION.
   The ballots for each seat must be counted in rounds.
   (A)   In the first round, every ballot counts as a vote for the first-choice
candidate on that ballot.
   (B)   If no candidate receives a majority in the first or a subsequent
round, the candidate receiving the fewest number of votes in that round is
eliminated.
   (C)   Every ballot counting towards the eliminated candidate is then counted
again for votes cast for the next-ranked continuing candidate. All the
continuing ballots for all continuing candidates are then tabulated in a new
round.
   (D)   Where a skipped ranking situation arises, the elector's votes will be
counted as if no skipped ranking had occurred, and the County's Registrar of
Voters is directed to count the elector's next-ranked choice in the next round,
whether or not the choice is accurately sequentially numbered. In the example
above, this means that the elector's third-choice candidate would be counted as
the elector's second-choice candidate, and so on.
   (E)   In the final round, the candidate who receives the majority of votes
from the continuing ballots is the winner. If two candidates in the final round
are tied, the winner will be the tied candidate who received the higher number
of votes in round one.
   (F)   In the event that there is a tie in any other rank or round besides
the top two candidates in the final round, the candidate who is eliminated will
be selected by lot (e.g. by a coin flip or other random metric), unless such
selection is not necessary because a top candidate has already been determined.
(Ord. 928-C.S., passed 12-7-21; Am. Ord. 955-C.S., passed 7-16-24)
POLITICAL CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS; REPORTING
§ 37.50 RESERVED.
§ 37.51 RESERVED.
§ 37.52 LIMITATIONS ON CONTRIBUTIONS BY PERSONS TO CANDIDATES.
   (A)   No person shall make and no candidate shall solicit or accept any
contribution which would cause the total amount contributed by that person to
that candidate, including contributions to all committees controlled by the
candidate, to exceed $500 within any single calendar year.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a candidate’s
contribution of his or her personal funds to his or her own campaign. Any such
contributions shall be disclosed in accordance with state law.
   (C)   Contributions in excess of the maximum amount provided in division (A)
of this section shall, within 14 days of receipt, either be: (1) returned to
the donor; or (2) paid to the City Clerk for deposit in the general fund of the
city.
   (D)   A contribution shall not be considered received if it is not
negotiated, deposited or utilized, and, in addition, either returned to the
donor or paid to the City Clerk for deposit in the general fund of the city
within 14 days of receipt.
   (E)   “Volunteer personal services” covered under Cal. Government Code 84300
as non-monetary contributions are not subject to the contribution limits set
out in division (A) above.
(Ord. 752-C.S., passed 6-15-10; Am. Ord. 773-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 37.53 LIMITATIONS ON CONTRIBUTIONS BY PERSONS TO INDEPENDENT COMMITTEES THAT
SUPPORT OR OPPOSE CANDIDATES.
   (A)   No person shall make, and no person or committee shall solicit,
contributions within any single calendar year in excess of $500 from any person
in any single candidacy period for or to a committee which makes independent
expenditures of $500 or more in support of or in opposition to any candidate.
   (B)   No committee which makes independent expenditures of $500 or more in
support of or in opposition to any candidate shall accept any contribution in
excess of $500 from any person within any single calendar year.
(Ord. 752-C.S., passed 6-15-10; Am. Ord. 773-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
CHAPTER 38: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
38.01   Purposes
   
38.02   Emergency defined
   
38.03   Disaster Council
   
38.04   Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services
   
38.05   Emergency Organization
   
38.06   Emergency plan
   
38.07   Expenditures
   
38.08   Violations
   
38.99   Penalty
§ 38.01 PURPOSES.
   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the Emergency Organization;
and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.
('63 Code, § 3-2.01) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.02 EMERGENCY DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, EMERGENCY shall mean the actual or threatened
existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of
persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air
pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, earthquake, or other conditions,
including conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of war, which
conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services,
personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces
of other political subdivisions to combat.
('63 Code, § 3-2.02) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.03 DISASTER COUNCIL.
   (A)   Membership. The Eureka Disaster Council is hereby created and shall
consist of the following:
      (1)   The Mayor, who shall be the chairman;
      (2)   The City Manager, Director of Emergency Services, who shall be the
vice-chairperson;
      (3)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;
      (4)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current
emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter;
and,
      (5)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran,
professional, or other organizations having an official emergency
responsibility as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
('63 Code, § 3-2.03)
   (B)   Powers and duties. It shall be the duty of the Eureka Disaster
Council, and it is hereby empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by
the City Council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such
ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as are necessary to implement
such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon the call of the
chairman or, during his absence from the city or inability to call such
meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman.
('63 Code, § 3-2.04)
(Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.04 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (A)   Director of Emergency Services.
      (1)   There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency
Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
      (2)   There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of
Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency
Services.
('63 Code, § 3-2.05)
   (B)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered to:
         (a)   Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a “local emergency,” if the City Council is in session, or at the
direction of the Mayor, to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not
in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City
Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days
thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;
         (b)   Request the Governor of the state to proclaim a “state of
emergency” when, in the opinion of the Mayor, the locally available resources
are inadequate to cope with the emergency;
         (c)   Control and direct the efforts of the Emergency Organization of
the city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
         (d)   Direct cooperation between, and the coordination of, the
services and staff of the Emergency Organization of the city and resolve
questions of authority and responsibility which may arise between them;
         (e)   Represent the city in all dealings with public or private
agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; and,
         (f)   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency”, as set
forth in this section, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the
Governor or the Director of the Office of Emergency Services of the state, or
the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director is hereby empowered:
            1.   To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably
related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency;
provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the
earliest practicable time by the City Council;
            2.   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, to bind the
city for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the
same for public use;
            3.   To require the emergency services of any city officer or
employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency”, in
the county, or the existence of a “state of war emergency”, to command the aid
of as many citizens of the community as the Director deems necessary in the
execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges,
benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers;
            4.   To requisition the necessary personnel or materials of any
city department or agency; and,
            5.   To execute all of his ordinary power as City Manager, all of
the special powers conferred upon that position by this chapter or by
resolution or Emergency Plan adopted by the City Council pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, and all powers conferred upon the office by any
statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful
authority.
      (2)   The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of
succession to his office to take effect in the event the Director is
unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform the required duties during
an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.
      (3)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall, under the
supervision of the Director, and with the assistance of emergency service
chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city
and have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
('63 Code, § 3-2.06)
(Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.05 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
   All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and
persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed
into service pursuant to the provisions of § 38.04(B) of this chapter, be
charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city
during such emergency, shall constitute the Emergency Organization of the city.
('63 Code, § 3-2.07) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.06 EMERGENCY PLAN.
   The Eureka Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the
Eureka Emergency Plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization
of all the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any
condition constituting a local emergency, a state of emergency, or a state of
war emergency, and which shall provide for the organization, powers, and
duties, services, and staff of the Emergency Organization. Such plan shall take
effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.
('63 Code, § 3-2.08) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.07 EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city.
('63 Code, § 3-2.09) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
§ 38.08 VIOLATIONS.
   No person during an emergency shall:
   (A)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency
Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by
virtue of this chapter;
   (B)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to
give, assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of
inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or
protection thereof; and,
   (C)   Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of
identification specified by the Emergency Agency of the state.
('63 Code, § 3-2.10) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
Penalty, see § 38.99
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $1,000, or by
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.
('63 Code, § 3-2.10) (Ord. 251-C.S., passed 7-4-75)
CHAPTER 39: CITY POLICY
Section
Appeals
   
39.01   Right to appeal
   
39.02   Time within which appeal shall be filed
   
39.03   Hearing: notice
Claims Against City
   
39.10   State provisions and applicability of subchapter
   
39.11   Claim presentation required for money or damage claims otherwise
excepted under Government Code Section 905
   
39.12   [Reserved]
   
39.13   [Reserved]
   
39.14   [Reserved]
   
39.15   Presentation of claims
   
39.16   Authority of City Manager
   
39.17   Contents of claim; review for sufficiency
   
39.18   Time limitation for presentment of claims
   
39.19   Council’s grant or denial of application to present late claim
   
39.20   [Reserved]
   
39.21   Time for action on claim
Procurement
   
39.35   Title
   
39.36   Adoption of purchasing system
   
39.37   General provisions
   
39.38   Public works projects
   
39.39   Goods and services
   
39.40   Professional services
   
39.41   Exceptions to competitive procurement
   
39.42   Miscellaneous
Prevailing Wages
   
39.51   Prevailing wages
APPEALS
§ 39.01 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, any person excepting
to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him
pursuant to any of the provisions of this code, or to any administrative
decision made by any official of the city pursuant to any of the provisions of
this code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a
written notice of such appeal, setting forth the specific grounds thereof.
('63 Code, § 1-4.01)
§ 39.02 TIME WITHIN WHICH APPEAL SHALL BE FILED.
   The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 14
days after receipt of written notice of such action appealed from, but in no
event later than 30 days after the date of such action.
('63 Code, § 1-4.02)
§ 39.03 HEARING: NOTICE.
   The City Clerk shall forthwith set such matter for hearing before the
Council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause notice thereof to be
given to the applicant not less than five days prior to such hearing, unless
such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. At such hearing the
appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why
the action excepted to should not be approved. The Council may continue the
hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and
conclusive in the matter.
('63 Code, § 1-4.03)
CLAIMS AGAINST CITY
§ 39.10 STATE PROVISIONS AND APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter recognize that the general claim procedures
applicable to the city and all local public agencies are governed by the
provisions of the Cal. Government Code, Chapters 1 and 2 of Division 3.6,
commencing with §§ 900 and following. The provisions of this chapter are
enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Cal. Government Code § 905;
provided, that such claims are not governed by any other statutes, ordinances
or regulations.
(Ord. 815-C.S., passed 8-4-15)
§ 39.11 CLAIM PRESENTATION REQUIRED FOR MONEY OR DAMAGE CLAIMS OTHERWISE
EXCEPTED UNDER GOVERNMENT CODE SECTION 905.
   Claims against the City of Eureka for money or damages that are excepted by
Cal. Government Code § 905 from Chapter 1 (commencing with § 900) and Chapter 2
(commencing with § 910) of the Government Claims Act and that are not governed
by any other statutes or regulations expressly relating thereto, must be
presented in the same manner as claims not so excepted. The time periods
prescribed by Cal. Government Code §§ 911.2 and 912.4 will apply to these
claims.
   A claim must be presented and acted upon before suit against the city or
employees of the city in their official capacity may be brought thereon. Any
action brought against the city on the claim will be subject to Cal. Government
Code §§ 945.6 and 946.
(Ord. 932-C.S., passed 2-15-22)
§ 39.12 [RESERVED]
§ 39.13 [RESERVED]
§ 39.14 [RESERVED]
§ 39.15 PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS.
   No suit subject to this chapter may be brought against the city until a
claim has been presented to and acted upon by the city, pursuant to the
provisions of Cal. Government Code § 945.4. Any action brought against the city
on a claim after it has been presented to and acted upon by the city shall be
subject to the provisions of Cal. Government Code §§ 945.6 and 946.
(Ord. 325-C.S., passed 6-17-80; Am. Ord. 556-C.S., passed 8-19-93; Am. Ord.
815-C.S. Passed 8-4-15)
§ 39.16 AUTHORITY OF CITY MANAGER.
   Pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 935.4, the City Council delegates
authority to the City Manager and their designees to review all claims for
sufficiency and to reject any and all claims. The City Council delegates to the
City Manager authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims, including
workers' compensation claims, for an amount up to $50,000. The City Council
shall have sole authority to allow, compromise, or settle claims for an amount
in excess of $50,000.
(Am. Ord. 815-C.S., passed 8-4-15)
§ 39.17 CONTENTS OF CLAIM; REVIEW FOR SUFFICIENCY.
   A claim shall be in writing, verified by the claimant or by his or her
guardian, conservator, executor or administrator, and shall be presented to the
City Clerk by the claimant or by a person acting on the claimant's behalf. The
claims shall show all information as required by Cal. Government Code § 910.
The foregoing reference to Cal. Government Code § 910 shall not be construed to
authorize a class action, and no claim may be filed on behalf of a class of
persons unless verified by every member of that class. The City Manager or his
or her designee, shall review all claims for sufficiency of information. The
City Manager or his or her designee, may within 20 days of receipt of a claim,
either personally deliver or mail to claimant a notice stating deficiencies in
the claim presented. If such notice is delivered or sent to claimant, the city
shall not act upon the claim until at least 15 days after such notice is sent.
(Ord. 325-C.S., passed 6-17-80; Am. Ord. 815-C.S., passed 8-4-15)
§ 39.18 TIME LIMITATION FOR PRESENTATION OF CLAIMS.
   Pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 911.2, any claim specified in EMC §
39.10 shall be presented within the following time limitations:
   (A)   Claims relating to a cause of action for death, injury to person or to
personal property shall be presented within six months after the accrual of the
cause of action.
   (B)   Claims relating to any other cause of action shall be presented within
one year after the accrual of the cause of action.
(Ord. 325-C.S., passed 6-17-80; Am. Ord. 468-C.S., passed 3-3-88; Am. Ord. 815-
C.S., passed 8-4-15)
§ 39.19 COUNCIL’S GRANT OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION TO PRESENT LATE CLAIM.
   Any applicant who fails to file a claim within the time period required by
EMC §
39.18 may submit a written request to the city for leave to present a late
claim, pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Government Code § 911.4. The City
Manager or his or her designee, shall grant or deny the application to present
a late claim within 45 days after it is presented to the City, in accordance
with the provisions of Cal. Government Code §§ 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive.
(Ord. 325-C.S., passed 6-17-80; Am. Ord. 815-C.S., passed 8-4-15)
§ 39.20 [RESERVED]
§ 39.21 TIME FOR ACTION ON CLAIM.
   Pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 912.4, the City Manager or his or her
designee shall act on a claim within 45 days after the claim has been
presented. By mutual agreement of the claimant and the City Manager or his or
her designee, such 45-day period may be extended by written agreement. If the
claim is not acted on within 45 days, it shall be deemed to have been rejected
on the forty-fifth day unless such time period has been extended, in which case
it shall be denied on the last day of the period specified in the extension
agreement.
(Ord. 325-C.S., passed 6-17-80; Am. Ord. 815-C.S., passed 8-4-15)
PROCUREMENT
§ 39.35 TITLE.
   This subchapter is known and may be cited as the "Purchasing System of the
City."
(‘63 Code, § 2-6.01) (Ord. 2849, passed 10-4-60; Am. Ord. 451-C.S., passed 9-
15-86; Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
§ 39.36 ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM.
   (A)   In accordance with and pursuant to Charter Section 709 (Purchasing),
there is hereby adopted a centralized purchasing system in the city in order to
establish: (a) efficient procedures for the purchase of equipment, materials,
supplies, and services, including conditions under which purchases require
competitive bidding; (b) requirements for Council approval of purchases; (c)
conditions under which all bids may be rejected and new bids invited; and (d)
to assure that purchases are at the lowest possible cost commensurate with
quality needed; (e) to exercise positive financial control over purchases; (f)
to assure the quality of purchases; (g) to authorize alternative procurement
methods; (f) to serve the city's best interests; and (g) to assure the quality
of professional services.
   (B)   To the full extent permitted under section 5(a) of Article XI of the
California State Constitution, with respect to municipal affairs, the city is
expressly exempt from compliance with the provisions of the Public Contract
Code, except for laws which expressly apply to charter cities or are preemptive
based on matters of statewide concern.
(‘63 Code, § 2-6.02) (Ord. 2849, passed 10-4-60; Am. Ord. 451-C.S., passed 9-
15-86; Am. Ord. 690-C.S., passed 5-17-05; Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17;
Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
§ 39.37 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this subchapter, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise, the following definitions apply regardless of whether or
not the defined term is capitalized:
      BID. A written offer to provide goods or services at a stated price in
response to a city bid solicitation.
      BIDDER. A person or entity that submits a bid in response to a city bid
solicitation.
      COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT PROCESS. Any competitive process for procurement
of goods or services, including bidding (formal or informal), requests for
proposals, requests for qualifications, and requests for quotes.
      CONTRACT. A written, legally-binding agreement between the city and a
contractor, service provider, or vendor to provide goods and/or services to the
city.
      DIR. The California Department of Industrial Relations.
      EMERGENCY. A sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and
imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or
impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services.
      FORMAL BIDDING. A competitive procurement process requiring public notice
of the invitation for bids, and pursuant to which a contract will be awarded,
if at all, to the responsible bidder that submits the lowest responsive bid.
      GOODS. Tangible items, including, materials, equipment, and supplies.
      INFORMAL BIDDING. A competitive procurement process in which notice of
the invitation for bids may be sent informally, including via email to
potential bidders, as may be further specified in the Procurement Policies and
Procedures.
      LAWS. All applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules, and
regulations (including the uniform federal standards applicable to non-federal
entity funding recipients), as well as the City Charter, this subchapter, and
all ordinances and resolutions enacted by the Council.
      LOCAL BUSINESS. A business that: (1) has fixed offices or distribution
points located within the geographical boundaries of Humboldt County; (2) is
listed in the City of Eureka permits and license tax paid file; (3) possesses a
current Business License Certificate; and (4) has been located and doing
business in Humboldt County for at least six months. A Post Office box number
alone will not suffice to establish status as a local business.
      MAINTENANCE.  Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or
protection of any city owned or publicly operated facility for its intended
purposes, including, but not limited to (1) minor repainting; (2) resurfacing
of streets and highways at less than one inch; (3) landscape maintenance,
including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants,
and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems; and (4) work performed to
keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal
systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and
electrical transmission lines of 230,000 volts and higher. However, the
definition of "maintenance" set forth in 8 C.F.R. § 16000, including exceptions
thereto, will apply for purposes of determining the applicability of prevailing
wage requirements.
      MASTER AGREEMENT. A contract for goods or services to be provided on an
"as-needed" or task order basis, with a total compensation stated as a not-to-
exceed amount.
      PROCUREMENT POLICIES AND PROCEDURES. The administrative procurement
policies and procedures established and maintained by the Purchasing Agent to
supplement and implement the provisions of this subchapter and applicable laws,
which may be updated as needed to reflect changes in laws and evolving best
practices and city needs.
      PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services that require a professional license,
degree, certification, or high level of technical skill, including, but not
limited to, economic and financial services, legal services, actuary services,
psychological services, medical services, claims consultant services, insurance
services, internet and related technology services, consultant and expert
services for litigation, architectural services, landscape architectural
services, engineering services, environmental project development and permit
processing services, land surveying services, and construction project
management services.
      PUBLIC WORKS.  Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration,
renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any city owned,
leased, or operated facility, including (1) painting or repainting of any city
owned, leased, or operated facility; (2) for a city-owned utility system,
"public works" only includes the construction, erection, improvement, or repair
of dams, reservoirs, powerplants, and electrical transmission lines of 230,000
volts and higher; and (3) for purposes of this definition, "facility" means any
plant, building, structure, ground facility, utility system, or other public
work improvement. However, the definition of "public works" set forth in Labor
Code § 1720 et seq., including exceptions thereto, will apply for purposes of
determining the applicability of prevailing wage requirements.
      PURCHASING AGENT. The City Manager or his or her designee, as specified
in §
39.37(B).
      QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS LIST. A list of preapproved contractors that the
Purchasing Agent may elect to create, maintain, and update on an annual basis
for informal bidding for public works contracts.
      RESPONSIBLE BIDDER. A bidder who has demonstrated the attribute of
trustworthiness, as well as quality, fitness, capacity, and experience to
perform the public works project to the city's satisfaction.
      SERVICES. Intangible products or assistance, including, but not limited
to, public works services, maintenance services, and professional services.
      VENDORS LIST. A list of preapproved vendors that the Purchasing Agent may
elect to create, maintain, and update annual on an annual basis for competitive
procurement, including informal bidding for goods or services (other than
public works services).
   (B)   Purchasing Agent. The City Manager is the Purchasing Agent for the
city. The City Manager may delegate, in whole or in part, any of the powers and
functions of Purchasing Agent to the Director of Finance or to any other
officer or employee of the city, subject to the limits of the delegee's
purchasing authority as set forth in §
39.39 and subject to the terms and condition of the written delegation of
authority.
      (1)   Authority. The Purchasing Agent has the following authority and
duties:
         (a)   Purchase or contract. To purchase or contract for goods and
services required by the city, provided those expenditures have been authorized
in the city budget or by other action of the Council.
         (b)   Minimum expenditures. To procure the needed quality of goods and
services at the least expense to the city;
         (c)   Encourage competition. To encourage full and fair competition as
appropriate to ensure the best value for the city;
         (d)   Purchasing analysis. To keep informed of current developments in
purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products;
         (e)   Forms. To prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably
necessary to the operation of the provisions of this subchapter; and
         (f)   Inspection and testing of purchases. To ensure the inspection of
all goods and services purchased or contracted for to ensure conformance with
the required specifications or scope of services, including authority to
require chemical and physical tests of samples to determine quality and
conformance with specifications.
      (2)   Cooperative purchasing. The Purchasing Agent is authorized to join
with other governmental agencies in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interests of the city would be served thereby.
      (3)   Exemptions from centralized purchasing. The Purchasing Agent may
authorize any department to purchase or contract for specified goods
independently of the Purchasing Agent, provided that such purchases or
contracts comply with the procedures established by this subchapter, and
subject to any other conditions the Purchasing Agent may require for the
specific authorization, including periodic reports.
      (4)   Alternative procurement procedures.  The Purchasing Agent may use
alternative procurement methods as provided in this subchapter.
      (5)   Brand preference.  The Purchasing Agent is authorized to make a
determination pursuant to § 3400(c) of the Public Contract Code that a
particular material, product, thing, or service may be designated by brand or
trade name in an invitation for bids or request for proposals for one of the
permitted reasons provided in Public Contract Code § 3400(c).
      (6)   Protests. It is in the city's best interest to ensure that protests
arising from a competitive procurement process are resolved fairly and
efficiently, and without delay to the city's operations or projects. The
Purchasing Agent is authorized to establish written protest procedures in
consultation with the City Attorney, which may be included in the bid documents
or request for proposals. The Purchasing Agent or his or her designee, acting
in consultation with the City Attorney, is authorized to investigate and make a
determination on a protest consistent with applicable laws.
   (C)   Determination of responsibility. A bidder may not be disqualified on
grounds that it is not a responsible bidder without the minimum due process
hearing required under laws, including the opportunity to present and rebut
evidence bearing on responsibility in relation to the subject procurement.
Determination of whether a bidder is responsible in relation to a specific
procurement may include consideration of evidence pertaining to any of the
following:
      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      (2)   Whether the bidder has the facilities to perform the contract or
provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;
      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (4)   The bidder's record of performance of previous contracts or
services;
      (5)   The bidder's past and current compliance with laws relating to the
contract or service;
      (6)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service within the allocated
time;
      (7)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the equipment,
materials, supplies, or services to the particular use required;
      (8)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service; and
      (9)   The nature and scope of the conditions or exceptions attached to
the bid.
   (D)   Written contracts. All contracts entered into by the city pursuant to
this subchapter must be in writing, drafted or approved by the City Attorney
pursuant to Charter Section 608, and must be executed by the Purchasing Agent
or other duly authorized officer or employee of the city in accordance with §
31.04 (Contracts, Conveyances, and Other Transactions), and as may be specified
in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
      (1)   All contracts must require the contracting party, to the maximum
extent allowed by law (and subject to the limitations of Cal. Civil Code §§
2782 and 2782.8, if applicable), to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the
city, its officers, officials, employees, and agents upon the terms specified
by the city to cover all damages and loss related to the work, services or
goods provided pursuant to the contract.
      (2)   All contracts must require the contracting party to obtain and
maintain the insurance coverage specified by the city, including additional-
insured endorsements, as required, to protect the city, its officers,
officials, employees, and agents from damages and loss related to the work,
services or goods provided pursuant to the contract.
      (3)   All contracts must require the contracting party to obtain and
maintain all licenses or permits required by laws to provide the goods or
services.
   (E)   Liability limitations. The city is not liable for payment or other
obligation for a contract or purchase that was made without compliance with
laws. No provision of this subchapter will be deemed to impose a mandatory duty
for the city or any of its officers, officials, employees, boards or council to
enforce the requirements of this subchapter. The procedures in this subchapter
are for the city's sole and exclusive benefit. The city's failure to follow or
enforce the provisions of this subchapter in any instance does not constitute a
waiver of any of this subchapter's requirements or the city's right of
enforcement.
   (F)   Rejection of bids. The Purchasing Agent is authorized to reject any or
all bids, quotes, or proposals when the public interest would be served by the
rejection, subject to the limits of laws.
   (G)   Authority to approve contracts. All contracts in the amount of
$100,000 or more require Council approval.
      (1)   The Purchasing Agent is authorized, without Council approval, to
approve and award a contract for an amount less than $100,000.
      (2)   The Purchasing Agent is authorized to delegate to another employee
or officer of the city, in writing, authority to approve a contract in an
amount of $10,000 or less.
(‘63 Code, § 2-6.04)
(Ord. 2849, passed 10-4-60; Am. Ord. 353-C.S., passed 11-3-81; Am. Ord. 451-
C.S., passed 9-15-86; Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 892-C.S.,
passed 12-3-19)
§ 39.38 PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS.
   Public works services must be procured under this section and applicable
laws. For purposes of complying with Charter Section 710 (Public Works),
contracts for city improvements which are estimated to cost more than $15,000,
but less than $100,000 are deemed to be "authorized by the Council to be made
directly by a city department in conformity with detailed plans, specifications
and estimates," if such contracts are procured in compliance with this section
and the Procurement Policies and Procedures, and approved by the Purchasing
Agent.
   (A)   Prequalification and statements of qualification.
      (1)   For any public works contract subject to informal bidding or formal
bidding, the Purchasing Agent or his or her designee may elect to require all
bidders to prequalify, using prequalification procedures that substantially
conform to the requirements of Public Contract Code § 20101, as may be further
specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures, including, but not
limited to, (a) required submission of a financial statement and standardized
prequalification questionnaire that is generally consistent with the current
guidelines and model forms provided by the DIR; (b) use of a uniform system of
rating prospective bidders based on objective criteria; and (c) inclusion of an
appeal process that enables a prospective bidder to dispute its rating prior to
the bid deadline, as further specified in Public Contract Code § 20101.
      (2)   Alternatively, an invitation for bids issued for informal bidding
or formal bidding may require submission of a signed statement of
qualifications which may be used to evaluate whether a bidder is a responsible
bidder as further specified in § 39.37(C) (Determination of responsibility).
   (B)   Bid thresholds and requirements. The bid thresholds established
pursuant to the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act and set forth
in Public Contract Code § 22032, as amended from time to time, will apply to
determine the applicable bidding requirements as follows:
      (1)   Public works projects that are estimated to cost up to and
including the amount set forth in Public Contract Code § 22032(a), currently
$60,000, may be performed by (a) city employees, (b) force account, (c)
negotiated contract, or (d) as otherwise specified in the Procurement Policies
and Procedures.
      (2)   Public works projects that are estimated to cost more than the
amount set forth in Public Contract Code § 22032(a) (currently $60,000), but no
more than the maximum amount set forth in Public Contract Code § 22032(b),
currently $200,000, may be awarded pursuant to informal bidding.
      (3)   Public works projects that are estimated to cost more than the
amount set forth in Public Contract Code § 22032(c), currently $200,000, must
be awarded pursuant to formal bidding.
      (4)   The bid threshold amounts set forth above will be deemed modified
to align with future increases to the corresponding amounts set forth in Public
Contract Code § 22032.
   (C)   Informal bidding. Contracts subject to informal bidding, as set forth
above, will be procured in accordance with the following requirements, and as
may be further specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures:
      (1)   Minimum number of bids. The notice inviting informal bids will be
sent by mail or email to at least three qualified bidders, whenever possible,
which may include contractors on the Qualified Contractors List.
      (2)   Bids in excess of informal bidding amount. If all bids received are
in excess of threshold amount for informal bidding the Council may award the
contract to the responsible bidder that submitted the lowest responsive bid, if
the Council determines that the cost estimate used as the basis for using
informal bidding was reasonable.
   (D)   Formal bidding. The notice inviting bids for contracts subject to
formal bidding, as set forth above, will be published as specified in the
Procurement Policies and Procedures, and will be subject to the provisions of
subsection (E), below.
   (E)   Requirements for informal and formal bidding.  Public works
procurements using informal bidding or formal bidding are subject to the
following provisions and as further specified in the Procurement Policies and
Procedures and subsection (F), below:
      (1)   Notice inviting bids. The notice inviting bids will be prepared
using the form approved by the Purchasing Agent, and must generally describe
the proposed project, describe how to obtain more detailed information, state
the time and place for bid submission, and provide such other information
required by laws. For formal bids, the bid documents must require submission of
bid security in the amount of 10% of the maximum bid price, as further
specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
      (2)   Prequalified contractors. If the city chooses to prequalify
contractors, the notice inviting bids will only be sent to prequalified
contractors pursuant to subsection (A), above.
      (3)   Notice required. Notice to prospective bidders must be provided in
the manner required by the Procurement Policies and Procedures for informal
bidding or formal bidding, as applicable.
      (4)   Bid opening procedure — informal bids.
         (a)   Submittal. Bids will be submitted to the purchasing agent or his
or her designee by the time stated in the notice inviting bids. For contracts
subject to prevailing wage requirements, the bidding instructions must require
that the bidder's DIR registration number be submitted with the bid, and city
staff will check online to confirm that the bidder is currently registered with
the DIR before opening the bid. Bids that are submitted after the stated
deadline for bid submission, or bids for which staff determines that the bidder
lacks the required DIR registration will be returned.
         (b)   Opening. Bids will be opened at the time stated in the notice
inviting bids.
      (5)   Bid opening procedure — formal bids.
         (a)   Sealed bids. Bids must be submitted to the Purchasing Agent or
his or her designee in sealed envelopes, each identified as a bid on the
envelope. For contracts subject to prevailing wage requirements, the bidding
instructions must require that the bidder's DIR registration number be included
on the outside of the envelope, and city staff will check online to confirm
that the bidder is currently registered with the DIR before opening the bid.
Bids that are submitted after the stated deadline for bid submission, or bids
for which staff determines that the bidder lacks the required DIR registration
will be returned unopened.
         (b)   Opening. Bids will be opened in public at the time and place
stated in the notice inviting bids.
      (6)   Basis for award. The contract will be awarded, if at all, to the
responsible bidder that submits the lowest responsive bid.
   (F)   Bid security and bonds. For formal bids, each bid must be accompanied
by bid security in the amount of 10% of the maximum bid price (including
additive alternates, if applicable), in the form of cash or as a cashier's
check, certified check, or bid bond payable to the city. For any public works
contract over $60,000, the successful bidder will be required to provide a
payment bond and a performance bond, each for an amount equal to 100% of the
contract price, as a condition to performing any work on the project. Any bond
submitted pursuant to this subsection must be issued by a bond surety that is
admitted in California and on a bond form approved by the Purchasing Agent.
   (G)   Change orders. For purposes of complying with Charter Section 710
(Public Works), change orders affecting the scope of work, time requirements,
cost, or other substantive provisions affecting the city's interest are deemed
to be approved by the Council, provided the City Manager recommends the change
order, and (1) the change order cost falls within the change order contingency
previously approved for the contract, or (2) the change order cost does not
exceed the Purchasing Agent's approval authority.
   (H)   Alternative procurement methods authorized. Subject to authorization
by the Council and the limitations of laws, the city may use an alternative
procurement method for bidding on public works in excess of $1,000,000.
Alternative procurement methods may include design-build, design-build-operate,
construction-manager-at-risk, lease-leaseback, or any other procurement
methodology specifically approved by the Council and determined to be in the
city's best interests. The Purchasing Agent is expressly authorized to consider
award on the basis of "best value," which may be based on objective criteria
that may include, but not be limited to, price, features, functions, life-cycle
costs, experience, and past performance.
   (I)   Task order contract. A Master Agreement for performing minor
improvements and repairs on a task order basis, including pothole, sidewalk, or
utility pole repairs, may be awarded subject to the same competitive
procurement requirements that apply to any other public works contract, as may
be further specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
(Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3- 19; Am.
Ord. 899-C.S., passed 3-17-20)
§ 39.39 GOODS AND SERVICES.
   Goods will be procured pursuant to this subsection and pursuant to the
Procurement Policies and Procedures.
   (A)   Estimated value of $10,000 or less.  Goods with an estimated dollar
value of $10,000 or less may be procured through a negotiated written purchase
order, and as otherwise specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
The Purchasing Agent may negotiate with vendors on the Vendors' List, if
established.
   (B)   Request for quotes. Goods with an estimated value over $10,000 and up
to $100,000 may be procured by a request for quotes as specified in the
Procurement Policies and Procedures, and in accordance with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Contents. The request for quotes will describe the required goods
in sufficient detail to ensure fair comparisons (including, but not limited to,
size, performance criteria, standards, shipping costs, time for delivery, and
warranty requirements), describe how to obtain more detailed information, and
state the time and manner for submitting quotes and any required supporting
documentation. The request will also describe required contract provisions or
attach the required form of contract.
      (2)   Issuance. The request for quotes must be issued to vendors listed
in the Vendors List, if established and applicable.
      (3)   Minimum number of quotes. Whenever possible, purchases will be
based on procurement of at least three quotes.
      (4)   Form of response. Quotes must be in writing and may be submitted by
mail, by fax, or electronically, as specified in the request for quotes.
      (5)   Award. The contract will be awarded, if at all, based on the lowest
responsive quote, factoring in shipping and handling costs, and subject to
local preference if applicable.
   (C)   Competitive procurement by informal bidding. Goods with an estimated
value exceeding $100,000 will be procured by informal bidding as specified in
the Procurement Policies and Procedures, and the contract awarded, if at all,
based on the lowest responsive bid, factoring in shipping and handling costs,
and subject to local preference if applicable.
   (D)   Term. Pursuant to Charter Section 711 (Terms of Contracts), no
contract for equipment, materials, or supplies will be made for a term in
excess of one year, with the exception of contracts for utilities where the
rates are regulated by state or federal laws, or as approved by the Council for
public works improvements.
   (E)   Used goods.  Used equipment, materials, or supplies may be procured at
the discretion of the Purchasing Agent or his or her designee, when in the best
interest of the city, and as may be further specified in the Procurement
Policies and Procedures.
   (F)   Local preference. Pursuant to Charter Section 709 (Purchasing), for
materials, supplies, and equipment obtained pursuant to a competitive
procurement process, a preference of up to 5% may be applied as may be further
specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
   (G)   Reports required. In the event that any goods are procured without
substantial compliance with the procedures set forth in this subsection, a full
report of the circumstances will be submitted in writing by the department head
to the Purchasing Agent, filed with the Council, and entered in the minutes of
the Council for public inspection.
   (H)   Master Agreement purchases. A Master Agreement for ongoing or
recurrent purchases of goods, may be awarded subject to the same competitive
procurement requirements that apply to any other contract for goods, as may be
further specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
(Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
§ 39.40 PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Criteria.  Contracts for services may be awarded based on criteria
including, but not limited to, price, rates, demonstrated competence, and the
experience and qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the
services required. In selecting an individual or firm to provide required
services, any of the following may be considered:
      (1)   Experience on similar projects or providing similar services and
record of performance on previous contracts.
      (2)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the firm, and personnel proposed to provide the services.
      (3)   The ability, capacity, and skill to perform the services.
      (4)   The proposed approach to complete the necessary elements of the
required services.
      (5)   The proposed lump sum fee and/or rate schedule for providing the
services.
   (B)   Vendors List.  Service contracts estimated to cost over $60,000 and up
to $200,000 may be procured from qualified service providers on the Vendors
List, if established, in accordance with informal competitive procurement
procedures that may be provided in the Procurement Policies and Procedures. If
no Vendors List is established or if there are insufficient qualified service
providers for the required services on the Vendors List, the services will be
procured by a request for proposals or request for qualifications, as may be
further specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures.
   (C)   Competitive procurement of services.  Service contracts estimated to
cost in excess of $200,000 will be procured by (1) request for proposals for
service contracts based on a defined project, or (2) by request for
qualifications for service contracts for ongoing or on-call services, or by a
combination of both methods, as may be further specified in the Procurement
Policies and Procedures.
   (D)   "Architectural and engineering services." Notwithstanding any
provision to the contrary in this subchapter, all contracts for "architectural
and engineering services," which is defined in Cal. Government Code § 4529.10
to include all architectural, landscape architectural, environmental,
engineering, land surveying, and construction project management services, will
be procured pursuant to a fair, competitive selection process as specified in
Cal. Government Code § 4529.12, and as may be further specified in the
Procurement Policies and Procedures.
   (E)   Professional services. For professional service contracts other than
for "architectural and engineering services," as defined above, that will be
(1) less than $100,000, and (2) can be provided by a well-qualified local
business, the Purchasing Agent, or designated department may negotiate with a
local business for the services subject to prior approval from the Council.
   (F)   Grant funded projects. Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary
in this subchapter, alternate procurement procedures that are more restrictive
may be used to comply with conditions applicable to grant funding.
   (G)   Master Agreement for services. A Master Agreement for performing
ongoing or on-call services, may be awarded subject to the same competitive
procurement requirements that generally apply to contracts for the underlying
services, as may be further specified in the Procurement Policies and
Procedures.
(‘63 Code, § 2-6.16) (Ord. 451-C.S., passed 9-15-86; Am. Ord. 690-C.S., passed
5-17-05; Am. Ord. 822-C.S., passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17;
Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
§ 39.41 EXCEPTIONS TO COMPETITIVE PROCUREMENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, but
subject to the limits of laws, the following procurements may be made without
any competitive procurement process.
   (A)   Sole source. A purchase may be made or contract awarded without a
competitive procurement process when there is only one reasonable and
practicable source for the required goods or services because of the unique
quality of the goods or services; availability; compatibility with existing
city programs, equipment or systems; or fitness for a particular use. Such a
sole source purchase must be determined to meet the Procurement Policies and
Procedures and be recommended for approval by the Purchasing Agent and be
approved by the Council.
   (B)   City's best interest. Except where otherwise required by laws or by
applicable funding conditions, goods and services may be obtained by negotiated
contract and without a competitive procurement process, when the Council
determines that, due to the nature of the goods or services, (1) a competitive
procurement process is not likely to serve the best interests of the city or to
result in the lowest price, or (2) there is a less expensive alterative (e.g.
state contract, used equipment, etc.) that will serve the city equally as well.
   (C)   Emergencies. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter,
upon determining that an emergency exists, as defined above, the Council or
City Manager may dispense with otherwise applicable competitive procurement
procedures to authorize a procurement necessary to address, avoid, or
ameliorate the circumstances creating the emergency or the resulting damage or
potential damage. An emergency procurement will be limited in scope and
duration to the extent necessary to satisfy the emergency need. The City
Manager must report to the Council any emergency purchase made and the basis
therefor at the next Council meeting following the emergency procurement.
   (D)   Urgent purchases.  The Purchasing Agent may authorize immediate
purchases of goods or services up to $30,000, without compliance with otherwise
applicable competitive procurement procedures, for goods or services that are
required on an urgent basis based on unforeseen and unforeseeable
circumstances, if the Purchasing Agent determines that the time required for
the applicable competitive procurement would outweigh the potential benefits
under the specific circumstances. A procurement made on an urgent basis will be
documented as specified in the Procurement Policies and Procedures. Lack of
planning or reasonable foresight will not constitute justification for an
urgent purchase.
   (E)   Purchases not susceptible to competitive bidding process. Except where
otherwise required by laws or by applicable funding conditions, goods and
services may be procured by negotiated contract and without a competitive
procurement process, for procurements which are not readily adaptable to the
open market and bidding processes. Such procurements include, but are not
limited to: (1) utility services (telephone, gas, water, sewer and electricity)
provided to city buildings and facilities, (2) franchises awarded by the
Council, (3) insurance or bond premiums, and (4) subscriptions, memberships,
software licenses, advertisements and travel expenses.
   (F)   Miscellaneous. Use of a competitive procurement process may be
dispensed with if it would be impossible, impractical, or incongruous or when
the amount involved is less than $5,000.
   (G)   Other. Competitive procurement processes may be dispensed with in
accordance with any other section of the city Charter or this chapter that
provides such an exemption, or by approval of the Council in accordance with
laws.
(Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
§ 39.42 MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   Estimate of requirements. All offices, boards, and commissions must
file detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements for procurements
of goods or services in such manner, at such times, and for such future periods
as the Purchasing Agent prescribes. Such requisitions and estimates must be
filed with the Purchasing Agent on such forms as he or she prescribes.
   (B)   Encumbrance of funds. Except in cases of emergency when necessary for
the protection of the public peace, health, safety, welfare, property, or
interests of the city or general public, the Purchasing Agent must not issue
any purchase order for goods or services unless there exists in the account
against which the purchase is to be charged a sufficient unencumbered
appropriation balance in excess of all unpaid obligations to pay for the
purchase.
   (C)   Surplus supplies and equipment. All offices, boards, and commissions
must submit to the Purchasing Agent, at such time and in such forms as he or
she prescribes, reports showing all equipment, materials, and supplies which
are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out, or scrapped. The
Purchasing Agent has the authority to sell all equipment, materials, and
supplies which have become unsuitable for public use or to exchange the same
for, or trade in the same on, new equipment, materials, and supplies.
(‘63 Code, §§ 2-6.12, 2-6.14, 2-6.17) (Ord. 2849, passed 10-4-60; Am. Ord. 451-
C.S., passed 9-15-86; Am. Ord. 555-C.S., passed 5-20-93; Am. Ord. 822-C.S.,
passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 861-C.S., passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed
12-3-19)
PREVAILING WAGES
§ 39.51 PREVAILING WAGES.
   Contracts for public works construction projects valued in excess of
$25,000, and contracts for alteration, demolition, repair or maintenance
projects valued in excess of $15,000, shall require payment of prevailing wages
in accordance with the requirements of the California Labor Code.
(Ord. 806-C.S., passed 11-4-14; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
CHAPTER 40: TRANSFERS OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY
Section
   
40.01   Findings and purpose
   
40.02   Expedited transfers of city-owned real property
   
40.03   Standard procedure for transfers of city-owned real property
§ 40.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   From time to time the city determines that it may be desirable to
transfer city-owned real property to another entity or individual.
   (B)   Since 1976, the city has utilized a "Policy and Procedure Memorandum"
to provide advisory guidelines to the City Council, the Planning Commission and
the staff regarding the procedures by which transfers of real property should
be handled.
   (C)   The City Council finds and declares that there is now a need for the
city to be able to distinguish certain transfers from others and that mandatory
controls and procedures to govern the transfer of city-owned real property from
the city to another entity or individual should be provided in the Municipal
Code and the purpose of the following provisions are to provide authority for
the City Council to make those distinctions and to set forth the mandatory
controls and procedures.
(Ord. 632-C.S., passed 11-2-99)
§ 40.02 EXPEDITED TRANSFERS OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The City Council may utilize an expedited process to transfer city-
owned real property to a non-profit organization without consultation with or
advice from the Planning Commission and without complying with the provisions
set forth in the Policy and Procedure Memorandum governing real property
transfers as it has or may be amended, if the City Council finds all of the
following:
      (1)   The property to be transferred has been utilized for a purpose that
is of benefit to the community for such period of time that the Council
believes the continued use of the property for substantially the same purpose
will not have an overly disruptive impact on the surrounding neighborhood or
its inhabitants;
      (2)   The property to be transferred will continue to be utilized for
substantially the same purpose that is has been used and that purpose is of
benefit to the community;
      (3)   The instrument conveying the property from the city to the non-
profit organization contains a clause requiring the property to revert back to
the city in the event the property ceases to be used for the benefit of the
community in a way that is at least substantially similar to the way that it is
being used at the time of the transfer;
      (4)   The non-profit organization receiving the property is providing
substantial value and consideration to the community and to the city in the
nature of services rendered to the community;
      (5)   The value to be received by the community and the city by
transferring the property to the non-profit organization exceeds the value of
continuing city ownership of the property; and
      (6)   The proposed transfer of property has been subjected to a minimum
of two public hearings before the City Council which were separated by no fewer
than seven days, and which were noticed by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation.
(Ord. 632-C.S., passed 11-2-99)
§ 40.03 STANDARD PROCEDURE FOR TRANSFERS OF CITY-OWNED REAL PROPERTY.
   In all cases excepting those in which the City Council makes the findings
set forth in §
40.02 above, transfers of city-owned real property shall be conducted in
conformance with the procedures set forth in the Policy and Procedure
Memorandum governing disposal of surplus property as that Memorandum may be
amended.
(Ord. 632-C.S., passed 11-2-99)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
         
50.   SEWERS
         
51.   SOLID WASTE
         
52.   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
         
53.   WATER
         
54.   STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL.
         
55.   ENERGY
         
56.   STREETS
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Purpose and policy
   
50.002   Definitions
   
50.003   Abbreviations
   
50.004   Vandalism
   
50.005   Confidential information
   
50.006   Conflicting provisions
   
50.007   Severability
General Sewer Use Regulations
   
50.020   Prohibited discharge standards
   
50.021   Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards
   
50.022   Specific pollutant limitations
   
50.023   City's right of revision
   
50.024   Special agreement
   
50.025   Dilution
Pretreatment of Wastewaters
   
50.035   Pretreatment facilities
   
50.036   Additional pretreatment measures
   
50.037   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
50.038   Tenant responsibility
   
50.039   Hauled wastewater
   
50.040   Grease hauler permit requirements
   
50.041   Grease hauler permit application
   
50.042   Grease hauler permit reissuance
   
50.043   Grease hauler permit contents
   
50.044   Grease hauler permit appeals
   
50.045   Grease hauler permit modification
   
50.046   Revocation of permit
Wastewater Discharge Permit
   
50.050   Wastewater survey
   
50.051   Wastewater discharge permit requirements
   
50.052   Wastewater discharge permit application
   
50.053   Wastewater discharge permit decisions
   
50.054   Duration of permit; reissuance
   
50.055   Permit contents
   
50.056   Appeals
   
50.057   Permit modification
   
50.058   Transfer of permit
   
50.059   Revocation of permit
Reporting Requirements
   
50.070   Baseline monitoring reports
   
50.071   Compliance schedule progress report
   
50.072   Report on compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard deadline
   
50.073   Periodic compliance reports
   
50.074   Reports of changed conditions
   
50.075   Reports of potential problems
   
50.076   Reports from nonsignificant industrial users
   
50.077   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
   
50.078   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
50.079   Analytical requirements
   
50.080   Sample collection; determination of noncompliance
   
50.081   Record keeping
Connections to POTW
   
50.090   Permits required
   
50.091   Impact fees and installation charges
   
50.092   Maintenance of building sewers
   
50.093   Main extensions
Rates and Charges
   
50.105   Wastewater volume determination
   
50.106   Pretreatment charges and fees
   
50.107   Wastewater user charges
   
50.108   Billing; persons responsible for payment
   
50.109   Penalty for nonpayment
Administration and Enforcement
   
50.120   Duties of City Manager
   
50.121   Compliance monitoring
   
50.122   Publication of industrial users in significant noncompliance
   
50.123   Administrative enforcement remedies
   
50.124   Judicial enforcement remedies
   
50.125   Supplemental enforcement action
   
50.126   Remedies nonexclusive
   
50.127   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
Private Sewer Lateral Inspection
   
50.201   Purpose
   
50.202   Triggering events
   
50.203   Inspection methods
   
50.204   Review of inspection results, standards
   
50.205   Notice to repair
   
50.206   Timing and completion of work
   
50.207   Fee in lieu of repair, repairs performed by the city and recovery of
costs
   
50.208   Lateral certificate
   
50.209   Exceptions
   
50.210   Fees
   
50.211   Failure to repair or replace
   
50.212   Assistance with sewer repair costs
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the
wastewater collection and Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW) for the city.
This chapter shall apply to all persons using the POTW. It provides for the
setting of user charges and fees for the equitable distribution of costs to all
users. Revenues derived from the application of the provisions of this chapter
shall be used to defray the city's cost of operating and maintaining an
adequate wastewater collection and treatment system and to provide sufficient
funds for capital outlay, bond service costs, capital improvements depreciation
and pretreatment. This chapter also enables the city to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et
seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403).
   (B)   Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with the operation of the POTW;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which may
pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise
be incompatible with the POTW;
      (3)   To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge
is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations;
      (4)   To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and
sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
      (5)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and
sludge from the POTW;
      (6)   To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to
which the POTW is subject.
('63 Code, § 5-5.101) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   If the industrial user is a corporation, AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE
shall mean:
         (a)   The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation;
         (b)   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management
decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility, including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure
long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit or
general permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
      (2)   If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or proprietor,
respectively;
      (3)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental
facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility;
      (4)   The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3) of this
definition may designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement
the prohibitions listed in §§
50.020,
50.021 and
50.022. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and
practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure,
five-day 20° centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration milligrams
per liter (mg/l).
   BUILDING SEWER OR LATERAL. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of
a user to the POTW.
   CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance
with Sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a
specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, California or the City Council of Eureka.
   CITY MANAGER or MANAGER. The person designated by the city to manage the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this chapter or his duly authorized representative.
   CLARIFIER. A device designed and installed so as to separate and retain
deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter such as sand, petroleum oil, non-
biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin from a waste
stream and permit liquid waste to discharge to the POTW.
   COLOR. The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum absorption,
relative to distilled water. One hundred percent transmittance is equivalent to
zero (0.0) optical density.
   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. The sample resulting from the combination of individual
wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either
flow or time.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Regional Water Quality Control Board or other duly authorized official of
said agency.
   EXISTING SOURCE. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of
which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment
standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter
promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
without regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
   GREASE HAULER. A person, firm or business that collects the contents of a
grease interceptor and transports it.
   GREASE INTERCEPTOR. A plumbing appurtenance or appliance that intercepts
fats, oil and grease from a wastewater discharge.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The introduction of source regulated under
Section 307 (b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
   INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person who discharges or causes or permits the
discharge of non-domestic wastewater into the POTW.
   INFILTRATION. The seepage of groundwater into a sewer system including sewer
laterals.
   INFLOW. Water discharged into the sewer system, including sewer laterals,
from sources such as roof drains, downspouts, sumps, foundation drains, yard
and area drains, drainage from springs and swampy areas and cross connections
from storm systems.
   INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DISCHARGE LIMIT. The maximum concentration
(or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined
from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent
of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event.
   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources: inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment
processes, or operations or its sludge processes, use, or disposal; and
therefore is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the
prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the
following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder (or more
stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title II commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained
in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine
Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
   LOWER LATERAL. The portion of a private sewer lateral which lies within the
public right-of-way.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
byproducts, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
   NEW SOURCE.
      (1)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there
is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307(c)
of the Act that will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
         (a)   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
         (b)   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
         (c)   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
      (2)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of division (1)(b) or (c) of this definition above, but otherwise
alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
      (3)   Construction of a new source as defined under this section has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
         (a)   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
            1.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment; or
         (b)   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility engineering,
and design studies, do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
   NOTICE TO REPAIR. A notice issued by the city to a property owner that the
sewer lateral is in violation of this chapter, which order directs the
abatement of the violation.
   NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to health or is indecent or offensive
to the senses or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere
with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property or which affects at the same
time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons
although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may
be unequal.
   OFFSET. Separation of pipe joints which restrict flow and allow
infiltration.
   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the U.S. in
quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of
the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation).
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental
entities.
   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial
wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial
wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e., pH, temperature, TSS,
turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), toxicity, odor).
   PREMISES. A parcel of real estate, including any improvements thereon, which
is determined by the city to be a single user for the purpose of receiving,
using and paying for services.
   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of
pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment
standard.
   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS or STANDARDS. Prohibitive discharge standards,
categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
   PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS or PROHIBITED DISCHARGES. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions
appear in §
50.020 of this chapter.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS or POTW. Any devices or storage, treatment,
recycling or reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances
which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. Also, the city's jurisdiction
over the industrial users and responsibility for the operation and maintenance
of the treatment works. Building sewers connecting building drains to the POTW
are not public sewers although they may be partially located in a public right-
of-way or easement.
   REPAIR OR REPLACE. To partially or completely replace a sewer lateral or
correct defects within a sewer lateral so as to ensure its proper function in
compliance with this code and applicable city and industry standards. CIP pipe
lining may constitute replacement when approved by the City Engineer.
   SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW (SSO). Any overflow, spill, release discharge or
diversion of entreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer
system.
   SEPTIC TANK WASTES. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
   SEWAGE. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing
operations, and the like).
   SEWER LATERAL. The sewer line beginning at the perimeter of any building and
terminating at the sewer main including both the section within the public
right-of-way.
   SEWER LATERAL CERTIFICATE. A document certifying that a sewer lateral meets
the standards of this chapter.
   SEWER MAIN. A public sewer main designed to accommodate multiple sewer
laterals.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Applies to industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards; any other industrial user that discharges
an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater, contributes a process
wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the treatment plant or, is designated as significant by the
city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standard or requirement.
   SLUG LOAD. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
50.020 of this chapter or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature,
including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch
discharge.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) CODE. A classification pursuant to
the “Standard Industrial Classification Manual” issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation including snowmelt.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of,
or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. One of 126 pollutants, or combination by the EPA under the
provision of Section 307 (33 USC 1317) of this Act.
   TREATMENT PLANT EFFLUENT. Any discharge of treated wastewater from the POTW
into waters of the state.
   UPPER LATERAL. That portion of the sewer lateral which resides on private
property from the building sewer edge of the public right-of-way.
   VIREOUS CLAY PIPE (VCP). Any sewer line or lateral composed of terra-cotta
type vitrified clay which is jointed together in short sections without
gaskets. This type of pipe is subject to significant offsets and I & I.
   WASTEWATER. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLAN or TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW
designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.103) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.003 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
      BOD   -   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations
      COD   -   Chemical Oxygen Demand
      EPA   -   U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
      gpd   -   Gallons per day
      l   -   liter
      mg   -   milligrams
      mg/l   -   milligrams per liter
      NPDES   -National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
      O&M   -   Operation and Maintenance
      POTW   -   Publicly Owned Treatment Works
      RCRA   -   Resource Cost and Recovery Act
      SIC   -   Standard Industrial Classifications
      SWDA   -   Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.)
      TSS   -   Total Suspended Solids
      USC   -   United States Code
('63 Code, § 5-5.104) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.004 VANDALISM.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment or other part of the POTW. Any person found in
violation of this requirement shall be subject to the enforcement actions set
out in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.306) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.005 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys,
wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and
monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be
available to the public unless the industrial user specifically requests and is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When
requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such
information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might
disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for
inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request
to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment
program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction.
('63 Code, § 5-5.801) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.006 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter, are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency or conflict.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1503)
   (B)   In the event any provision of this chapter conflicts or is otherwise
inconsistent with the latest edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code which has
been or may be adopted by this code, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1504)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.007 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue
in full force and effect.
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
GENERAL SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 50.020 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or
other opening in a community sewer other than through an approved building
sewer unless, upon a written application by the user and the payment of the
applicable user charges and fees, the city issues a permit for such direct
discharges.
   (B)   No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW,
directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through
or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any
other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirement.
Furthermore, no person may contribute the following substances to the POTW:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the municipal
wastewater collection and POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams
with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      (2)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, or
otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or
endangering city personnel.
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case solids
greater than one-inch or 25.4 millimeters in any dimension.
      (4)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants (BOD, and the like), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or
pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW, or any wastewater
treatment or sludge process; or which will constitute a hazard to humans or
animals.
      (5)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F (65.5° C),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C).
      (6)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through, but in no
case shall the discharge exceed 25 mg/l.
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety
problems.
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the city in accordance with §
50.039 of this chapter.
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry
into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
      (10)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant’s
effluent thereby violating the city’s NPDES permit. Color (in combination with
turbidity) shall not cause the treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of
the compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than 10% from the
seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except as specifically approved in writing by the City Manager in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (12)   Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artisan well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized in writing by the City Manager.
      (13)   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial wastes.
      (14)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized in writing
by the City Manager in a wastewater discharge permit.
      (15)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a
toxicity test.
      (16)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
      (17)   Any discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable
origin is limited to 100 mg/l.
   (C)   Wastes prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in
such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains
located in process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial
user’s pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.201) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.021 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   The National Categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated.
('63 Code, § 5-5.202) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.022 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to establish local limits pursuant to
40 C.F.R. 403.5(c).
   (B)   The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass
through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in
excess of the following:
0.113 mg/l   arsenic
0.119 mg/l   benzene
0.044 mg/l   cadmium
0.023 mg/l   chloroform
0.692 mg/l   copper
0.796 mg/l   cyanide
0.009 mg/l   1,1 dichloroethane
0.062 mg/l   1,2 dichlorobenzene
0.021 mg/l   1,3 dichlorobenzene
0.081 mg/l   1,4 dichlorobenzene
0.070 mg/l   ethylbenzene
3.915 mg/l   lead
0.009 mg/l   mercury
0.049 mg/l   methylene chloride
0.574 mg/l   nickel
0.146 mg/l   silver
0.376 mg/l   toluene
1.438 mg/l   total chromium
0.392 mg/l   total phenols
0.520mg/l   total xylenes (TOTAL XYLENES is defined as the sum of ortho, para,
and meta xylenes)
0.678 mg/l   zinc
   (C)   Concentrations apply at the point where the waste is discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for “total” metal, unless
indicated otherwise. At his discretion, the City Manager may impose mass
limitations in addition to or in place of the concentration based limitations
above.
   (D)   The City Manager may develop best management practices (BMP), by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement local
limits and the requirements of §§
50.020 and
50.021.
('63 Code, § 5-5.203) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.023 CITY'S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to
the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives and/or the general
and specific prohibitions established in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.204) (Ord. 571-C.S, passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.024 SPECIAL AGREEMENT.
   The city reserves the right to enter into special written agreements with
industrial users setting out special terms under which they may discharge to
the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a
pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request
a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR
403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment
standard from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user
can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different
from the factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment
standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor
variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR
403.13.
(‘63 Code, §5-5.205) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.025 DILUTION.
   No industrial user or wastewater hauler shall ever increase the use of
process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a
discharge limitation, unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment
standard or requirement. The City Manager may impose mass limitations on
industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
('63 Code, § 5-5.206) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATERS
§ 50.035 PRETREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to
comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in this
chapter within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the
City Manager, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and
maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans showing the
pretreatment facilities and operating procedure shall be submitted to the city
for review, and must be approved by the city before construction of the
facility. The review of such plans and operating procedure will in no way
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility
as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the city under the
provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.301) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.036 ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES.
   (A)   Whenever deemed necessary, the City Manager may require industrial
users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that
certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW
and determine the industrial user’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Each person discharging into the POTW greater than 100,000 gallons per
day shall install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable
storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow over a 24-hour
period.
   (C)   Clarifiers shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City Manager,
they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive
amounts of petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral
oil origin or sand; except that such clarifiers shall not be required for
residential users. All clarifiers shall be of type and capacity approved by the
City Manager and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Such clarifiers shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired
regularly, as needed, by the owner at his sole expense.
   (D)   Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
   (E)   At no time shall any reading on a properly calibrated combustible gas
detector at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW,
be more than 20% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter.
   (F)   Grease interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the City
Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of fats, oils and grease that may cause or contribute to
lateral or sanitary sewer overflows; except that such grease interceptors shall
not be required for residential users. All grease interceptors shall be of type
and capacity approved by the City Manager and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease interceptors shall be installed
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Such grease interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the owner at
his sole expense.
      (1)   Users that are required to have a grease interceptor may be
required to connect the following fixtures to the grease interceptor, if they
are present:
         (a)   Pot sinks or similar devices, including all compartments of a
three compartment sink;
         (b)   Pre-rinse sinks or similar devices;
         (c)   Prep sinks or similar devices;
         (d)   Soup kettles or similar devices;
         (e)   Wok stations or similar devices;
         (f)   Drains in areas where floor mats are washed;
         (g)   Any other fixtures or drains that have a reasonable potential to
allow fats, oils and grease to be discharged to the POTW.
      (2)   Users with food waste disposal units shall connect the unit to a
grease interceptor with a minimum capacity of 1,000 gallons or remove the unit.
      (3)   Users with dishwashers and mop sinks shall connect them directly to
the POTW or to a grease interceptor with a minimum capacity of 750 gallons.
      (4)   Accumulated grease and sediment shall be removed as necessary to
prevent lateral or sanitary sewer overflows. At a minimum, single-chamber
grease interceptors shall be cleaned in accordance with the manufacturer’s
specifications, or when the combined depth of sediment and grease equals or
exceeds 25% of the total depth of the sediment, water, and grease. Multiple-
chamber grease interceptors shall be cleaned in accordance with the
manufacturer’s specifications, or when the combined depth of sediment and
grease in the final chamber equals or exceeds 25% of the total depth of the
sediment, water, and grease in that chamber.
      (5)   Grease interceptors shall be kept free of non-food waste including,
but not limited to grit, rocks, gravel, eating utensils, cigarettes, trash,
towels, and rags.
      (6)   The addition of chemicals, enzymes, emulsifiers, live bacteria or
other grease cutters or additives used for purposes of grease reduction in the
grease interceptor is prohibited.
      (7)   If the City Manager determines that a grease interceptor is not
being adequately maintained, a correction notice may be issued requiring the
deficiency be corrected within seven, 14, or 30 days. Maintenance programs,
including BMPs and defined cleaning frequencies, may be mandated. Users that
fail to adhere to a maintenance program may be required to install additional
pretreatment devices.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.302) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.037 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   The City Manager may require any industrial user to develop and implement an
accidental discharge/slug control plan. At least once every two years the City
Manager shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a
plan. Any industrial user required to develop and implement an accidental
discharge/slug control plan shall submit a plan which provides, at a minimum,
the following:
   (A)   Description of discharge practices including nonroutine batch
discharges.
   (B)   Description of stored chemicals.
   (C)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge and written follow-up notification of such discharge within five
days of the discharge event. Such notification must also be given for any
discharge which would violate any of the prohibited discharges in §
50.020 of this chapter.
   (D)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
   (E)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes affecting
the potential for a slug discharge.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.303) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.038 TENANT RESPONSIBILITY.
   Where an owner of property lets premises to any other person as a tenant, if
either the owner or the tenant is an industrial user, either or both may be
held responsible for compliance with the provisions of this chapter. This
provision is enforceable against either the owner or the tenant or both,
without regard to any contractual arrangements as between the owner and tenant.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.304) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.039 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste of residential origin may be accepted into the POTW
at a designated receiving structure within the treatment plant area, and at
such times as are established by the City Manager, provided such wastes do not
violate the provisions of this chapter or any other requirements established or
adopted by the city. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to
use such facilities shall be issued by and at the discretion of, the City
Manager, based on the interests and purposes to be served under this chapter.
   (B)   The discharge of hauled industrial wastes is prohibited without prior
approval and a wastewater discharge permit from the city.
   (C)   Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the industrial
user fee system as authorized in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.305) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.040 GREASE HAULER PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Any person collecting, pumping or hauling waste kitchen grease generated at
businesses located within the city shall apply for and obtain a grease hauler
permit from the city before engaging in that activity. The City Manager shall
approve, deny, or approve with special conditions all applications for grease
hauler permit. It shall be unlawful for any grease hauler to operate within the
City limits without a current grease hauler permit.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11) Penalty, see
§
50.999
§ 50.041 GREASE HAULER PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Contents. All grease haulers required to have a grease hauler permit
must submit a completed permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate
applications will not be processed and will be returned to the grease hauler
for revision.
   (B)   Application signatories and certification. All grease hauler permit
applications and grease hauler reports must contain the certification
statement, described in §
50.052(B), and be signed by an authorized representative of the grease hauler.
   (C)   The City Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the grease hauler
and may require additional information. Within 45 days of receipt of a complete
grease hauler permit application, the City Manager will determine whether or
not to issue a grease hauler permit. If no determination is made within this
time period, the application will be deemed denied. The City Manager may deny
any application for a grease hauler permit based on insufficient information or
information indicating a risk to the city's POTW might result from the activity
as proposed.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.042 GREASE HAULER PERMIT REISSUANCE.
   (A)   Grease hauler permits shall be valid for a period of two years and
will expire two years from the date of issuance.
   (B)   A grease hauler shall apply for permit renewal by submitting a
complete grease hauler permit application in accordance with §
50.040 a minimum of 45 days prior to the expiration of the grease waste
hauler’s existing grease hauler permit.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.043 GREASE HAULER PERMIT CONTENTS.
   Grease hauler permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed
necessary by the City Manager to ensure that the collection of waste kitchen
grease within the City limits is being conducted in accordance with applicable
federal, state and local laws. At a minimum, the grease hauler permits shall
contain the following conditions:
   (A)   A statement that indicates grease hauler permit issuance and
expiration date.
   (B)   Reporting, notification and record keeping requirements.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.044 GREASE HAULER PERMIT APPEALS.
   Any grease hauler may petition the city to reconsider the terms of or the
denial of a grease hauler permit within ten days of its denial or issuance
subject to the following conditions:
   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the grease hauler
permit provisions objected to, the reason for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the grease hauler permit.
   (C)   The effectiveness of the grease hauler permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal process.
   (D)   If the City fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied.
   (E)   If the ruling made by the City Manager is unsatisfactory to the person
requesting reconsideration, they may, within ten days after notification of
such city action, file a written appeal to the City Council. The written appeal
shall be heard by the Council within 30 days after the date of filing. The City
Council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten days after the close
of the hearing on the appeal.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.045 GREASE HAULER PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The City Manager may modify any grease hauler permit at any time,
based on good cause, which shall include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   For a violation of any terms or conditions of the grease hauler
permit;
      (3)   For misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the grease hauler permit application or in any required reporting;
      (4)   To correct typographical or other errors in the grease hauler
permit.
   (B)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a grease hauler permit
modification does not stay any grease hauler permit condition.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.046 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Grease hauler permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
      (1)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the grease hauler permit application;
      (2)   Falsifying reports;
      (3)   Failure to pay fines;
      (4)   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (5)   Failure to complete a grease hauler survey or the grease hauler
permit application;
      (6)   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
      (7)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms
of the grease hauler permit or this chapter.
   (B)   Grease hauler permits are nontransferable, and shall be voidable upon
nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All grease
hauler permits are void upon the issuance of a new grease hauler permit.
(Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT
§ 50.050 WASTEWATER SURVEY.
   When requested by the City Manager, all industrial users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing
a wastewater survey prior to commencing their discharge. The City Manager is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
industrial users to update the survey. Failure to complete this survey shall be
reasonable grounds for terminating service to the industrial user and shall be
considered a violation of this chapter, or for imposing penalties as set out in
§
50.999.
('63 Code, § 5-5.401) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.051 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirement.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any significant industrial user to
discharge wastewater into the city's POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the City Manager. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the enforcement
actions set out in this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does
not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state
pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of
federal, state, and local law.
      (2)   The City Manager may require other industrial users, including
liquid waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to
carry out the purposes of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.402)
   (B)   Existing connections. Any significant industrial user which discharges
industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of this chapter and
who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 45 days
after said date, apply to the city for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with §
50.052(A) of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW
to continue after 90 days of the effective date of this chapter except in
accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the city.
('63 Code, § 5-5.403)
   (C)   New connections. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or
recommence discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater
discharge permit prior to discharging. An application for this wastewater
discharge permit must be filed at least 45 days prior to the date upon which
any discharge will begin.
('63 Code, § 5-5.404)
   (D)   Extrajurisdictional industrial users. The city may enter into an
agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the significant industrial
user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of
pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user.
('63 Code, § 5-5.405)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.052 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Contents. All industrial users required to have a wastewater discharge
permit must submit a completed wastewater discharge permit application. The
City Manager shall approve a form to be used as a permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the industrial user for revision.
('63 Code, § 5-5.406)
   (B)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and industrial user reports must contain the following
certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the
industrial user.
   I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.
   (C)   Misleading, incomplete or false information. Any application submitted
with information that is at any time determined to be materially misleading,
incomplete or false may result in termination of the permit, disconnection of
service, penalties under this chapter, as well as any other remedies provided
by law.
('63 Code, § 5-5.407)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-
C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.053 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS.
   The City Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and
may require additional information. Within 45 days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the City Manager will determine
whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is
made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The City
Manager may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit.
('63 Code, § 5-5.408) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 7-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.054 DURATION OF PERMIT; REISSUANCE.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years, at the discretion of the City Manager. Each
wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will
expire.
('63 Code, § 5-5.501)
   (B)   A significant industrial user shall apply for wastewater discharge
permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit
application in accordance with §
50.051(A) of this chapter a minimum of 45 days prior to the expiration of the
industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit.
('63 Code, § 5-5.507)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.055 PERMIT CONTENTS.
   Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably
deemed necessary by the City Manager to prevent pass through or interference,
protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent,
protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal,
protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits shall contain the following conditions:
      (1)   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five years.
      (2)   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification and approval from the city, and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater
discharge permit.
      (3)   Effluent limits including best management practices applicable to
the user based on applicable standards in federal, state, and local law.
      (4)   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state, or local law.
      (5)   Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative
penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for
compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law.
      (6)   Requirements to control slug discharges, if determined by the POTW
to be necessary.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to
the following:
      (1)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
      (2)   Limits on instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or maximum
concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or
properties.
      (3)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the
treatment works.
      (4)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges.
      (5)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
      (6)   The unit charge or schedule of industrial user charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
      (7)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
      (8)   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all
applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which
become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit.
      (9)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the City Manager to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
('63 Code, § 5-5.502) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.056 APPEALS.
   Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the city to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ten days of its
issuance.
   (A)   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   (B)   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reason for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
   (C)   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal process.
   (D)   If the city fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration
shall be deemed to be denied.
   (E)   If the ruling made by the City Manager is unsatisfactory to the person
requesting reconsideration, they may, within ten days after notification of
such city action, file a written appeal to the Council. The written appeal
shall be heard by the Council within 30 days after the date of filing. The
Council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within ten days after the close
of the meeting.
('63 Code, § 5-5.503) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.057 PERMIT MODIFICATION.
   (A)   The City Manager may modify the wastewater discharge permit with good
cause including, but limited to, the following:
      (1)   To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      (2)   To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial
user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time
of wastewater discharge permit issuance;
      (3)   To address change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      (4)   To address information indicating that permitted discharge poses a
threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters;
      (5)   For a violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater
discharge permit;
      (6)   For misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant
facts in the wastewater discharge permit application nor in any required
reporting;
      (7)   To address revision of or a grant of variance from categorical
pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      (8)   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater
discharge permit;
      (9)   To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to
a new owner/operator.
   (B)   The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge
permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
('63 Code, § 5-5.504) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.058 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new
owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance
notice to the City Manager and the City Manager approves in writing to the
wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the City Manager must
include a written certification by the new owner and/or operator which:
      (1)   States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent
to change the facility’s operations and processes.
      (2)   Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
      (3)   Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
   (B)   Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.505) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.059 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge;
      (2)   Failure to provide notification to the city of changed condition
pursuant to §
50.074 of this chapter;
      (3)   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application;
      (4)   Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
      (5)   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
      (6)   Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises
and records;
      (7)   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
      (8)   Failure to pay fines;
      (9)   Failure to pay sewer charges;
      (10)    Failure to meet compliance schedules;
      (11)    Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater
discharge permit application;
      (12)    Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted
facility;
      (13)   Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any
terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter.
   (B)   Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation
of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge
permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.506) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 50.070 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determined under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant
industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and
currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be
required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed
in division (B) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
their discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be
required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed
in division (B) of this section. A new source shall also be required to report
the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and
quantity of pollutants discharged.
   (B)   The industrial user shall submit the information required by this
section including:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility
including the name of the operator and owners.
      (2)   Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control
wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should
include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the
POTW from the regulated processes.
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to
each regulated process.
         (b)   Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the
city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations (or mass,
where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operation and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
50.080 of this chapter. In cases where compliance with a best management
practice or pollution prevention alternative is required, the user shall submit
documentation as required by the City Manager.
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
50.079(A) of this chapter.
      (6)   Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's
authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirement.
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the
industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule
pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out §
50.052(A)(14) of this chapter.
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
50.052(B) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.601) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.071 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORT.
   The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by §
50.070 of this chapter. The schedule shall contain progress increments in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include hiring an
engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, beginning and conducting
routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the City Manager no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance. The report shall include at a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, (and, if appropriate)
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established
schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the City Manager.
('63 Code, § 5-5.602) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.072 REPORT ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the city a report containing the information described in §
50.070(B)(4) - (6) of this chapter. For industrial users subject to equivalent
mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in
40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
industrial user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users
subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation),
this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
50.052(B) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-5.603) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.073 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard
shall, at a frequency determined by the City Manager, but at least once every
six months, submit a report indicating the nature, concentration, and flow of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standards.
In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best
management practice (BMP) or pollution preventative alternative, the user must
submit documentation required by the City Manager or the pretreatment standard
necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. All periodic
compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
50.052(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in
good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that
sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (C)   If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of
this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW,
using the procedure prescribed in §
50.079(A) of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.604) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.074 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each industrial user is required to notify the City Manager of any planned
significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which might
alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least 45 days before
the change.
   (A)   The City Manager may require the industrial user to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application.
   (B)   No industrial user shall implement the planned changed conditions
until and unless the City Manager has responded to the industrial user's
notice.
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, flow increases or decreases of 10%
or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants, or other
changes in waste character or composition shall be deemed significant.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.605) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.075 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental
discharge of nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a
slug load which may cause potential problems for the POTW (including a
violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this chapter), it is the
responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the
city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
action taken by the industrial user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall,
unless waived by the City Manager, submit a detailed written report describing
the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user
to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other
damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the
industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to notify the city of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this chapter.
   (D)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) of this section. Employers shall ensure
that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
   (E)   Significant industrial users are required to notify the City Manager
immediately of any changes that would affect the users’ potential for a slug
discharge.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.606) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.076 REPORTS FROM NONSIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS.
   All industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards and
not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate
reports to the city as the City Manager may require.
('63 Code, § 5-5.607) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.077 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the
industrial user must notify the Control Authority within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the Control Authority
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is
not required to resample if the POTW performs monitoring at the industrial
user's at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling between the
industrial user's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the
results of this sampling.
('63 Code, § 5-5.608) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.078 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste
shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of
a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under
40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the names of the hazardous
waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user
discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the
POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the
extent information is known and readily available to the industrial users an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be
discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no
later than 30 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
division (A) need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under §
50.074 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of
§§
50.070,
50.072 and
50.073 of this chapter.
   (B)   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (C)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the
volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has
determined to be economically practical.
   (D)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
('63 Code, § 5-5.609) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.079 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40
CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by the EPA.
('63 Code, § 5-5.610) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.080 SAMPLE COLLECTION; DETERMINATION OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Sample collection.
      (1)   Except as indicated in division (A)(2), the industrial user must
collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling
techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is
authorized by the City Manager. Where time-proportional composite sampling or
grab sampling is authorized by the city, the samples must be representative of
the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified
in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples
collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited
in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease,
the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in approved
EPA methodologies may be authorized by the city, as appropriate. In addition,
grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits.
      (2)   Sample for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
toxicity, sulfides, and volatile organic chemicals must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
('63 Code, § 5-5.611)
      (3)   For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in §§
50.070 and
50.071 a minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities
for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which
historical sampling data are available, the City Manager may authorize a lower
minimum. For the reports required by §
50.073, the industrial user is required to collect the number of grab samples
necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements.
   (B)   Determination of noncompliance. The City Manager may use a grab
samples to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards. ('63 Code, § 5-
5.612)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-
C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.081 RECORD KEEPING.
   Industrial users shall retain, and make available for inspection and
copying, all records and information required to be retained under this
chapter, including documentation associated with best management practices.
These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This
period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation
concerning compliance with this chapter, or where the industrial user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the City Manager.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.613) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
CONNECTIONS TO POTW
§ 50.090 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into,
use, alter, or disturb any portion of the POTW or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a permit from the Building Official in accordance with the
provisions of the California Plumbing Code adopted by § 150.020.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1601)
   (B)   All excavations for building sewers in public streets and easements
shall require a permit from the city pursuant to the provisions of §§
98.15 -
98.20 of this code, in addition to the permit required by the provisions of
this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1602)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
Penalty, see § 50.999
§ 50.091 IMPACT FEES AND INSTALLATION CHARGES.
   (A)   Impact fees. Any person, prior to connecting a building sewer to the
POTW, shall be required to pay an impact fee in addition to any other charges
and fees required by the provisions of the Uniform Plumbing Code and this
chapter. The amount of the impact fee shall be determined using industry
standard rate-setting methodologies and adopted by resolution of the City
Council.
   (B)   Installation charge.
      (1)   Installations of building sewers shall be made by the city from the
sewer main to the property line by appropriate methods at the expense of the
applicant.
      (2)   An applicant for a new sewer installation shall advance a sum to
the city based upon a schedule of fees and charges adopted by the City Council
and amended from time to time to reflect changes in labor rates and material
costs.
      (3)   In lieu of the installation charge required by the provisions of
this section, the City Manager may require applicants for new sewer
installation to make such sewer installation at their own expense in accordance
with such standards as have been or may be adopted by resolution of the
Council. In such instances, all labor, materials, equipment, and other items
necessary for the installation shall be furnished by the applicant.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1603) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.092 MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING SEWERS.
   (A)   The customer shall maintain in good condition, and shall be
responsible, regardless of the cause, for all required repairs to the building
sewer line and all other sewer pipe(s) and appurtenances, including the "Y"
cleanout and its connections and the sewer lateral including that portion of
the lateral that lies within the public right-of-way. Customer shall comply
with all requirements under this code prior to excavating anywhere within the
pubic right-of-way for the purpose of maintaining and/or repairing the
customer's private sewer line.
   (B)   If the customer's private sewer line is equipped with a "Y" cleanout
that is visible and accessible to department personnel, and the department is
notified of a blocked or faulty sewer line serving the customer's premises,
department personnel may, but shall not be required to: (1) inspect the portion
of customer's private sewer line between the sewer point of service and the
city sewer main, and (2) unblock and/or repair this portion of customer's
private sewer line, if it is blocked or in disrepair. The department's action
or failure to act pursuant to this subsection (B) shall not reduce or otherwise
affect in any way the customer's obligations and responsibility under
subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   The customer shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless city, its
officers and employees from and against any and all claims, actions, costs
(including attorney fees), damages or other liability arising from the
condition, operation, maintenance or repair of any sewer line, pipe or
appurtenance that the customer is required to maintain and repair hereunder,
except for liabilities resulting solely from the department's negligent repair
of the customer's private sewer line.
   (D)   Whenever a sewer lateral is replaced at a different location, deemed
unnecessary or otherwise abandoned, the lateral shall be capped at the wye
using a method approved by the City Engineer prior to final approval.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1604) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed
2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19;
Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.093 MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Extensions required.
      (1)   An applicant for a permit to connect a premises to the POTW where
the property upon which such premises is situated does not abut the POTW, shall
deposit with the city the following sums: in the case of all applications for a
new sewer main extension, a sum shall be advanced to the city based upon an
estimate by the City Manager of the total costs of all labor, materials,
equipment, and other costs incidental to the main extension, plus 20% for
general overhead, but excluding the cost of oversizing sewer mains for the
general benefit of the sewer collection system, but in no event shall the
charge be less than $500.
      (2)   In lieu of the advance required by the provisions of this division
(A), the City Manager may require applicants for new sewer connections to make
such sewer connections at their own expense in accordance with such standards
as have been or may be adopted by resolution of the Council. In such instances,
all labor, materials, equipment, and other items necessary for such connections
shall be furnished by the applicants.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1701)
      (3)   In cases where a property is connected to the POTW indirectly via
connection to another property's lateral ("cross-connected sewer lateral"), the
City Manager may order the owner of the property to go through the process set
out in division (A)(1) above and complete the installation of a separate
connection. This process shall be required when, in the professional opinion of
the City Manager and his public works professionals, a modern direct connection
is necessary to prevent backups, overflows, update decayed or vulnerable
lateral lines, or presents any other threat to the health and safety of the
immediately adjacent properties, neighborhood, or POTW.
   (B)   Extensions by the applicant. In lieu of the advances required by the
provisions of division (A) of this section, the City Manager may require
applicants for new sewer connections to make such sewer main extensions at
their own expense in accordance with such standards as have been or may be
adopted by resolution of the Council. In such instances, all labor, materials,
equipment, and other items necessary for the extension shall be furnished by
the applicant. Any extra costs incurred by the applicant in any oversizing of
sewer mains required by the City Manager for the general benefit of the sewer
collection system may be reimbursed by the city in accordance with a written
agreement with the applicant entered into prior to the construction of such
main extension.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1702)
   (C)   Low-pressure sewer manifold agreements. The Director of Public Works,
where it is determined the installation of low-pressure sewer manifold system
is necessary to provide sewer service to a specific area, shall establish a
reimbursement agreement to provide for the design and installation of said
system. The reimbursement agreement shall require a surcharge be assessed to
each parcel connecting to the manifold system. The surcharge shall consist of
an equal portion of the estimated costs to design and install the total system
main extension. The surcharge shall be based on a review and agreement prepared
by the Director of Public Works prior to the installation of the system.
Services (laterals) off the main will be at each parcel owner's expense.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1703)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-
C.S., passed 12-20-11)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.105 WASTEWATER VOLUME DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Metered water supply. User charges which are based on wastewater
volumes shall be applied against the total amount of water used from all
sources unless, in the opinion of the city, significant portions of water
received are not discharged to the POTW. The total amount of water used from
public and private sources shall be determined by means of public meters or
private meters installed and maintained at the expense of the user and approved
by the city.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1401)
   (B)   Metered wastewater volume and metered diversions. For users where, in
the opinion of the city, a significant portion of the water received from any
metered source does not discharge to the POTW because of the principal activity
of the user or removal by other means, the user charges and fees may be applied
against the volume of water discharged from such premises into the POTW.
Written notification and proof of the diversion of water shall be provided by
the user if the user is to avoid the application of the user charges and fees
against the total amount of water used from all sources. The user may install a
meter of a type and at a location approved by the city and at the user’s
expense. Such meters may measure either the amount of sewage discharged or the
amount of water diverted. Such meters shall be capable being read by the city’s
meter reading equipment and shall be tested for accuracy at the expense of the
user when deemed necessary by the city. (‘63 Code, § 5-5.1402)
   (C)   Estimated wastewater volume.
      (1)   For users where, in the opinion of the city, it is unnecessary or
impractical to install meters, the user charges and fees may be based upon a
volume estimate prepared by the user and approved by the city. Such estimate
shall be based upon a rational determination of the wastewater discharged and
may consider such factors as the number of fixtures, seating capacity,
population equivalent, annual production of goods and services, or such other
determinants of water use necessary to estimate the wastewater volume
discharged.
      (2)   The city may require estimates of diverted volume to be re-verified
as needed to ensure the accuracy of billing. Reverification may be required due
to changes in the type or number of users, processes, equipment, operating
hours, number of fixtures or other changes likely to affect wastewater volumes.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1403) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.106 PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES.
   The Council may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of costs
of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include:
   (A)   Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost
of processing such applications.
   (B)   Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including
the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge, and
reviewing monitoring reports submitted by the users.
   (C)   Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures
and construction.
   (D)   Fees for filing appeals.
   (E)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained in this section. These fees relate solely to the matters
covered by this chapter and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the city.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1501) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.107 WASTEWATER USER CHARGES.
   (A)   Classification of users. All users shall be classified by assigning
each one to a “user classification” category according to the principal
activity conducted on the user's premises and based on the typical wastewater
constituents and characteristics for that type of user as determined by the
city. The purpose of such classification is to facilitate the regulation of
wastewater discharges based on wastewater constituents and characteristics to
provide an effective means of source control and to establish recovery of the
city costs.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1801)
   (B)   User charges. A schedule of wastewater charges and fees shall be
adopted from time to time by ordinance of the City Council.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1802)
   (C)   Compliance with state regulations. The charges and fees shall be
established at a level which will enable the city to comply with any revenue
requirements of the State Clean Water Grant Program, and the charges and fees
shall be determined in a manner consistent with regulations of the grant
program.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1803)
   (D)   Special situations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the Council shall have the power to establish by ordinance, or by
agreement with the user, the service connection charge and the monthly sewer
service charges applicable to any public corporation, political subdivision,
city, county, district, the state, the United States, or any department or
agency thereof, or to any user outside the city limits at rates different from
those set forth in this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1804)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 743-C.S. passed 9-1-09; Am. Ord. 775-
C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.108 BILLING; PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Billing.
      (1)   All sewer service charges shall become due and payable to the city
as of the date of billing. All sewer service charges shall become delinquent 28
days from and after the date of billing. All bills delinquent 28 days or more
shall be subject to a 1.5% per month finance charge.
      (2)   All bills for such charges shall be issued by the Director of
Finance. They shall be combined with bills or statements for water services
where the premises in question are connected to the water system. The bills
shall state their purpose (water and sewer services) and shall list separately
the charge for water service and the charge for sewer service and the total
charge for both services. Neither charge may be paid separately from the other.
If the real property with sewer service is not connected to the water system, a
separate bill shall be rendered for sewer service only. All bills shall be for
monthly or bimonthly periods. The Director of Finance shall have the power to
require any user to pay bills monthly if, in his discretion, monthly payments
are required for the protection of the city.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1805)
   (B)   Persons responsible for payment. All sewer service charges shall be
billed to the following persons:
      (1)   In the case of any person whose premises are connected with the
water system, to the person who requested such connection to the water system,
or his successor in interest, or to any person requesting that such bill be
charged to him; or,
      (2)   In the case of any person whose premises are not connected to the
water system, then to the person who requested such connection to the sewage
works, or his successor in interest, or, if no such request was made, then to
the owner of such premises on the date on which such premises are required by
the provisions of this chapter to connect to the sewage works, or to the
successor in interest to such person, or to any person requesting that such
bill be charged to him.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1806)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord.
892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.109 PENALTY FOR NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   Penalties for nonpayment shall be the same as those imposed for
delinquent water bills as described in
Chapter 53 of this code.
   (B)   The city may seek to recover delinquent charges through any and all
legal means including the use of private collection services, placement of
liens or assessments against the property, or use of the State of California
Franchise Tax Board.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1807) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.120 DUTIES OF CITY MANAGER.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the City Manager shall
administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the City Manager may be delegated by the City
Manager to other city personnel.
('63 Code, § 5-5.102) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.121 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Inspection and sampling. The City Manager shall have the right to
enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of
this chapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and
whether the industrial user is complying with all requirements thereof.
Industrial users shall allow the City Manager or his representatives ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties.
      (1)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force which
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
industrial user shall make necessary arrangement with its security guards so
that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel for the city,
state, and EPA shall be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities.
      (2)   The city, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the
industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations.
      (3)   The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall
be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the
industrial user at its own expense. The monitoring equipment should normally be
situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that the
facility will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. All devices
used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated yearly to
ensure their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the City
Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be
born by the industrial user.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to the
industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
      (6)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's
requirements and all applicable local agency construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city, unless a time extension is otherwise granted
by the city.
('63 Code, § 5-5.701)
   (B)   Search warrants. If the City Manager has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property or any part thereof, and if the City Manager
has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of
this chapter or that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection
program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any
permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health,
safety, and welfare of the community, then the City Attorney may apply to the
appropriate court for a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the
specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if
anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. In the event
of an emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made
without the issuance of a warrant.
('63 Code, § 5-5.702)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.122 PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in
the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the significant
industrial users and categorical industrial users which, during the previous 12
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:
   (A)   CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITS, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(l);
   (B)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as
defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for
BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);
   (C)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous
limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
   (D)   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its
emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   (E)   Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance
schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement
order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final
compliance;
   (F)   Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required
reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports,
periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance
schedules;
   (G)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
   (H)   Any other violation which the city determines will adversely affect
the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.
('63 Code, § 5-5.901) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 681-C.S., passed
7-6-04; Am. Ord. 737-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.123 ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the City Manager finds that any
person has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit
or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the City
Manager or his agent may serve upon said person a written notice of violation.
Within seven days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the
violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to
include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the person to the City
Manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the person of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any
action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The City Manager may enter into consent orders,
assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any person responsible for noncompliance. Such documents shall include
specific action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a
time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force
and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to §
50.123(D) and (E) and shall be judicially enforceable.
   (C)   Show cause hearing. The City Manager may order a person which has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the City Manager and
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice
shall be served on the person, specifying the time and place for the meeting,
the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request
that the person show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least seven days prior to the
hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the
person as defined in §
50.002 and required by §
50.052(B). A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite
for, taking any other action against the person.
   (D)   Compliance orders. When the city finds that a person has violated or
continues to violate this chapter, wastewater discharge permits or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue an
order to the person responsible for the discharge directing that the person
come into compliance within 30 days. If the person does not come into
compliance within 30 days, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and
properly operated. Compliance orders may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order release the person of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a
prerequisite to taking any other action against the person.
   (E)   Cease and desist orders.
      (1)   When the City Manager finds that a person is violating this
chapter, the person’s wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder,
or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the person’s past
violations are likely to recur, the City Manager may issue an order to the
person directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the
person to:
         (a)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
         (b)   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
      (2)   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to
taking any other action against the person.
   (F)   Administrative citation.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, any person that
is found to have violated any provision of this chapter, its wastewater
discharge permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement may be issued an administrative citation and fine in
accordance with
Chapter 10 of this code.
      (2)   Fine amounts shall be consistent with a schedule of fines and fees
as adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of the City Council.
      (3)   Fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the
case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines may be
assessed for each day during the period of violation.
      (4)   Appeals of administrative citations shall follow the process
proscribed in
Chapter 10 of this code.
      (5)   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against the person.
   (G)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The City Manager may immediately suspend a person’s discharge
(after informal notice to the person) whenever such suspension is necessary in
order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to
present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons. The City Manager may also immediately suspend a person’s
discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
         (a)   Any person notified of a suspension of its discharge shall
immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a person’s
failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City
Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW,
its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The City Manager
shall allow the person to recommence its discharge when the person has
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment
has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in this chapter are
initiated against the person.
         (b)   A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written
statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence to the City Manager, prior to the date
of any show cause or termination hearing as set forth in this chapter.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (G) shall be interpreted as requiring a
hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.
   (H)   Termination of discharge.
      (1)   In addition to those provisions in §
50.059, any person that violates the following conditions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to
discharge termination.
         (a)   Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
         (b)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
         (c)   Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge;
         (d)   Refusal of reasonable access to the person’s premises for the
purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling;
         (e)   Violation of the pretreatment standards in §§
50.020 through
50.025.
      (2)   Such person will be notified of the proposed termination of its
discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under division (C) of
this section why the proposed action should not be taken.
(‘63 Code, §§ 5-5.1001 - 5-5.1006) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 737-
C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord. 892-C.S.,
passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.124 JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. Whenever the person has violated a pretreatment
standard or requirement or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter,
wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the city may petition the Superior Court for the
issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as may be appropriate in
restraining the continuance of such violation.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1101)
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person which has violated or continues to violate this chapter,
any order, or wastewater discharge permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a minimum civil penalty
of $1,000 per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term
average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period
of the violation.
      (2)   The city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and
other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and
monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city.
      (3)   When a discharge of wastes causes an obstruction, damage, or other
impairment to the POTW, the city may assess a charge against the person for the
cost of the work required to clean or repair the POTW and add such charge to
the person’s service charge.
      (4)   Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for
taking any other action against a person.
   (C)   Criminal penalties.
      (1)   Any person that willfully or negligently violates any provision of
this chapter, any orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or
any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of at least $1,000 per violation per day or
imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
      (2)   Any person that willfully or negligently introduces any substance
into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a penalty of at least
$1,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year. This
penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury
or property damage available under state law.
      (3)   Any person that knowingly makes any false statements,
representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or
other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this
chapter, wastewater discharge permit or order, or who falsifies, tampers with,
or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under
this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of at least $1,000
per violation per day or imprisonment for not more than one year or both.
      (4)   In the event of a second conviction, a person shall be punished by
a fine of not more than $2,000 per violation per day or imprisonment for not
more than two years or both.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1102)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11; Am. Ord.
892-C.S., passed 12-17-19)
§ 50.125 SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION.
   (A)   Water supply severance. Whenever a person has violated or continues to
violate the provisions of this chapter, orders, or wastewater discharge permits
issued in this chapter, water service to the person may be severed. Service
will only recommence, at the person’s expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1201)
   (B)   Public nuisances. Any violation of this chapter, wastewater discharge
permits, or orders issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the City Manager or his designee.
Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of
applicable state and city codes, ordinances, rules and/or regulations governing
such nuisances, including recoupment by the city of any costs incurred in
removing, abating or remedying said nuisance.
(‘63 Code, § 5-5.1202)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
§ 50.126 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions in §§
50.122 through
50.125 of this chapter are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right
to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right
to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further,
the city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1104) (Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed
12-20-11)
§ 50.127 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset.
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, UPSET means an exceptional
incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable
control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the
extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or
improper operation.
      (2)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of subsection (3) of this division (A) are met.
      (3)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense
of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause
(s) of the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures;
         (c)   The industrial user has submitted the following information to
the POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be
provided within five days):
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance.
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue.
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (4)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (5)   Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
      (6)   The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment
standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
('63 Code, § 5-5.1301)
   (B)   Bypass.
      (1)   (a)    BYPASS shall mean the intentional diversion of wastestreams
from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility.
         (b)    SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE shall mean substantial physical damage
to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (2)   An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not
cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it
also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses
are not subject to the provision of subsections (3) and (4) of this division
(B).
      (3)   (a)    If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a
bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass if possible.
         (b)   An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware
of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass
and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected
to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-
case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
      (4)   (a)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take enforcement
action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless:
            1.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal
injury, or severe property damage;
            2.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and,
            3.   The industrial user submitted notices as required under
subsection (3) of this division (B).
         (b)   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in subsection (4)(a) of division (B).
('63 Code, § 5-5.1302)
(Ord. 571-C.S., passed 6-2-94; Am. Ord. 775-C.S., passed 12-20-11)
PRIVATE SEWER LATERAL INSPECTION
§ 50.201 PURPOSE.
   This chapter sets forth the methods by which the city may require inspection
and repair of private sewer laterals (both upper and lower). The city finds
that many sewer service laterals in Eureka are old and deteriorated and, as a
result, subject to failure as well as inflow and infiltration (I & I) from
groundwater and stormwater runoff. Eliminating inflow and infiltration from
Building Sewers is required by § 50.020 of this code and is necessary to ensure
effective and efficient operation of the POTW and to comply with the terms and
conditions of the city's current wastewater discharge permit.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.202 TRIGGERING EVENTS.
   All gravity sewer laterals, including all pipes and appurtenances from the
building envelope to the public main, shall be inspected and repaired/replaced
at the property owner's expense, when any of the following triggering events
occurs unless the property owner presents satisfactory proof to the city that
the sewer lateral including clean-out is less than 25 years old and has been
inspected pursuant to a city-issued permit:
   (A)   Whenever any real property located within the city is to be sold,
transferred or vested in any other person or entity.
   (B)   Application for building and/or plumbing permits with an aggregate
valuation that exceeds $50,000 or which involves the addition of two or more
additional plumbing fixture units (PFU) within any three-year period.
   (C)   Any change of use which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, has the
potential to increase the amount or strength of sewer effluent such as:
      (1)   A change from any use to a restaurant.
      (2)   A change from any lower intensity use to residential.
      (3)   A change from residential to commercial or industrial use.
   (D)   The parcel served by an existing sewer lateral is being subdivided.
   (E)   The sewer lateral has been plugged or backed up on more than one
occasion within a three-year period.
   (F)   Upon repair or replacement of any portion of the sewer lateral.
   (G)   The city is proposing to repair or replace the sewer main serving the
property.
   (H)   Any other instance where, in the opinion of the City Engineer,
cleaning and inspection of the sewer lateral is necessary to protect public
health and safety.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.203 INSPECTION METHODS.
   (A)   All sewer laterals to be inspected shall first be thoroughly dewatered
and cleaned so that the type and condition of the pipe can be determined by
visual inspection.
   (B)   All building sewers and sewer clean-outs subject to inspection under
this subchapter, must be inspected using closed circuit television (CCTV)
performed by a qualified licensed plumbing contractor or utility evaluation
service approved by the city. Footage which does not comply with the following
standards will not be accepted:
      (1)   Video shall be provided in electronic format and submitted by
uploading as required by the city.
      (2)   Camera footage shall be taken from the building sewer cleanout to
the public sewer main.
      (3)   Video footage shall include the running distance from the point of
origin.
      (4)   Whenever possible, the sewer shall be free of debris or flows which
obstruct visibility.
      (5)   The camera shall be fed at a rate that allows a technician to make
observations of pipe condition. Footage shall pause at junctions and obvious
defects including pipe offsets, cracks, obstructions and areas of infiltration.
   (C)   Footage shall be accompanied by a written report of pipe materials,
transitions, junctions, defects, pipe terminations and a description of the
point of entry. The report shall contain the approximate location in linear
feet from point of origin for listed observations.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.204 REVIEW OF INSPECTION RESULTS, STANDARDS.
   City staff will review inspection results in accordance with the city
standards and policies and generally accepted industry standards to determine
any structural deficiencies revealed by the inspection and notify the property
owner of required repairs or replacement. A sewer lateral shall be considered
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter if inspection verifies all of
the following to the satisfaction of the City Engineer:
   (A)   The sewer lateral is constructed of materials with a remaining design
life of at least 25 years. All vitreous clay pipe (VCP) is considered to be at
the end of its design life.
   (B)   The sewer lateral is free of roots, deposits of grease, and other
solids that may obstruct flows.
   (C)   There are no illicit, illegal or non-sewer (storm/groundwater)
connections to the sewer lateral.
   (D)   Pipe joints are tight and sound to prevent exfiltration of sewage or
infiltration of groundwater.
   (E)   The sewer lateral is free of structural defects such as cracks,
breaks, offsets, and major sags or grade changes which, in the opinion of the
City Engineer, are likely to impede flow over time.
   (F)   The sewer lateral is equipped with a cleanout at the property line per
city standards.
   (G)   The lateral is not cross connected to neighboring properties.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.205 NOTICE TO REPAIR.
   If, upon review of inspection results, the city determines that the sewer
lateral is not in conformance with the above listed standards, a notice to
repair shall be issued. The notice shall include a listing of defects observed
and a time frame for repair and shall conform with the requirements for service
of administration citations under Chapter 10 of this code.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.206 TIMING AND COMPLETION OF WORK.
   If any part of a sewer lateral fails any inspection, it shall be repaired or
replaced as necessary and brought into compliance with this code and all other
applicable local and state standards and codes. Timing of work shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Regardless of the triggering event, whenever a lower lateral is
determined to need repair or replacement, at the property owner's option they
may furnish to the city a fee in lieu of repairs as detailed below.
   (B)   Whenever any real property located within the city is to be sold,
transferred or vested in any other person or entity and that property contains
any building constructed more than 25 years prior to the date of sale, the
property owner shall have the upper and lower sewer lateral inspected for
infiltration and inflow, unless an exception under this subchapter applies.
      (1)   If a sewer lateral fails any infiltration and inflow inspection, it
shall be repaired or replaced as necessary and brought into compliance with
city standards and codes prior to any transfer of the entire real property
estate or the fee interest in that real property on which the building that is
serviced by the sewer lateral is located, excepting that a fee in lieu may be
paid as detailed below.
      (2)   Upper laterals must be replaced prior to sale.
   (C)   If alterations or additions to the structures on the property are the
triggering event, lateral inspection shall be performed and the owner shall
cause any required repairs to be made prior to the triggering permit receiving
final inspection.
   (D)   Repair or replacement required by any other triggering event shall be
completed within one year following issuance of the notice to repair or as
required by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.207 FEE IN LIEU OF REPAIR, REPAIRS PERFORMED BY THE CITY AND RECOVERY OF
COSTS.
   (A)   At the property owner's option as an alternative to repairing or
replacing the lower sewer lateral, the property owner may furnish to the city a
fee for repair of the lower lateral in an amount as may be adopted by
resolution and updated as necessary based on the estimated cost of such work.
   (B)   This fee shall be paid prior to sale of the property or final approval
of any permit, plan, alteration or commencement of use triggering replacement.
   (C)   Payment of the fee in lieu satisfies the requirement to repair/replace
the lower lateral only and do not apply to repair/replacement of the upper
lateral.
   (D)   If, after being provided notice the sewer lateral repair/replacement
are not completed by the property owner within the required time limits,
including any extensions granted, the city shall complete the required repair/
replacement. The costs of the repair/replacement shall become a lien upon the
property served by the sewer lateral and may be recovered in an action brought
thereof in the name of the city; or, in the alternative, such cost and
expenditure may be placed upon the county tax bill to be collected by for the
benefit of the city.
   (E)   Prior to the city causing the lien to be placed on the county tax
bill, the City Clerk shall notify the property owner of the intent to place the
cost of the repair/replacement on the county tax bill and shall give the
property owner the opportunity to appear before the City Council to show cause
for why such sums should not be placed on the county tax bill to be collected
for the benefit of the city.
   (F)   Any and all sums determined to be due and owing to the city by
resolution of the City Council shall accrue interest at the rate set by
resolution, but not to exceed 10% per year.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.208 LATERAL CERTIFICATE.
   Upon completion of required repairs, or if no repairs or replacement are
required, the property owner shall receive a lateral certificate from the city
stating that the sewer lateral meets the requirements of this subchapter and
does not require re-inspection.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.209 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The City Engineer may waive sewer lateral inspection and/or repair
required under this subchapter upon his/her determination that compliance is
physically infeasible. Economic hardship is not a sufficient basis for waiving
the inspection requirements of this chapter. This subchapter shall not apply
if:
      (1)   The city has issued a lateral certificate or approved installation
or replacement of the sewer lateral at any time during the previous 25 years
and there is no evidence that the lateral is defective or that conditions have
changed;
      (2)   If the inspection and/or installation compliance is physically
impossible.
      (3)   The city determines inspection is unnecessary because sewer piping
is less than ten feet long and existing physical conditions would prevent
infiltration and inflow.
      (4)   The ownership transfer is exempt from tax reassessment as
determined by the Humboldt County Assessor and the transfer is solely between
spouses, registered domestic partners, parent(s) and child(ren), grandparent(s)
and grandchild(ren) or results from the death of a co-tenant.
   (B)   If after inspection the City Engineer determines that it is in the
city's best interest, the repairs required by this subchapter may be postponed
to a date certain. In this event, the City Engineer must put the reasons for
the determination in writing and identify a date certain by which the repair
must be made. The date certain will in no event be more than five years from
the date of the inspection. The written determination will be in the form of an
instrument that will be recorded against the subject property.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22; Am. Ord.
959-C.S., passed 1-21- 25)
§ 50.210 FEES.
   The city may charge fees for lower lateral replacement, inspections,
inspection review, issuing lateral certificates and other activities associated
with the administration of this code and shall adopt and amend such fees by
resolution of the City Council as necessary to ensure recovery of all
associated costs.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.211 FAILURE TO REPAIR OR REPLACE.
   The failure of a property owner to repair or replace a sewer lateral within
the time frames stated in this chapter.
   (A)   Shall be deemed a public nuisance subject to administrative citations
or other remedies in conformance with Chapter 10 of this code.
   (B)   Shall relieve the city, its officers, employees and agents from any
liability, damages, or claims resulting from a sewer backup, regardless of
where the blockage occurs.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 50.212 ASSISTANCE WITH SEWER REPAIR COSTS.
   At the discretion of the city, loans and/or grant funds may be made
available to property owners whose sewer lateral requires repair or replacement
in order to conform with city standards pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 893-C.S., passed 12-17-19; Am. Ord. 939-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Findings, purpose, and authority
   
51.02   Definitions
   
51.03   Mandatory collection service
   
51.04   Curbside recycling collection
   
51.05   Curbside bulky item/goods collection
   
51.06   Curbside organics waste collection
   
51.07   Organics requirements for single-family generators
   
51.08   Requirements for commercial businesses including multi-family
residential dwellings
   
51.09   Collection and disposal of prohibited wastes
   
51.10   Individual waste removal
   
51.11   Littering; unlawful disposal
   
51.12   Organics de minimis waivers for commercial generators
   
51.13   Exclusions
   
51.14   Discontinuing service upon vacancy
   
51.15   Billing for services
   
51.16   Rate deviations
   
51.17   Storage
   
51.18   Containers
   
51.19   Frequency of collection or removal
   
51.20   Delinquent accounts
   
51.21   Right to collect solid waste
   
51.22   Unauthorized collection prohibited
   
51.23   Civil action by franchise collector/hauler
   
51.24   Collection contract
   
51.25   Collection vehicles
   
51.26   Inspections and investigations by city
   
51.27   Enforcement
   
51.28   Requirements for haulers and facility operators
   
51.29   Requirements for commercial edible food generators
   
51.30   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services
   
51.31   Procurement requirements for city departments
§ 51.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND AUTHORITY.
   The City Council of the City of Eureka finds and declares:
   (A)   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 939 of 1989, the California
Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et
seq., as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to time),
requires cities and counties to reduce, reuse, and recycle (including
composting) solid waste generated in their jurisdictions to the maximum extent
feasible before any incineration or landfill disposal of waste, to conserve
water, energy, and other natural resources, and to protect the environment.
   (B)   State recycling law, Assembly Bill 341 of 2011 (approved by the
Governor of the State of California on October 5, 2011, which amended Cal.
Public Resources Code §§ 41730, 41731, 41734, 41735, 41736, 41800, 42926,
44004, and 50001 of, and added §§ 40004, 41734.5, and 41780.01 and Chapter 12.8
(commencing with § 42649) to Part 3 of Division 30 of, and added and repealed §
41780.02, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time),
places requirements on businesses and multi-family property owners that
generate a specified threshold amount of solid waste to arrange for recycling
services and requires jurisdictions to implement a mandatory commercial
recycling program.
   (C)   State organics recycling law, Assembly Bill 1826 of 2014 (approved by
the Governor of the State of California on September 28, 2014, which added Cal.
Public Resources Code Chapter 12.9 (commencing with § 42649.8) to Part 3 of
Division 30 of the Public Resources Code, relating to solid waste, as amended,
supplemented, superseded, and replaced from time to time), requires businesses
and multi-family property owners that generate a specified threshold amount of
solid waste, recycling, and organic waste per week to arrange for recycling
services for that waste, requires jurisdictions to implement a recycling
program to divert organic waste from businesses subject to the law, and
requires jurisdictions to implement a mandatory commercial organics recycling
program.
   (D)   SB 1383, the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires the California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery
("CalRecycle") to develop regulations to reduce organics in landfills as a
source of methane. The regulations place requirements on multiple entities
including jurisdictions, residential households, commercial businesses and
business owners, commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food
recovery organizations, and food recovery services to support achievement of
statewide organic waste disposal reduction targets.
   (E)   SB 1383, the Short-lived Climate Pollutant Reduction Act of 2016,
requires jurisdictions to adopt and enforce an ordinance or enforceable
mechanism to implement relevant provisions of SB 1383 regulations. This chapter
will also help reduce food insecurity by requiring commercial edible food
generators to arrange to have the maximum amount of their edible food, which
would otherwise be disposed, be recovered for human consumption.
   (F)   Requirements in this chapter are consistent with other adopted goals
of the city including the Humboldt Regional Climate Action Plan and the City of
Eureka Zero Waste Action Plan.
   (G)   The city adopts this chapter in order to comply with SB 1383
requirements in a manner that is consistent with and continues to implement the
city's previously adopted programs, policies and goals including the following:
      (1)   Reduce litter and other illegal solid waste disposal practices;
      (2)   Maintain a healthy, safe, economical, coordinated, and orderly
regulation of collecting, transporting, and/or disposing of solid waste kept,
accumulated or produced within the city;
      (3)   Encourage environmentally acceptable programs of source separation,
recycling, composting and salvaging, and the reduction of the total solid waste
generated on a city-wide and per capita basis;
      (4)   Provide for the storage, collection, transportation, diversion and
recovery of marketable and recyclable materials in compliance with state
requirements and the waste reduction and recycling goals set forth therein;
      (5)   Divert waste out of landfills so as to extend landfill life and
reduce the need to expand or build new landfills;
      (6)   Prevent nuisances and hazards to public health caused by improper
solid waste and garbage disposal, accumulation, storage and removal;
      (7)   Eliminate solid waste and garbage as a breeding site for insects or
other vectors, and a food source for rodents and other animals; and
      (8)   Reduce blighting conditions.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. A term
not defined in this chapter shall have the meaning defined by state law and
regulation. If term defined herein differs from an applicable definition in
state law or regulation, the definition in state law or regulation shall apply.
The definition of a word applies to any of that word's variants.
   ACCUMULATION. Refuse of any kind, as defined in this chapter, that is not
properly contained or stored, or is not removed from the premises as required
by this chapter, or is not removed at a frequency that precludes the potential
for a nuisance or health hazard as determined by the city.
   BLUE CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(5) and shall
be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
recyclable materials.
   BROWN GOODS. Electronic equipment such as stereos, televisions, computers,
VCRs, DVD players and other similar items. Though not required to be diverted
from the waste stream per this chapter, many of these materials may be reused
or recycled and are expected to be legally diverted from landfills through the
city's bulky item curbside collection program or whenever possible.
   BULKY ITEMS/BULKY GOODS. Discarded household appliances including
refrigerators, ranges, washers, dryers, water heaters, dishwashers and other
similar items (known as "white goods"), electronic equipment such as stereos,
televisions, computers, VCRs, DVD players and other similar items (known as
"brown goods"), furniture, carpets, mattresses, tires and oversized green
wastes such as tree trunks and branches not exceeding two feet in diameter and
four feet in length as produced or generated from residential property. Though
not specifically required to be diverted from the waste stream per this
chapter, many of these materials may be reused, recycled or composted, and are
expected to be legally diverted from landfills through the city's bulky item
curbside collection program or whenever possible. BULKY ITEMS/GOODS do not
include any motor vehicle or any subassembly, component, or part thereof
(except tires), any construction and demolition debris, nor hazardous or
prohibited wastes.
   C AND D or CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS. Materials resulting from
construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations and
which has been segregated for recycling, reuse or remanufacture. Materials
include but are not limited to wood, asphalt, concrete, bricks, plaster,
drywall, windows, wire, porcelain, toilets, dirt, gravel, rock, steel rebar,
roofing material and other materials resulting construction, renovation,
remodeling, repair, or demolition operations.
   CITY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The City Manager or their designee.
   COLLECT or COLLECTION. The operation of taking physical possession of,
transportation of, and removal of solid waste materials from the premises or
property where the materials are produced or generated to a point of disposal
and/or recycling or composting.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family residential
dwelling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(6).
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. Includes a tier one, or a tier two
commercial edible food generator as defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) and (a)
(74). For the purposes of this definition, food recovery organizations and food
recovery services are not commercial edible food generators pursuant to 14 CCR
§ 18982(a)(7).
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in 14
CCR § 17855(a)(4), or, as otherwise defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a)(8).
   COMPOST. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 17896.2(a)(4), which stated, as
of the effective date of this chapter, that COMPOST means the product resulting
from the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid wastes that are
source separated from the municipal solid waste stream, or which are separated
at a centralized facility.
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS or COMPOSTABLE PLASTIC. Plastic materials that meet the
ASTM D6400 standard for compostability, or as otherwise described in 14 CCR §
18984.1(a)(1)(A) or § 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   CONTAINER. Any and all types of solid waste receptacles approved by the city
for use by customers used to store solid waste, recyclable materials, or
organic waste for collection service including any cart, toter, can, bin, roll-
off, compactor or similar receptacle
   CURBSIDE. Adjacent to the curb of a public or private street or alley, or on
streets without curbs, adjacent to the shoulder of the street; or in shopping
centers, business parks and similar premises, adjacent to the garbage
enclosures.
   DE MINIMIS. A commercial business that generates a limited amount of organic
waste such as:
      (1)   Generates two or more cubic yards of solid waste per week and less
than 20 gallons of organic materials per week; or
      (2)   Generate less than two cubic yards of solid waste per week and less
than ten gallons of organic material per week
   DESIGNEE. The person, organization or entity to which the city designates
activities such as inspections, route audits, waste evaluations or other
actions to comply with the requirements of this chapter. DESIGNEES can include
the entity that the city designates to carry out some or all of the city's
responsibilities for compliance with SB 1383 regulations, administration or
enforcement of this chapter as authorized in 14 CCR § 18981.2. A designee may
be a government entity, a franchised hauler, a private entity, or a combination
of those entities as determined by the city.
   DESIGNEE FOR EDIBLE FOOD RECOVERY. The Humboldt County Department of
Environmental Health for the tier 1 and tier 2 generators for inspection as
required by this chapter.
   DISPOSAL. To deposit refuse into an approved solid waste landfill, transfer
station, or container.
   E-WASTE. Electronic equipment nearing the end of its useful life and
determined by the Department of Toxic Substances Control, to be covered by the
Electronic Waste Recycling Act of 2003. Computers, televisions, VCRs, stereos,
copiers, and fax machines are common E-WASTE products.
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this chapter or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(18), EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is recovered and
not discarded. Nothing in this chapter or in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12
requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not meet the food
safety requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the city to address non-compliance with
this chapter including, but not limited to, issuing administrative citations,
fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   An entity that engages in the collection or receipt of edible food
from tier one or tier two commercial edible food generators and distributes
that edible food either directly or through other entities, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   A food bank as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113783;
         (b)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 113841; and
         (c)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113842.
      (2)   A FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(26). A FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE is not a commercial edible food
generator for the purposes of this chapter and implementation of 14 CCR,
Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR § 18982(a)(7).
   FOOD SCRAPS. All food such as, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, meat,
poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta, bread, cheese, and
eggshells and other food materials and may be modified from time to time per
the hauler's organics collection materials requirements. FOOD SCRAPS exclude
fats, oils, and grease.
   FOOD-SOILED PAPER. Compostable paper material that has come in contact with
food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper plates, paper
coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons and materials and may be
modified from time to time per the hauler's organics collection materials
requirements.
   FOOD WASTE. Solid and semi-solid putrescible waste resulting from food
scraps, food-soiled paper, winery and other food processing or manufacturing
operations and includes Biodegradeable Products Institute (BPI) certified
container products and other materials which may be included in the organics
collection.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. An agreement between the city and an individual,
association or firm, organization, or other business entity for the collection
of solid waste, including recyclables and or organic waste.
   FRANCHISEE. An individual, association, firm, organization, or other
business entity who has entered into a franchise agreement with the city,
whether or not said entity is operated for profit, for the collection of solid
waste, including recyclables, within the city.
   GARBAGE. Any solid waste material designated for landfill that is not
designated for composting, reuse, or recycling. GARBAGE is designated for a
gray container and not allowed in the blue or green container. GARBAGE does not
include prohibited wastes such as hazardous waste and medical waste.
   GRAY CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(28) and shall
be used for the purpose of storage and collection of gray container waste.
   GRAY CONTAINER WASTE. Solid waste that is collected in a gray container that
is part of a three-container organic waste collection service that prohibits
the placement of organic waste in the gray container as specified in 14 CCR §§
18984.1(a) and (b), or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402(a) (6.5).
   GREEN CONTAINER. Has the same meaning as in 14 CCR § 18982.2(a)(29) and
shall be used for the purpose of storage and collection of source separated
green container organic waste.
   GREEN WASTE. Recyclable/compostable plant materials or yard waste, resulting
from the maintenance of any plants growing on a property, and that is to be
composted, transported or collected at the premises where produced.
   HAULER/FRANCHISE COLLECTOR. A person, company or entity, or the agents or
employees thereof, whom the city shall have duly licensed, franchised, granted
a permit to, or contracted with, to collect, carry, transport, compost, and/or
recycle solid waste, recyclables, and organic waste for the city. The hauler
operates routes or provides regular service and is directly or indirectly
reimbursed for the collection and disposal of solid waste in the city.
   HAULER ROUTE. The designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each segment
of the city's collection service area, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(31.5).
   HAZARDOUS WASTE.
      (1)   Any material, which by reason of its quality, concentration,
composition or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
illness or pose a substantial threat or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or
otherwise mismanaged or any waste which is defined or regulated as a hazardous
waste, toxic waste, hazardous chemical substance or mixture, or asbestos under
applicable law. If two or more governmental agencies having concurrent or
overlapping jurisdiction over hazardous waste adopt conflicting definitions of
HAZARDOUS WASTE, for purposes of collection, transportation, processing and/or
disposal, the broader, more expansive definition shall be employed for purposes
of this subchapter. Hazardous waste includes, but is not limited to any of the
following:
         (a)   Materials regulated by Cal. Public Resources Code § 40141, Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 25110.02, 25115, 25117, 25281 or 25316 (the
California Hazardous Waste Control Act), and Cal. Water Code § 13050;
         (b)   Low-level radioactive waste regulated under Cal. Health and
Safety Code Div. 20, Ch. 7.6 (commencing with § 28500) or under Cal. Health and
Safety Code, Div. 20, Ch. 6.1 (commencing with § 25015);
         (c)   Materials regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., as amended (including, but not limited to,
amendments thereto made by the Solid Waste Disposal Act Amendments of 1980),
and related federal, state, and local laws and regulations;
         (d)   Materials regulated under the Toxic Substance Control Act, 15
U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq., as amended, and related federal State of California,
and local laws and regulations, including the California Toxic Substances
Account Act, Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 25300 et seq.;
         (e)   Materials regulated under the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601, et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder; or materials regulated under
any future amendments to or re-codification of these statutes or regulations
promulgated thereunder and any future additional or substitute federal, state
or local laws and regulations pertaining to the identification, transportation,
treatment, storage or disposal of toxic substances or hazardous waste.
      (2)   These materials may not be disposed in landfills, and shall be
disposed appropriately at an approved HAZARDOUS WASTE disposal facility.
   INSPECTION. A site visit where the city or its designee reviews records,
containers, and an entity's collection, handling, recycling, or landfill
disposal of organic waste or edible food handling to determine if the entity is
complying with requirements set forth in this chapter, or as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(35).
   LARGE EVENT. An event, including, but not limited to, a sporting event or a
flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a local agency,
and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of operation of
the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a public,
nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street system, or
other open space when being used for an event. If the definition in 14 CCR §
18982(a)(38) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(38) shall apply to this chapter.
   LARGE VENUE. A permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an
average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per
day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this chapter and
implementation of the SB 1383 regulations, a venue facility includes, but is
not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated stadium,
amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center, zoo,
aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center, fairground,
museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes of
implementation of the SB 1383 regulations, a site under common ownership or
control that includes more than one large venue that is contiguous with other
large venues in the site, is a single large venue. If the definition in 14 CCR
§ 18982(a)(39) differs from this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(39) shall apply to this chapter.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Waste, including bio-hazardous waste, non-RCRA pharmaceutical
and sharps waste, as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code Div. 104, Part 14
(§§ 117600 et seq.), or subsequent revision and home-generated sharps and
pharmaceuticals accumulated at a consolidation point. MEDICAL WASTE may
originate from, but is not limited to, hospitals, public or private medical
clinics, research laboratories, pharmaceutical industries, blood banks,
pathology laboratories, clinical laboratories, veterinary facilities, dialysis
or other specialty clinics and other medical facilities. These materials may
not be disposed in landfills, and shall be disposed appropriately at an
approved hazardous or MEDICAL WASTE disposal facility. MEDICAL WASTE does not
include any waste which has been rendered non-bio-hazardous.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY (MFD). Of, from, or
pertaining to residential premises with five or more dwelling units. MULTI-
FAMILY premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy
facilities, which are considered commercial businesses.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION or NOV. A notice that a violation has occurred that
includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR §
18995.4.
   OCCUPANCY, OCCUPIED. Premises that are occupied when a person or persons
take or hold possession of the premises for permanent or temporary use. For the
purposes of determining whether a premise is OCCUPIED during periods when
collection service is made available to such premises, OCCUPANCY is presumed,
unless evidence is presented that gas, electric, telephone and water and
sanitary sewer utility services were not being provided to the premises during
such periods.
   OCCUPANT. The person(s) holding possession of premises for permanent or
temporary use.
   ORGANIC WASTE. Solid waste containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including but not limited to
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and writing paper, manure,
biosolids, digestate, and sludges or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by 14 CCR § 18982(a).
   ORGANIC WASTE GENERATOR. A person or entity that is responsible for the
initial creation of organic waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)
(48).
   OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of record as shown in the County
Assessor's current records as the holder or holders of title to the real
property constituting the premises to which refuse collection service is
provided.
   PAPER PRODUCTS. Include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue, and toweling, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(51).
Printing, writing papers including, but are not limited to, copy, xerographic,
watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper, white wove
envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, notepads, writing tablets, newsprint,
and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars, brochures,
reports, magazines, and publications, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982
(a)(54).
   PREMISES. Any land, building or structure, or portion thereof, where any
refuse may be produced, kept, deposited, placed or accumulated.
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS. The following:
      (1)   Discarded materials placed in the blue container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated recyclable materials for the
jurisdiction's blue container;
      (2)   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified as acceptable source separated green container organic waste for the
jurisdiction's green container;
      (3)   Discarded materials placed in the gray container that are
acceptable source separated recyclable materials and/or source separated green
container organic wastes to be placed in jurisdiction's green container and/or
blue container; and
      (4)   Excluded waste placed in any container.
   RECOVERY. Any activity or process described in 14 CCR § 18983.1(b), or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(49).
   RECYCLABLE WASTE MATERIALS. Materials removed or separated from other
residential, commercial or industrial garbage or solid waste for purposes of
reuse, reprocessing or composting. These materials are expected to be legally
diverted from landfills whenever possible. Examples of these materials include
but are not limited to:
      (1)   All recyclable containers, including but not limited to aluminum
cans, aerosol cans, containers made of tin and bi-metal, glass bottles and
jars, and plastic bottles and packaging and plastic bags;
      (2)   All recyclable paper/fiber including but not limited to newspaper,
magazines, white paper, colored paper, cardboard, junk mail, phone books and
catalogues;
      (3)   Construction and demolition debris;
      (4)   Bulky items including brown goods, white goods and tires;
      (5)   Clothing and textiles;
      (6)   Green waste and yard waste; and
      (7)   Food waste.
   RECYCLED-CONTENT PAPER. Paper products and printing and writing paper that
consists of at least 30%, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(61).
   RESTAURANT. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food
and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR § 18982(a)(64).
   ROUTE REVIEW. A visual inspection of containers along a hauler route for the
purpose of determining container contamination and may include mechanical
inspection methods such as the use of cameras, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(65).
   SELF-HAULER. A person or organization who hauls solid waste, organic waste,
or recyclable materials he or she has generated to another person. SELF-HAULER
also includes a person who back-hauls waste, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
§ 18982(a)(66). Back-haul means generating and transporting organic waste to a
destination owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own
employees and equipment, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(66)(A).
   SINGLE-FAMILY. Of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises with
fewer than five units.
   SOLID WASTE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semisolid, and
liquid wastes, and all recyclables and organic waste, including but not limited
to garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, abandoned
vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances,
dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous
waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other
discarded solid and semi-solid wastes, except that SOLID WASTE does not mean or
include any of the following wastes:
      (1)   Hazardous waste, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code, § 40141;
      (2)   Sewage collected and treated in a municipal or regional sewage
system, or other highly diluted water-carried materials or substances less than
50% solids content by weight.
      (3)   Substances having commercial value which have been salvaged for
reuse, composting, recycling, or resale, including but limited to recyclable
waste materials or organic waste once these are contained within a collection
bin and/or vehicle.
      (4)   Mulch, compost or compost piles which are produced or kept at a
residence, providing they are properly maintained and stored and not creating a
potential health hazard or nuisance.
      (5)   Special waste, as defined in this subchapter;
      (6)   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law
(Cal. Health and Safety Code Div. 104, Part 9, Ch. 8 (commencing with §
114960)); and
      (7)   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management
Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code Div. 104, Part 14 (commencing with § 117600)).
Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a solid waste landfill, as
defined in § 40195.1. Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be
solid waste shall be regulated pursuant to this division.
   SOURCE SEPARATED. Materials, including commingled recyclable materials, that
have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste stream, at the point
of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or processing those
materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted
products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 17402.5(b)(4). For the
purposes of this chapter, SOURCE SEPARATED shall include separation of
materials by the generator, property owner, property owner's employee, property
manager, or property manager's employee into different containers for the
purpose of collection such that source separated materials are separated from
gray container waste or other solid waste for the purposes of collection and
processing.
   SOURCE SEPARATED GREEN CONTAINER ORGANIC WASTE. Source separated organic
waste that can be placed in a green container that is specifically intended for
the separate collection of organic waste by the generator.
   SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Source separated non-organic
recyclables.
   SPECIAL WASTE. Any waste matter which is a hazardous waste or which requires
special handling or processing, including any of the following: flammable
waste; waste transported in a bulk tanker; liquid waste; sewage sludge; waste
from a septic system or other wastewater treatment or pollution control
process; residue and debris from the cleanup of a spill or release of any
chemical substance; any soil, waste, residue, debris or other material
contaminated by any hazardous material or hazardous waste; dead animals;
manure; explosive substances or substances or materials that have been exposed
to highly infectious or contagious diseases.
   STATE. The State of California.
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following: supermarket, grocery store with a total
facility size equal to or greater than 10,000 square feet, food service
provider, food distributor or wholesale food vendor. If the definition in 14
CCR § 18982(a)(73) of TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR differs from
this definition, the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(73) shall apply to this
chapter.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following: restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a
total facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet; hotel with an
on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms; health facility with an on-site
food facility and 100 or more beds; large venue; large event or a state agency
with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats, or total cafeteria facility size equal
to or greater than 5,000 square feet; or a local education agency facility with
an on-site food facility. If the definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) of TIER
TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR differs from this definition, the
definition in 14 CCR § 18982(a)(74) shall apply to this chapter.
   TRANSFER STATION. Those facilities used to receive solid wastes and to
temporarily store, separate, convert, or otherwise process the solid waste and/
or recyclables, in preparation for transport.
   VECTOR. A carrier, usually insects or rodents that are capable of
transmitting a disease.
   VIRTUALLY ALL. Almost entirely, or for all practical purposes, almost
everything.
   WHITE GOODS. Kitchen and laundry appliances or other large appliances or
similar items.
   WHOLESALE FOOD VENDOR. A business or establishment engaged in the merchant
wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and vegetables) is
received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a retailer, warehouse,
distributor, or other destination, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR § 189852
(a)(76).
   YARD WASTES. Leaves, grass, weeds and wood materials from trees and shrubs.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.03 MANDATORY COLLECTION SERVICE.
   (A)   Use of city's franchise collection/hauler service required.
      (1)   The periodic collection of garbage, recyclable items, organics and
other solid waste materials from improved properties in the city benefits
occupants of places and premises in the city, and promotes and protects the
health, safety and welfare of all residents of the city. Therefore, collection
services provided by the city's franchise collector/hauler are mandatory for
all owners of improved property within the city in or from which solid waste is
created, accumulated or produced.
      (2)   Solid waste must be regulated to the extent necessary to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the public, to conserve disposal capacity,
to meet state laws and to ensure cost effective public service. To this end,
the City Council finds that to give practical effect to this policy, a
mandatory collection ordinance to regulate the collection of waste, and a
comprehensive system for the storage, collection, removal, transport, recovery
of marketable and recyclable materials, compostable materials and disposal of
solid waste in the city is essential.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   Mandatory collection service is required for the three-bin
collection of garbage, recyclable items, organics and other solid waste
materials generated on all occupied properties within the city, as identified
in this chapter. As mandatory collection service is implemented and becomes
available pursuant to the subscription guidelines of this chapter, the owner,
tenant or occupant of every parcel with one or more businesses and/or
residential buildings approved for occupancy and located within the city must
subscribe to and thereafter use regularly the collection service franchised by
the city.
      (2)   No provision herein contained should be construed to conflict with
any provision of the Integrated Waste Management Act, the Medical Waste
Management Act, or any other state or federal law. In the event such a conflict
exists, or should exist in the future, state or federal law should be
controlling. This chapter is not intended, nor shall it apply to transfer
stations or other solid waste disposal facilities.
   (C)   Subscription to collection service. Subscription to mandatory
collection service should not be required until the service becomes available
to each affected property. The property owner of each occupied premises must
assume responsibility for subscribing to collection service within seven days
of either written notification from the city or occupancy of the premises,
whichever is sooner. At the city's discretion, providing collection service to
all properties may be implemented in phases as determined by what is most
efficient and cost effective and as programs become available and economically
viable.
   (D)   Property owner responsible for securing collection service. The owner
of any improved property in or from which garbage, recyclable and organic
materials is created, accumulated or produced is responsible for subscribing to
the collection service to be rendered to such property by the city's franchised
collection service. It is the property owner's responsibility, not the
tenant's, to secure and maintain collection services.
   (E)   Payments on behalf of owner permitted. Nothing in this chapter is
intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing
arrangement, under which payments for collection service are made by a tenant
or tenants, or any agent on behalf of the owner; however any such arrangement
will not affect the owner's obligation to the city or to the franchise
collector/hauler for payment for such service.
   (G)   Written notice required for non-use. The city's franchise collector/
hauler must give written notice to the City Manager or designated
representative of the address of any occupied premise within the city which is
not subscribing to the collection and disposal service provided by the
collection service franchised by the city.
   (H)   Failure to subscribe.
      (1)   If the City Manager has reason to believe that any person required
to subscribe for service has failed to subscribe or failed to maintain a
subscription for service, the City Manager may cause written notice to be
mailed to the owner of the real property so affected directing the owner to
subscribe for such service within ten days after the date of the notice.
      (2)   Any such notice must state that if the person to whom it is
directed fails within the ten day period to subscribe for such collection
service, or fails to appear and show sufficient cause why such person should
not be required to subscribe, the Manager may authorize such service and the
charges therefore will be assessed against the real property upon which the
premises served are located.
      (3)   After notice and a public hearing, unpaid delinquent accounts may
be confirmed by the City Council, and the amount confirmed will constitute a
lien on the property. The lien will continue until the amount of the charges
and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation
of the charge, is paid in full or until it is discharged of record.
      (4)   Alternatively, or in addition, the confirmed amount may be made a
personal obligation of the property owner of record. Alternatively, or in
addition, the confirmed amount may be specially assessed against the real
property involved, and collected at the same time and in the same manner as
ordinary real property taxes.
   (I)   Exemptions. Property owned by federal, state or local governments will
be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.04 CURBSIDE RECYCLING COLLECTION.
   (A)   Weekly recycling collection. In addition to mandatory garbage
collection, mandatory curbside recycling collection service will be in effect
for specific recyclables generated on premises within the city as identified in
this chapter. The city's franchise collector/hauler will provide a separate
cart for source-separated recyclable materials, and provide pickup service for
these recyclable materials on a weekly basis. Designated recyclables must be
stored separately from garbage and organic waste. Persons may place the
recycling cart curbside on the day of the week scheduled for collection by the
collector.
   (B)   Residential recycling collection system. The curbside collection of
residential recyclables may utilize a single-stream collection system. The
stream will include but not be limited to all recyclable containers, such as
aluminum cans, aerosol cans, containers made of tin and bi-metal, glass bottles
and jars, plastic bottles and packaging, and all paper/fiber, such as
newspaper, magazines, white paper, colored paper, cardboard, junk mail,
catalogues and phone books.
   (C)   Commercial recycling collection. The curbside collection of commercial
recyclables may utilize a single-stream collection system. The stream will
include but not be limited to all recyclable containers, such as aluminum cans,
aerosol cans, containers made of tin and bi-metal, glass bottles and jars,
plastic bottles and packaging, and all paper/fiber, such as newspaper,
magazines, white paper, colored paper, cardboard, junk mail, catalogues and
phone books. Collection of commercial recyclables may also include a cardboard
bin for collection of cardboard only excluding packaging materials including
but not limited to materials such as Styrofoam, packing peanuts, and plastic or
wax lined cardboard.
   (D)   Upon the placement of recyclable materials in a designated recycling
collection location for collection by an authorized franchise collector/hauler,
the recyclable material will become the property of the authorized franchise
collector/hauler.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.05 CURBSIDE BULKY ITEM/GOODS COLLECTION.
   (A)   The curbside collection of residential bulky item/goods will be
offered by the city's franchise collector/hauler. Each residential property
owner may receive two collections per year, and may be used for disposal of
white goods, brown goods and other items as approved by the franchise
collector/hauler. Residents may contact the franchise collector/hauler directly
to access this service. Bulky items/goods placed on the curb for collection
will be placed separately from garbage and other recyclables. Many of these
materials may be reused, recycled or composted, and are expected to be legally
diverted from landfills whenever possible.
   (B)   Bulky items/goods which are placed in a designated recycling
collection location for collection by the city's authorized franchise
collector/hauler will remain the property of the bulky goods generator until
such bulky goods are collected by such authorized franchise collector/hauler.
   (C)   Upon the collection of such bulky items/goods, such bulky items/goods
will become the property of the authorized franchise collector/hauler or of the
city as set forth in the agreement for collection of bulky items/goods entered
into by the city and such franchise collector/hauler.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.06 CURBSIDE ORGANICS WASTE COLLECTION.
   (A)   A curbside organic waste collection service must be offered by the
city's franchise collector/hauler. Residents may contact the franchise
collector/hauler directly to establish service. Organic materials must be
stored separately from garbage and recyclables. Upon establishment of service,
the city's franchise collector/hauler will provide a separate bin/cart for
diversion of organic waste materials, including food waste, grass clippings,
branches, leaves and other yard waste.
   (B)   Organic waste includes food waste and green waste and the
specifications of how these materials are sorted and collected will be
determined by the franchise collector/hauler based on program availability and
economic viability.
   (C)   Organic waste which is placed in a designated recycling collection
location for collection under the city organic waste collection program will
remain the property of the organic waste generator until such organic waste is
collected by the city or an authorized franchise collector/hauler.
   (D)   Upon the collection of such organic waste, such waste will become the
property of the authorized franchise collector/hauler or of the city as set
forth in the agreement for collection of organic wastes entered into by the
city and such franchise collector/hauler.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.07 ORGANICS REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY GENERATORS.
   Single-family organic waste generators must comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   Must subscribe to city's organic waste collection services for all
organic waste generated as described below in division (B). The city will have
the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers to evaluate
adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service for proper
separation of materials and containment of materials; single-family generators
will adjust its service level for its collection services as requested by the
city. Generators may additionally manage their organic waste by preventing or
reducing their organic waste, managing organic waste on site, and/or using a
community composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
   (B)   Will participate in the city's organic waste collection service(s) by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below and
will not place prohibited container contaminants in collection containers.
   (C)   Generator will place source separated green container organic waste,
including food waste in the green container; source separated recyclable
materials in the blue container; and gray container waste in the gray
container. Generators will not place materials designated for the gray
container into the green container or blue container.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BUSINESSES INCLUDING MULTI-FAMILY
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS.
   Generators that are commercial businesses, including multi-family
residential dwellings, will:
   (A)   Subscribe to the city's three-container collection services and comply
with requirements of those services as described below. The city will have the
right to review the number and size of a generator's containers and frequency
of collection to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of
collection service for proper separation of materials and containment of
materials; commercial businesses will adjust their service level for their
collection services as requested by the city.
   (B)   Participate in the city's organic waste collection service(s) by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described below.
Generator will place source separated green container organic waste, including
food waste in the green container; source separated recyclable materials in the
blue container; and gray container waste in the gray container. Generator will
not place materials designated for the gray container into the green container
or blue container.
   (C)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size, and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors for employees,
contractors, tenants, and customers, consistent with the city's blue container,
green container, and gray container collection service.
   (D)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, provide containers for
the collection of source separated green container organic waste and source
separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal
containers are provided for customers, for materials generated by that
business. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial business does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of container, then the business does not have to provide
that particular container in all areas where disposal containers are provided
for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
business will have either:
      (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the collection service provided by the city, with either lids
conforming to the color requirements or bodies conforming to the color
requirements or both lids and bodies conforming to color requirements. A
commercial business is not required to replace functional containers, including
containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the
requirements of this division prior to the end of the useful life of those
containers, or prior to January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container. Pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.8, the container labeling requirements
are required on new containers commencing January 1, 2023.
   (E)   Multi-family residential dwellings are not required to comply with
container placement requirements or labeling requirements in division (D) above
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b).
   (F)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection, and/
or other measures, excluding multi-family residential dwellings, prohibit
employees from placing materials in a container not designated for those
materials per the city's blue container, green container, and gray container
collection service.
   (G)   Excluding multi-family residential dwellings, periodically inspect
blue containers, green containers, and gray containers for contamination and
inform employees if containers are contaminated and of the requirements to keep
contaminants out of those containers pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(b)(3).
   (H)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
source separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials.
   (I)   Provide education information before or within 14 days of occupation
of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep source
separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials separate from gray container waste (when applicable) and the location
of containers and the rules governing their use at each property.
   (J)   Provide or arrange access for city or its agent to their properties
during all inspections.
   (K)   Nothing in this section prohibits a generator from preventing or
reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a community
composting site pursuant to 14 CCR § 18984.9(c).
   (L)   Commercial businesses that are tier one or tier two commercial edible
food generators will comply with food recovery requirements.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.09 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF PROHIBITED WASTES.
   No person will knowingly dispose of any prohibited waste with any garbage,
organic waste or recyclable materials. Prohibited wastes will include all
current hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, electronic wastes (e-waste),
and all future prohibited substances or wastes determined to be hazardous by
authorities or legislation. All such prohibited hazardous wastes will be
collected, transported and disposed in compliance with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws and regulations. A list of prohibited wastes will be
available for review at the offices of the Humboldt Waste Management Authority.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.10 INDIVIDUAL WASTE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted to prevent any person
from carrying his or her own solid waste including garbage, recyclable
materials, and organic waste to an approved public or private disposal site for
which a valid permit is in effect.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person transporting solid waste within the city
to suffer, allow, or permit any portion of the load to be lost in transit.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.11 LITTERING; UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any solid waste
materials, or to cause the same to be thrown or deposited, upon any street,
alley, gutter, park, or other public place. Except for clean fill, and finished
compost, it shall be unlawful to throw or deposit solid waste in or upon any
vacant lot or back yard, or to store or keep the same otherwise than in
containers or bins as required by this chapter.
   (B)   It is unlawful to have, store, deposit, or keep solid waste where
rodents can have access thereto or feed thereon.
   (C)   Each day's violation of this section will be treated, considered, and
be a separate and distinct offense.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly deposit in any container
for collection by a commercial refuse collector, any of the following
materials:
      (1)   Hazardous wastes or other prohibited waste as defined by state law.
      (2)   Liquid wastes, including petroleum products or septage.
      (3)   Automobiles, automobile bodies, automobile frames, engines or
engine blocks or portions thereof. Light-gauge automobile parts such as hoods,
doors, grilles, or fenders are permitted.
      (4)   Animal bodies or portions thereof, except for dogs, cats or smaller
animals, not exceeding 25 pounds each, on an individual basis or as permitted
by local disposal facility.
      (5)   Hot ashes or burning material.
      (6)   Fish processing wastes more than four days old.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.12 ORGANICS DE MINIMIS WAIVERS FOR COMMERCIAL GENERATORS.
   The city may provide waivers for generators in the following manner, at the
city's discretion:
   (A)   De minimis waivers. The city may waive a commercial business'
obligation to comply with some or all of the organic waste requirements of this
chapter if the commercial business provides documentation that the business
generates below a certain amount of organic waste material as described below.
   (B)   Commercial businesses requesting a de minimis waiver must:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation that shows total solid waste
collection service is less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste
subject to collection in a green container comprises less than ten gallons per
week per applicable container of the business' total waste.
      (2)   Notify the city if circumstances change such that commercial
business's organic waste exceeds threshold required for waiver, in which case
waiver will be rescinded.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.13 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Appear and show cause for exclusion.
      (1)    Any written notice sent to a property owner must include an option
to appear before the City Manager, or a designated representative, at a time
specified within the notice to show cause why such person should not be
required to subscribe for the collection of garbage, recyclables, and organic
waste. In addition, any property owner not receiving a notice may arrange to
appear before the City Manager, or a designated representative, at a time
specified to show cause why such person should not be required to subscribe for
the collection service. At the appearance, the Manager may find excluded from
the requirements of said section only those persons who show:
         (a)   That they are not owners of the property mentioned; or
         (b)   That the property is not within the city limits; or
         (c)   That the property is vacant; or
         (d)   That the residential unit or structure on the property is vacant
or temporarily unoccupied for a period in excess of one month; or
         (e)   Unique parcel specific conditions which compel the property
owner, tenant or occupant to self haul their garbage, recyclables and organic
waste to the transfer station. Such conditions may include properties with
long, narrow or steep driveways where the franchisee, in the opinion of the
City Manager, is unable to properly and safely use the franchisee's equipment,
and granting such exclusion would not create a nuisance; or
         (f)   That the owner or occupant legally recycles and composts
virtually all their solid waste so that no unsanitary condition, hazard to
health, or public nuisance will arise upon the premises owned, managed or
controlled by them if they are not provided with collection and disposal
services by a collector.
      (2)   Declaration required.
         (a)   All persons claiming an exclusion per this section must occupy
the property and will be asked to sign a declaration or affidavit, under
penalty of perjury, once per year stating that they legally recycle and compost
virtually all their solid waste so that no unsanitary condition, hazard to
health, or public nuisance will arise upon the premises owned, managed or
controlled by them.
         (b)   The signed affidavit must be submitted in person, electronically
or through the mail on or before June 1 in order to be excluded from
subscribing to collection services for the subsequent fiscal year (July 1
through June 30). Those affidavits submitted electronically must have a
timestamp on or before June 1. Those affidavits submitted through the mail must
be postmarked on or before June 1. There will be a five-day grace period for
extenuating circumstances as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, or a
designated representative.
   (B)   Any exclusion granted by the City Manager is revocable for cause, as
determined by the City Manager. Any exclusion granted by the City Manager can
be made conditional, as needed to ensure continuing eligibility. Violations of
any such conditions can result in the revocation of the exemption, and/or
result in the assessment of penalties under Eureka Municipal Code §
10.99.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.14 DISCONTINUING SERVICE UPON VACANCY.
   The owner of any premises required to subscribe to a collection service
under this chapter may discontinue service when the premises are vacant or the
occupant is traveling out of town for one or more months. The owner is required
to submit written notice of such vacancy to the city's franchise collector/
hauler. Monthly collection fees will continue to accrue until such time as
notice is received by the city's franchise collector/hauler. This section may
be used by the owner no more than twice per calendar year. In the event of a
dispute arising under this section, the dispute shall be reviewed as set forth
in this chapter.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.15 BILLING FOR SERVICES.
   The city's franchise collector/hauler shall be responsible for billing
collection subscribers. In the event that accounts become more than 60 days
delinquent, the franchise collector/hauler may submit those accounts to the
city for collection. The franchise collector/hauler shall not cease to provide
for properties which have delinquent accounts.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.16 RATE DEVIATIONS.
   (A)   Metered rates. The city's franchise collector/hauler will include
metered service which provides market based incentives to reduce waste and
increase waste diversion through curbside collection of recyclable waste
materials. Metered service will require that residents and other users,
particularly those who recycle and compost the vast majority of their waste,
have the opportunity to pay lower rates for smaller garbage bins/carts, thus
encouraging higher rates of waste diversion.
   (B)   Appropriate rates. The accumulation of solid waste in certain
instances may be so far above the normal or average, that the rates approved by
the City Council may not be sufficient to fairly compensate the collector for
collecting the same, or the accumulation of solid waste in certain instances
may be so far below the normal average that the rates fixed by the City Council
may not be fair and just to the property owner obligated to pay for the removal
of solid waste. If, after attempting to resolve the rate difference, either the
collector or the property owner believes such to be the fact, a written
application may be made to the City Manager for potential relief, and it will
be the duty of the City Manager to make an investigation and, if possible, to
fix a rate fair to both parties.
   (C)   Disputes over charges made by collectors, or as to the character of
the service performed, will be decided by the City Manager or designee.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.17 STORAGE.
   A property owner or occupant shall store garbage, recyclable, and organic
waste materials on their premises, or shall require it to be stored or handled,
in such a manner so as not to promote the propagation, harborage or attraction
of vectors, or the creation of a nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person
to allow solid waste to accumulate outside of an authorized waste container.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.18 CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Franchise collector/hauler to provide containers. The city's franchise
collector/hauler will provide containers to properties subscribing to
collection service. The franchise collector/hauler will provide a variety of
container sizes to meet the different needs of households. It will be the duty
of every property owner, tenant, lessee, or occupant of any premises to arrange
for containers large enough to hold all solid waste ordinarily accumulated on
the premises in one week's time. Containers must be watertight, have suitable
bails or handles and a tight-fitting cover.
   (B)   Maintenance and location.
      (1)   All containers, when leaking or in a defective state, must be
cleaned, repaired or replaced by the franchise collector/hauler or owner of the
container.
      (2)   Individually-serviced residences. Containers must be placed for
collection day such that they are easily accessible for collection as approved
by the collector. Such placement should occur no earlier than 5:00 p.m. on the
day prior to the scheduled collection day, nor later than 10:00 p.m. Emptied
containers should be removed promptly from the curb, no later than the day
following collection.
      (3)   All other occupancies. Cans, bins, bulk waste containers, and other
vessels for waste storage by all other occupancies must be placed such that
they are easily accessible for collection as approved by the collector.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.19 FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION OR REMOVAL.
   Refuse must be collected or removed as follows:
   (A)   Food stores and markets, restaurants and other commercial and
industrial occupancies generating substantial quantities of solid waste will
have the same removed at least two times per week.
   (B)   All other occupancies will have solid waste removed at least once a
week.
   (C)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) and (B) above, every occupancy will
remove and/or subscribe to a waste removal schedule as frequently as necessary
to maintain sanitary, nuisance-free, vector-free, clean and aesthetic
conditions on the premises.
   (D)   Said solid waste will be collected and removed pursuant to the
schedules of this section except when prevented by disruptions due to strikes,
severe and unusual weather conditions, or other acts of God which prevent
collection, or holidays interrupting the normal seven-day collection cycle.
   (E)   Except in cases of emergency, no regularly scheduled collection will
be made on Sunday.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.20 DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   When a delinquent account is forwarded to the city by the city's
franchise collector/hauler, the city will then, pursuant to the authority
contained in Cal. Gov't Code § 38790.1, attempt to collect the delinquent fees
in the manner described in Cal. Gov't Code § 25831.
   (B)   Late fees. Prior to forwarding a delinquent account to the city, a
late fee will be applied to delinquent accounts by the city's franchise
collector/hauler as an incentive to secure payment. The amount of the fee will
be determined by the city's franchise collector/hauler and authorized by the
City Council.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.21 RIGHT TO COLLECT SOLID WASTE.
   (A)   Only the city and its duly authorized agents, servants, or employees,
or persons holding a permit or contract for the collection of solid waste
including garbage, recyclables, and organic waste in the city, will have the
right to gather and collect in the city, and it will be unlawful for any person
to gather or collect the same except as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The city may issue permits to non-profit organizations for temporary
curbside or drop-off collection of recyclable materials.
   (C)   The Council hereby finds that approved methods of solid waste
management, collection and disposal are essential to the preservation of the
health, safety, and well-being of the public within the city.
   (D)   The Council hereby finds that the city is empowered by its Charter and
by the Cal. Public Resources Code to contract for collection and disposal of
solid waste under such terms prescribed by the Council through ordinance.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.22 UNAUTHORIZED COLLECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, other than an authorized franchise collector/hauler, will
remove solid waste, including garbage, recyclables, organic waste or bulky
items/goods which have been placed in a designated collection location. Any and
each such removal in violation hereof from any designated recycling collection
location will constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter will be subject
to the provisions of §
10.99 and may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of
the City Attorney. Each removal in violation of this chapter will constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.23 CIVIL ACTION BY FRANCHISE COLLECTOR/HAULER.
   Nothing in this chapter will be deemed to limit the right of an authorized
franchise collector/hauler to bring a civil action against any person who
violates this chapter.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.24 COLLECTION CONTRACT.
   (A)   Contract.
      (1)   Term. An exclusive contract for the collection and disposal of
solid waste for a period not to exceed ten years may be entered into by the
city in accordance with and subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Bidding. The Council may award an exclusive contract with or
without competitive bidding under the Cal. Public Resources Code for the
collection of solid waste within the city.
      (3)   Extension of term. From time to time, the City Council, after a
public hearing, may extend a contract for the collection and disposal of solid
waste for successive periods of ten years each, provided that the Council finds
the contractor is providing good service at competitive rates.
      (4)   Disposal plans. Such contract will provide that the contractor will
collect and dispose the solid waste in the city in the manner provided in this
chapter, and in accordance with applicable state and federal laws and
regulations.
      (5)   Rates. The contractor will not charge any amount in excess of the
rates specified by the City Council.
      (6)   Bond. The contractor may be required to furnish a surety bond to
the city in an amount established by the City Council, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the contract and the provisions of this chapter.
      (7)   Sole and exclusive rights of contractor. The contractor will have
the sole and exclusive right, subject to the provisions of this chapter, to
collect all solid waste in the city and transport the same through the streets
and public ways of the city. An exclusive right to collect all solid waste in
the city will not be applicable to public entities, or to self-disposal as
permitted by this chapter.
      (8)   Additional terms. The Council, by ordinance, will have power to
provide for the inclusion in such contract of such terms as it deems necessary
to protect the interests of the city.
      (9)   Award of contract. Before the Council awards a contract, the
Council will consider the following: the proposed method of collection and
disposal of solid waste; the financial stability of the collector or bidder;
level of service to be provided by collector or bidder to the city; rates to be
charged by the collector or bidder for collection; the level of service to be
provided to city-owned public facilities; and quantity and quality of equipment
and assets owned by the collector or bidder to be used in collection.
   (B)   Collection at city-owned facilities.
      (1)   City buildings and facilities. The entity to whom a collection
contract is awarded will collect and dispose of the solid waste produced and
generated at any city-owned and operated public building or facility, including
but not limited to City Hall, City Police Station, City Main Fire Station and
all fire stations, Wharfinger Building, Adorni Center, Municipal Auditorium,
Sequoia Park and Zoo, Ryan Memorial Building, Municipal Corporation Yard,
Wastewater Treatment Plant, the Eureka Marina, Eureka Boardwalk and Fisherman's
Terminal and other city-owned and operated buildings, parks or playgrounds.
Collection of such solid waste will be made at least once each week or per
terms of an approved franchise contract.
      (2)   City containers. The city will place all solid waste in containers,
bins, or hoppers ready for collection by the contractor.
      (3)   Street solid waste containers. The contractor, at no charge to the
city, not less frequently than once a week, will service street garbage and
recycling containers placed and maintained by the city on any public street or
sidewalk.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.25 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   (A)   All equipment and containers used for the collection and hauling of
solid waste will be so constructed and maintained as to prevent leakage,
spillage, or overflow. All trucks and equipment will be clearly identified by
an assigned equipment number and with the licensee's name and local telephone
number affixed thereto.
   (B)   All collection vehicles will be well maintained, painted, clean and in
satisfactory mechanical condition.
   (C)   For servicing large, bulky, dry loads, an open steel truck bed may be
used provided adequate canvas or other covers are applied to restrict any loss
of debris.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.26 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS BY CITY.
   (A)   City representatives and/or its designees are authorized to conduct
inspections and investigations, at random or otherwise, of any collection
container, collection vehicle loads, or transfer, processing, or disposal
facility for materials collected from generators or source separated materials
to confirm compliance with this chapter by organic waste generators, commercial
businesses (including multi-family residential dwellings), property owners,
commercial edible food generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery
services, and food recovery organizations, subject to applicable laws. This
section does not allow city to enter the interior of a private residential
property for inspection.
   (B)   Regulated entity must provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and must
cooperate with the city's designee during such inspections and investigations.
Such inspections and investigations may include confirmation of proper
placement of materials in containers, edible food recovery activities, records,
or any other requirement of this chapter described herein. Failure to provide
or arrange for access to an entity's premises or access to records for any
inspection or investigation is a violation of this chapter and may result in
penalties.
   (C)   Any records obtained by city or its designee during its inspections
will be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure exemptions of the
Public Records Act as set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 6250 et seq.
   (D)   The city and/or designee are authorized to conduct any inspections as
reasonably necessary to further the goals of this chapter, subject to
applicable laws.
   (E)   The city and/or designee will receive written complaints from persons
regarding an entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383
regulations, including receipt of anonymous complaints.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.27 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city has broad authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter
including, but not limited to, issuance of a citation, a notice of violation, a
notice to abate, an administrative fine, or a declaration of nuisance.
   (B)   Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil action or
prosecution as misdemeanor or infraction. The city may pursue civil actions in
the California courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative citations. The
city may choose to delay court action until such time as a sufficiently
substantial number of violations, or cumulative size of violations exist such
that court action is a reasonable use of city staff and resources. The city may
record any notices as liens against the subject property.
   (C)   Responsible entity for enforcement. Enforcement pursuant to this
chapter may be undertaken by the City Enforcement Official or their designee
and the City Attorney.
   (D)   Process for enforcement.
      (1)   The City Enforcement Official and/or their designee will monitor
compliance with the chapter randomly and through compliance reviews, route
reviews, investigation of complaints, and an inspection program. The city may
issue an official notification to notify regulated entities of its obligations
under this chapter. The City Enforcement Official and/or their designee will
issue a notice of violation requiring compliance within 60 days of issuance of
the notice.
      (2)   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth
in the notice of violation, the city will commence an action to impose
penalties, via an administrative citation and fine, pursuant to the city fine
guidelines at the city's discretion. Notices will be sent to the "owner" at the
official address of the owner maintained by the tax collector for the city or
if no such address is available, to the owner at the address of the dwelling or
commercial property or to the party responsible for paying for the collection
services, depending upon available information.
      (3)   Property owners in the city are responsible for violations caused
by tenants.
   (E)   Penalty amounts for types of violations. The penalty amounts for types
of violation will be consistent with the City of Eureka's Code §
10.99 and the city may update the penalty amounts, procedures and process from
time to time to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (F)   Appeals process. Persons receiving an administrative citation
containing a penalty for an uncorrected violation may request a hearing to
appeal the citation. A hearing will be held only if it is requested within the
time prescribed and consistent with the city's procedures in the city's codes
for appeals of administrative citations §
10.47. The city will appoint a hearing officer who will conduct the hearing and
issue a final written order. Any affected person who is dissatisfied with the
determination of the City Manager may appeal the same to the City Council.
   (G)   Education period for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2023 and
through December 31, 2023, the city or its designee will conduct inspections,
route reviews or waste evaluations, and compliance reviews, depending upon the
type of regulated entity, to determine compliance; and if the city determines
that organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, tier one commercial edible
food generator, food recovery organization, food recovery service, or other
entity is not in compliance, it will provide educational materials to the
entity describing its obligations under this chapter.
   (H)   Civil penalties for non-compliance. Beginning January 1, 2024, if the
city and/or designee determines that an organic waste generator, self-hauler,
hauler, tier one or tier two commercial edible food generator, food recovery
organization, food recovery service, or other entity is not in compliance with
this chapter, it will document the noncompliance or violation, issue a notice
of violation, and take enforcement action.
   (I)    Fee disputes; limitations on time to challenge. Any subscriber that
disputes for any reason a fee or charge imposed under the authority of this
chapter may seek review of that fee as set forth in this section. Any and all
fee disputes must be filed no later than 30 days after the fee or charge is
assessed. If an appeal is not filed within 30 days, the fee or charge is final,
unappealable, fully due and payable, and subject to all applicable collection
and lien remedies.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.28 REQUIREMENTS FOR HAULERS AND FACILITY OPERATORS.
   (A)   Requirements for all haulers providing residential, commercial, or
industrial organic waste collection services to generators within the city's
boundaries will meet the following requirements consistent with the franchise
agreement(s), contract(s), agreement(s), or other authorization by the city to
operate within the city:
      (1)   Through written notice to the city annually on or before May 1,
identify the facilities to which they will transport organic waste including
facilities for source separated recyclable materials, materials and source
separated green container organic waste.
      (2)   Transport source separated recyclable materials and source
separated green container organic waste to a facility, operation, activity, or
property that recovers organic waste as defined in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter
12, Article 2.
      (3)   Obtain approval from the city to haul organic waste, unless it is
transporting source separated organic waste to a community composting site or
lawfully transporting c and d in a manner that complies with 14 CCR § 18989.1
and any additional city requirements.
      (4)   Comply with the SB 1383 regulation requirements as detailed and
required by the city in related franchise agreement, contracts, or other
authorization to meet these requirements for the following: collection
container requirements, collection container color, collection container
labeling, outreach and education, contamination monitoring, reporting, and
other requirements contained within its franchise agreement, permit, license,
or other agreement entered into and approved by the city.
   (B)   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations.
      (1)   Owners of facilities, operations, and activities that recover
organic waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel
digestion facilities, and publicly owned treatment works will, upon city
request, provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded
capacity at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information
about throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes.
Entities contacted by the city must respond within 60 days.
      (2)   Community composting operators, upon jurisdiction request, must
provide information to the city to support organic waste capacity planning,
including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste
anticipated to be handled at the community composting operation. Entities
contacted by the city must respond within 60 days.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.29 REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATORS.
   (A)   Tier one commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section commencing January 1, 2023, and tier two
commercial edible food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024,
pursuant to 14 CCR § 18991.3.
   (B)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, will require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (C)   Tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators will comply
with the following requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Use the CalRecycle Model Food Recovery Agreement or the contractual
elements contained in the requirements for food recovery organizations and food
recovery services section of this chapter to contract with, or otherwise enter
into a written agreement with food recovery organizations or food recovery
services for:
         (a)   The collection of edible food for edible food recovery from the
tier one or tier two commercial edible food generator's premises; or
         (b)   The acceptance of edible food that the tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization.
      (3)   Will not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow the city's edible food recovery designee for edible food
recovery to access the premises, inspect procedures, and review records related
to edible food recovery and/or provide them electronically if requested by the
city or the designee for edible food recovery.
      (5)   Register with the County of Humboldt Division of Environmental
Health as an edible food generator. Commercial edible food generator
registration will require an annual fee in an amount to cover costs, as set by
resolution or ordinance of the Humboldt County Board of Supervisors. No part of
the registration fee shall be refundable.
      (6)   Submit to annual inspection by the County of Humboldt Division of
Environmental Health for compliance with this section.
      (7)   Keep records that include the following information:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery organization or a food recovery
service that collects or receives edible food from the tier one or tier two
commercial edible food generator pursuant to a contract or written agreement as
required by this chapter.
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
the provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            1.   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization.
            2.   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            3.   The established schedule or frequency that food will be
collected or self-hauled.
            4.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 (Chapter 285, Statutes of 2017), as
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23; Am. Ord. 957-C.S., passed 11-5-24)
§ 51.30 REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATIONS AND SERVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Food recovery services operating in the city and collecting or
receiving edible food directly from tier one and/or tier two commercial edible
food generators via a contract or written agreement established under the
requirements of this chapter will maintain the following records:
         (a)   The name, address, and contact information for each tier one and
tier two commercial edible food generator from which the service collects
edible food.
         (b)   The quantity in pounds of edible food by type collected from
each tier one and tier two commercial edible food generator per month.
         (c)   The quantity in pounds of edible food by type transported to
each food recovery organization or redistribution site per month.
         (d)   The name, address, and contact information for each food
recovery organization or redistribution site that the food recovery service
transports edible food to for edible food recovery.
      (2)   Food recovery organizations operating in the city and collecting or
receiving edible food directly from tier one and/or tier two commercial edible
food generators via a contract or written agreement established under the
requirements of this subchapter, or receiving edible food from food recovery
services or from other food recovery organizations, will maintain the following
records:
         (a)   The name, address, and contact information for each tier one and
tier two commercial edible food generator, food recovery service, or other food
recovery organization from which the organization collects or receives edible
food.
         (b)   The quantity in pounds of edible food by type collected or
received from each tier one or tier two commercial edible food generator, food
recovery service, or other food recovery organization per month.
         (c)   The name, address, and contact information for other food
recovery organizations or redistribution sites that the food recovery
organization transports edible food to for edible food recovery.
   (B)   Commencing no later than July 1, 2023, food recovery organizations and
food recovery services operating in the city and collecting or receiving edible
food from tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators or any other
source will report to the city and the city's edible food recovery designee for
edible food recovery the following: a detailed edible food activity report of
the information collected as required under this subchapter, including weight
in pounds by type and source of edible food, the schedule/frequency of pickups/
drop-offs of edible food from/to each edible food source or redistribution
site, brief analysis of any necessary process improvements or additional
infrastructure needed to support edible food recovery efforts, such as
training, staffing, refrigeration, vehicles, and the like, and an up to date
list of tier one and tier two commercial edible food generators with whom they
have contracts or agreements established as required under this chapter.
   (C)   In order to provide the required records to the state, the city, and
the city's edible food recovery designee for edible food recovery, and tier one
or tier two commercial edible food generators, contracts between food recovery
organizations and food recovery services operating in the city and tier one and
tier two commercial edible food generators will use the CalRecycle model food
recovery agreement and include a clause requiring the food recovery
organization or food recovery service to report to the tier one and tier two
commercial edible food generators with whom they have contracts the annual
amount of edible food recovered and to inform them of the tax benefits
available to those who donate edible food to non-profits.
   (D)   Food recovery capacity planning. To support edible food recovery
capacity planning assessments or other such studies, food recovery services and
food recovery organizations operating in the city will provide information and
consultation to the county and its designee for edible food recovery upon
request, regarding existing, or proposed new or expanded, edible food recovery
capacity that could be accessed by the city and its tier one and tier two
commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food recovery
organization contacted by the city, or its designee for edible food recovery
will respond to such requests for information within 60 days.
   (E)   The city's enforcement entity and or the city's designee for edible
food recovery shall be allowed to access the premises, inspect procedures, and
review records related to edible food recovery and/or provide them
electronically if requested by the city or the designee for edible food
recovery.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
§ 51.31 PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CITY DEPARTMENTS.
   City departments must comply with the recovered organic waste product
procurement requirements and recycled-content paper procurement requirements
per SB 1383 regulations (14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 12). The city
will:
   (A)   Purchase recycled-content paper products and recycled-content printing
and writing paper that consists of at least 30 percent, by fiber weight,
postconsumer fiber instead of non-recycled products whenever recycled paper
products and printing and writing paper are available at the same or lesser
total cost than non-recycled items;
   (B)   Provide paper products and printing and writing paper that meet
federal trade commission recyclability standard as defined in 16 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) § 260.12. Certify in writing, under penalty of
perjury, the minimum percentage of postconsumer material in the paper products
and printing and writing paper offered or sold to the jurisdiction. This
certification requirement may be waived if the percentage of postconsumer
material in the paper products, printing and writing paper, or both can be
verified by a product label, catalog, invoice, or a manufacturer or vendor
internet website;
   (C)   Certify in writing, on invoices or receipts provided, that the paper
products and printing and writing paper offered or sold to the jurisdiction is
eligible to be labeled with an unqualified recyclable label as defined in 16
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) § 260.12 (2013); and
   (D)   Provide records to the city's recordkeeping designee, in accordance
with the city's procurement of all paper products and printing and writing
paper purchases within 30 days of the purchase (both recycled-content and non-
recycled content, if any is purchased) made by any division or department or
employee of the city. Records will include a copy (electronic or paper) of the
invoice or other documentation of purchase, written certifications as required
in §
51.15(B)(3) and (B)(4) for recycled-content purchases, purchaser name, quantity
purchased, date purchased, and recycled content (including products that
contain none), and if non-recycled content paper products or printing and
writing papers are provided, include a description of why recycled-content
paper products.
(Ord. 943-C.S., passed 2-21-23)
CHAPTER 52: UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Section
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Public hearings by Council; designation of district
   
52.03   Unlawful acts
   
52.04   Exceptions
   
52.05   Notices to property owners and utility companies
   
52.06   Responsibilities of utility companies, property owners, and city
   
52.07   Extensions of time
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the state.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES, and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT. That area in the city within which
poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as
such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter.
   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
('63 Code, § 7-6.01) (Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69)
§ 52.02 PUBLIC HEARINGS BY COUNCIL; DESIGNATION OF DISTRICT.
   (A)   Reports.
      (1)   The Council may from time to time, call public hearings to
ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the
removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within
designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and
facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated
service. The City Clerk shall notify by mail all affected property owners, as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned of the
time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof.
Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to
time. At each such hearing, all persons interested shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and
conclusive.
      (2)   Prior to holding such public hearings, the Director of Public Works
shall prepare a report for submission at such hearings containing, among other
information, the extent of the utilities' participation and estimates of the
total cost to the city and affected property owners. The report shall also
contain an estimate of the time required to complete the underground
installation and the removal of overhead facilities.
('63 Code, § 7-6.02)
   (B)   Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. If,
after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity,
health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such
removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and
within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground
service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and
equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such
underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
('63 Code, § 7-6.03)
(Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69; Am. Ord. 240-C.S., passed 12-6-74; Am. Ord.
375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 52.03 UNLAWFUL ACTS.
   Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
52.02(B) of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles,
overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the district after the
date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such
resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish
service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such
owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant
to continue to receive utility service as provided in §
52.06(B) of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove such
facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 7-6.04) (Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 52.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities
may be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed ten days, without
authority of the Director of Public Works in order to provide emergency
service. The Director of Public Works may grant special permission, on such
terms as the Director of Public Works may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual
circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect,
construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and
associated overhead structures.
('63 Code, § 7-6.05)
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to
the provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution,
not apply to the following types of facilities:
      (1)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the
supervision and to the satisfaction of the Director of Public Works;
      (2)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
      (3)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, where such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
      (4)   Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for
the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500
volts;
      (5)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by
means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the
building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building
without crossing any public street;
      (6)   Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
      (7)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts; and,
      (8)   Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
('63 Code, § 7-6.06)
(Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 52.05 NOTICES TO PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITY COMPANIES.
   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to the provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities
and all persons owning real property within the district created by such
resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such
affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying
such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar
or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary
facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines
of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the
applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or
utilities on file with the Commission.
   (B)   Such notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of
the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter, together with a copy of the provisions of this
chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and to the affected utilities.
('63 Code, § 7-6.07) (Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69)
§ 52.06 RESPONSIBILITIES OF UTILITY COMPANIES, PROPERTY OWNERS, AND CITY.
   (A)   Utility company. If underground construction is necessary to provide
utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to
the provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of
the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by
it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the
Commission.
('63 Code, § 7-6.08)
   (B)   Property owners.
      (1)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities
referred to in division (A) of this section and the termination facility on or
within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the
rules of the Public Utilities Commission of the state.
      (2)   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or
renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection (1) of
this division (B) within the time provided for in the resolution enacted
pursuant to §
52.02(B) of this chapter, the Director of Public Works shall post a written
notice on the property being served and 30 days thereafter may authorize the
discontinuation and removal of any and all overhead service wires and
associated facilities supplying utility services to such property.
('63 Code, § 7-6.09)
   (C)   City. The city shall remove at its own expense, all city-owned
equipment from all poles required to be removed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove
such poles within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the
provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 7-6.10)
(Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69; Am. Ord. 240-C.S., passed 12-6-74; Am. Ord.
375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 52.07 EXTENSIONS OF TIME.
   In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a
resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
52.02(B) of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on
account of shortages of materials, war, restraint by public authorities,
strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances
beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act shall be
accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such
limitation.
('63 Code, § 7-6.11) (Ord. 113-C.S., passed 1-12-69)
CHAPTER 53: WATER
Section
Water System
   
53.01   Management
   
53.02   Administration of funds
   
53.03   Water service connections
   
53.04   Main extensions
   
53.05   Water charges and fees
   
53.06   Independent fire sprinkler systems rate
   
53.07   Temporary service
   
53.08   Turn-on charge
   
53.09   Special situations
   
53.10   Deposits for water service
   
53.11   Billing
   
53.12   Meter tests
   
53.13   Property owners responsible
   
53.14   Separate service for dwellings; customer control valves
   
53.15   Vacancies
   
53.16   Access by city representatives
   
53.17   Interference with water system
   
53.18   Opening fire hydrants
   
53.19   Interruptions in service
   
53.20   Interpretation
   
53.21   Summer irrigation charges
   
53.22   Discontinuance of service for violation
Water Shortage and Water Waste Regulations
   
53.35   Purpose
   
53.36   Definitions
   
53.37   Application
   
53.38   Large water users
   
53.39   Site design review
   
53.40   Water waste prohibited
   
53.41   Nonessential uses; limitations
   
53.42   Enforcement
   
53.43   Operative dates
   
53.44   Disconnection for violation
Cross-Connections
   
53.55   Purpose
   
53.56   Definitions
   
53.57   Policy
   
53.58   Inspection and discontinuance of service
   
53.59   Where protection is required
   
53.60   Type of protective device required
   
53.61   Approved backflow prevention assembly
   
53.62   Inspection and testings
   
53.63   Special conditions
   
53.99   Penalty
WATER SYSTEM
§ 53.01 MANAGEMENT.
   The management, control, and care of the Municipal Water System of the city
shall be vested in the Director of Community Services under the general
direction of the City Manager.
('63 Code, § 5-6.01) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
§ 53.02 ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS.
   The Director of Finance shall be in charge of the collection of all moneys
which may become due to the city for water services and shall pay the same into
the city treasury and account for the same in the same manner as he pays into
the treasury and accounts for other funds received by him in his official
capacity.
('63 Code, § 5-6.02) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
§ 53.03 WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Water from the Municipal Water System shall be delivered to the
consumers thereof in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter and not
otherwise. Service installations shall be made only to property abutting on
public streets, or abutting on such distribution mains as may be constructed in
alleys or easements, at the convenience of the city. The city shall furnish the
service complete from its main to the property line, in the case of an alley or
easement, and to the curb line if the service is from a street main. The owner
shall furnish and install all piping on his premises to the city connection.
All services, except private independent fire protection sprinkler system
service connections having a two-inch pipe size or larger, shall be metered.
The city shall furnish all meters up to and including four-inch service
connections, and after their installation they shall be maintained by the city.
   (B)   (1)   A schedule of installation and connection charges and fees shall
be adopted by resolution from time to time following a public hearing by the
City Council.
      (2)   A connection charge shall be paid for each new service connection
installed, whether installed by the city or the applicant, and whether the new
service is connected to an existing distribution main or a new main extension.
   (C)   Installation and connection charges for service to property outside
the city boundaries shall be two times the charges for service to properties
within the boundaries of the city.
('63 Code, § 5-6.03) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 230-C.S., passed
7-10-74; Am. Ord. 296-C.S., passed 10-3-78; Am. Ord. 359-C.S., passed 1-19-82)
§ 53.04 MAIN EXTENSIONS.
   Extensions of the Municipal Water System mains shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this section. An applicant for a new service
connection to serve property abutting a maintained public street in which no
distribution main at least four inches in diameter exists shall, in addition to
paying those charges set forth in §
53.03 of this subchapter, deposit with the city an amount as set by resolution
from time to time following a public hearing by the City Council.
('63 Code, § 5-6.04) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 230-C.S., passed
7-10-74)
§ 53.05 WATER CHARGES AND FEES.
   A schedule of water quantity and service charges and fees shall be adopted
by resolution from time to time following a public hearing by the City Council.
Notice of the public hearing shall be published at least ten days in advance in
a newspaper of general circulation.
('63 Code, § 5-6.05) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 230-C.S., passed
7-10-74; Am. Ord. 263-C.S., passed 6-4-76, operative 10-1-76; Am. Ord. 36-C.S.,
passed 12-1-81)
§ 53.06 INDEPENDENT FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS RATE.
   The charge for installation of an independent fire sprinkler system shall be
set by resolution. Fees shall be paid to the city in advance no further
installation or connection fee shall be charged.
('63 Code, § 5-6.07) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 263-C.S., passed
6-4-76, operative 10-1-76; Am. Ord. 494-C.S., passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 679-
C.S., passed 6-1-04)
§ 53.07 TEMPORARY SERVICE.
   Consumers desiring temporary service of less than six months' duration shall
deposit, in advance, an amount as adopted by resolution from time to time
following a public hearing by the City Council. Upon the discontinuance of the
service, the actual cost of installing and removing the facilities required to
furnish such service, exclusive of the cost of salvageable material, shall be
determined, and an adjustment shall be made as an additional charge, refund, or
credit. Temporary service connections shall be disconnected and terminated
within six months after their installation, unless an extension of time is
granted in writing by the Director of Community Services. The rates and charges
for temporary service shall be in accordance with regular service. Consumers
requiring temporary service shall pay the estimated cost of service in advance.
All temporary service shall be initiated by the deposit of the required fee
with the Director of Finance and an appropriate turn-on order on a form
provided by the Director of Finance, which shall be submitted to the Community
Services Department before temporary service is installed.
('63 Code, § 5-6.08) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.08 TURN-ON CHARGE.
   Except when turn-on occurs concurrently with the installation of the meter,
a turn-on charge shall be made, in an amount as adopted by resolution from time
to time by the City Council.
('63 Code, § 5-6.09) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 359-C.S., passed
1-19-82; Am. Ord. 726-C.S., passed 6-3-08)
§ 53.09 SPECIAL SITUATIONS.
   Anything to the contrary in this subchapter notwithstanding, the Council
shall have the power to establish by agreement or resolution the rates to be
charged for providing water services to governmental agencies, including school
districts, and to any person outside the corporate limits of the city at rates
different from those set forth in this subchapter and on a basis which is fair
and equitable to all parties concerned.
('63 Code, § 5-6.10) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.10 DEPOSITS FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   An advance deposit shall be required for each service except that if a
property owner owns other real property within the city currently supplied with
water and sewer service by the city, such deposit may be waived at the
discretion of the Director of Finance. The amount of the deposit shall be in an
amount as adopted by resolution from time to time following a public hearing by
the City Council.
   (B)   Any or all of such advance deposits may be applied toward the
nonpayment of water and sewer service accounts after the service has been
discontinued. Service shall not be resumed on such accounts until such time as
the deposit is replaced to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance and the
turn-on fee has been paid. Advance deposits may be returned without crediting
of interest to a customer or may be credited to his current billing one year
from date of deposit.
('63 Code, § 5-6.11) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 359-C.S., passed
1-19-82; Am. Ord. 412-C.S., passed 8-21-84)
§ 53.11 BILLING.
   (A)   Regular water bills shall be issued for the two months' period
immediately preceding the date of the meter reading. Monthly water bills may be
issued in the discretion of the Director of Finance. All bills shall be due and
payable upon presentation and shall be delinquent 30 days after the billing
date. All bills delinquent 30 days or more shall be subject to a 1½% per month
finance charge. If bills remain unpaid following a second billing period,
service shall be disconnected 15 days following the expiration of the second
billing period upon not less than five days' notice to the customer. If
disconnected, the service shall not be reconnected until the amount of the
bill, plus a reconnection charge in an amount as adopted by resolution from
time to time following a public hearing by the City Council together with
repayment of the advance deposit, if such deposit has been utilized to pay the
delinquent bill, is paid.
   (B)   Separate bills shall be rendered for each service connection or meter
installation.
('63 Code, § 5-6.12) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 359-C.S., passed
1-19-82; Am. Ord. 726-C.S., passed 6-3-08)
§ 53.12 METER TESTS.
   (A)   If a customer desires to have the meter serving his premises tested,
he shall first make a deposit in an amount as adopted by resolution from time
to time following a public hearing by the City Council.
   (B)   Should the meter register more than 2% fast, the deposit will be
refunded. Should the meter read less than 2%, the deposit will be retained. If
a meter tested at the request of a customer is found to be more than 2% fast,
the excess charge for the time service was rendered the customer requesting the
test, or for a period of six months, whichever shall be the lesser, shall be
refunded to the customer. If a meter tested at the request of a customer is
found to be more than 25% slow in the case of residential service, or more than
2% slow for other than residential service, the city may bill the customer for
the amount of the undercharge based upon corrected meter readings for the
period, not exceeding six months, the meter was in use. If a meter is found not
to be registering, the charge for service shall be at the minimum monthly rate,
or shall be based on the estimated consumption for a comparable period, or
shall be by such other method as is determined by the Director of Finance, and
his decision shall be final.
('63 Code, § 5-6.13) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.13 PROPERTY OWNERS RESPONSIBLE.
   Owners of property shall be held responsible for water used on their
premises although payments shall be accepted from tenants. In the event tenants
do not pay in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, the service
shall be disconnected and shall not be restored until the delinquent water
charges, including the cost of water delivered, as well as the cost of
reconnecting the service and any sewer service charges, shall have been paid.
All unpaid accounts for water delivered to any premises shall be a lien against
the real property.
('63 Code, § 5-6.14) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.14 SEPARATE SERVICE FOR DWELLINGS; CUSTOMER CONTROL VALVES.
   (A)   Separate service for dwellings. Each single-family residential
dwelling shall have a separate service. Multiple-family dwelling units may be
provided with one or more service connections at the election of the customer.
No person shall supply water for use outside the premises to which the service
is connected.
('63 Code, § 5-6.15)
   (B)   Customer control valves. All water services installed shall have an
independent control valve provided by the customer on his side of the service
installation as close as is practicable to the meter location. No water
distribution system shall be so connected as to contaminate the city water
supply, either by cross connection or otherwise.
('63 Code, § 5-6.16)
(Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.15 VACANCIES.
   The water charges specified by this subchapter shall be charged against
unoccupied buildings unless a notice of the vacancy and a request for the
discontinuance of service are made to the office of the Finance Department not
less than five days in advance of the billing date.
('63 Code, § 5-6.17) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.16 ACCESS BY CITY REPRESENTATIVES.
   Access to service connections and water meters shall be provided at all
times. Authorized employees of the city shall be admitted at all reasonable
hours to all parts of any premises supplied with water, except the interior of
dwellings, but including the meter box, to assure that the regulations set
forth in this subchapter are complied with.
('63 Code, § 5-6.18) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.17 INTERFERENCE WITH WATER SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the city service
lines, valves, or meters or to construct a bypass around a meter or service.
('63 Code, § 5-6.19) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.18 OPENING FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Permits. It shall be unlawful for any person to open or tamper with
any fire hydrant, except with a written permit from the city or when acting
under the instruction of the Director of Public Safety. The Director of
Community Services may authorize the rental of fire hydrants upon the advance
payment of the permit fee and consumption charge, based upon estimated
consumption, as determined by the Director of Community Services.
('63 Code, § 5-6.20)
   (B)   Fees. A fee schedule may be adopted by resolution of the Council
establishing permit and/or use fees for the rental of fire hydrants and
consumption of water. The fee shall be paid at the time the application for the
permit is filed and shall be non refundable.
('63 Code, § 5-6.20.5)
(Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 269-C.S., passed 1-21-77; Am. Ord. 375-
C.S., passed 10-19-82)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.19 INTERRUPTIONS IN SERVICE.
   The city shall not be liable for damages which may result from interruptions
in service from a cause beyond the control of the city. The city reserves the
right to interrupt service at any time for the purposes of making repairs or
extensions to the water system or for any other purpose. Whenever possible, and
as time permits, all customers affected shall be notified prior to making such
shutdowns. The city shall not be liable for interruptions, shortages, or
insufficiencies of supply or for any loss or damage occasioned thereby if
caused by accident, act of God, fire, strike, riot, war, or any other cause not
within the control of the city.
('63 Code, § 5-6.21) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70)
§ 53.20 INTERPRETATION.
   The Director of Community Services is hereby authorized to interpret the
provisions of this subchapter with respect to the necessity for, type of,
manner, or method in which materials shall be used or meters shall be
installed. Such interpretations shall be in writing and a copy thereof shall be
filed in the office of the Director of Community Services.
('63 Code, § 5-6.23) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
§ 53.21 SUMMER IRRIGATION CHARGES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in this subchapter to the contrary, the
Council is authorized by resolution to establish a summer irrigation quantity
charge schedule for water service to residential users. Such summer irrigation
quantity charges for water service shall be applicable only during such billing
periods as the Council may prescribe to residential users within the city with
a meter service connection not in excess of one-inch.
('63 Code, § 5-6.24) (Ord. 206-C.S., passed 5-19-73)
§ 53.22 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have
a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by
counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in
writing his complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility
billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service
not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination
of the customer's complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
an amount as adopted by resolution from time to time by the City Council .
(Am. Ord. 726-C.S., passed 6-3-08)
WATER SHORTAGE AND WATER WASTE REGULATIONS
§ 53.35 PURPOSE.
   (A)   From time to time it may be necessary that Council declare that a
water shortage emergency condition prevails in the area served by the city.
During such Council-declared water shortages, this subchapter is intended to
allocate equitably the water available to human consumption, sanitation, and
fire protection.
   (B)   The specific uses regulated or prohibited in this subchapter are
nonessential and, if allowed, would constitute wastage of water and should be
prohibited pursuant to Cal. Water Code §§ 350 et seq. and 71640 et seq. and the
common law.
('63 Code, § 5-7.01) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87)
§ 53.36 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, California.
   COUNCIL. The elected Council of the city.
   CUSTOMER. Any person using water supplied by the city.
   MANAGER. The City Manager of the city.
   NONESSENTIAL USE. Any use not required for human consumption, sanitation, or
fire protection.
   NONESSENTIAL USER. Any user other than a domestic residential customer or
facility providing for health and safety.
   OUTDOOR SURFACE. Any patio, porch, veranda, driveway, or sidewalk.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or
organization of any kind.
   WATER. Potable water provided by the city through its distribution system.
   WATER WASTE.
      (1)   Water use in outdoor areas resulting in runoff. The use of water
which allows water to run off to a gutter, ditch, or drain.
      (2)   The excessive use, loss, or escape of water through breaks, leaks
or malfunctions in the water user's plumbing or distribution facilities.
      (3)   The washing of vehicles, building exteriors, sidewalks, driveways,
parking areas, tennis courts, patios or other paved areas without the use of a
positive shut-off nozzle on the hose, which results in excessive runoff.
('63 Code, § 5-7.02) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
§ 53.37 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all customers of the city
using water both in and outside the city limits, regardless of whether any
causing water shall have a contract for water service with the city.
('63 Code, § 5-7.03) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
§ 53.38 LARGE WATER USERS.
   No person whose historic monthly average water use of any three-month period
exceeds 50,000 gallons per month, called “large water user” in this subchapter,
shall irrigate, sprinkle, or water any shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground
covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation
during a declared water shortage except as assigned by the Manager after
consultation with individual large water users.
('63 Code, § 5-7.04) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.39 SITE DESIGN REVIEW.
   (A)   During a declared water shortage, no planting or landscaping required
by the design review process or other city action shall be implemented unless
the Manager determines that the health, safety, or welfare of the public might
be endangered.
   (B)   Single pass cooling systems, non-recirculating systems in all new
conveyer car washes and commercial laundry systems and non-recycling decorative
water fountains are prohibited in all new water services.
('63 Code, § 5-7.05) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.40 WATER WASTE PROHIBITED.
   No person or customer shall cause or permit water waste as defined in §
53.36.
('63 Code, § 5-7.06) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.41 NONESSENTIAL USES; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Prohibited.  
      (1)   Whenever the Manager determines that the water available to the
city is insufficient to permit nonessential uses and that all water then
available to the city should be used solely for human consumption, sanitation,
and fire protection, he may order and direct, individually or collectively,
that nonessential uses shall not be permitted by any person or customer. While
such order is in effect, no person or customer shall fill with city-furnished
water any swimming pool, wash any car or any outdoor surface, irrigate,
sprinkle, or water any shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants,
vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation, or allow any
other nonessential use of water as designated by order of the Manager.
Violations shall be punished as set forth in §
53.99(B) of this chapter.
      (2)   The Manager shall use every available means to inform customers
that such order is in effect.
('63 Code, § 5-7.07)
   (B)   Limited amount of water delivered to customers. Whenever the Manager
determines the water available to the city is insufficient to meet the demands
of customers of the city and that all water available to the city should be
protected for human consumption, sanitation, and fire protection, he may order
that limits be imposed on individual consumption as determined and specified by
resolution of the Council, including penalties in addition to those set forth
in §
53.99(B) of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 5-7.08)
(Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed 12-31-87)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.42 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Each police officer of the city, in connection with his duties imposed
by law, shall diligently enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Manager and all employees of the city shall have the duty and are
authorized to enforce the provisions of this subchapter and shall have all the
powers and authority set forth in Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, including the power
to issue written notices to appear.
('63 Code, § 5-7.10) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87)
§ 53.43 OPERATIVE DATES.
   (A)   Section
53.41 shall become operative each time the Council by resolution declares that
a water emergency condition prevails pursuant to Cal. Water Code, §§ 350 et
seq.
   (B)   Section
53.41 shall become inoperative from the time when the Council by resolution
determines that a water shortage no longer exists until the Council, if ever,
subsequently declares that another water shortage prevails.
('63 Code, § 5-7.11) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-87; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
§ 53.44 DISCONNECTION FOR VIOLATION.
   The Manager shall forthwith direct and cause the disconnection of the water
service of any person or customer cited for a misdemeanor under this
subchapter. Such service shall be restored only upon the payment of the turn-on
charge fixed by the Council, as provided in this code.
('63 Code, § 5-7.09) (Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed
12-31-87; Am. Ord. 742-C.S., passed 6-2-09)
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 53.55 PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this subchapter set requirements to:
   (A)   Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by isolating within the water users
internal distribution system or the water users private water system such
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems;
   (B)   Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the water users in plant potable water system and
non-potable water system, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and,
   (C)   Provide for the maintenance of a continuing Program of Cross-
Connection Control which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the city's potable water systems.
('63 Code, § 5-10.101) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.56 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the
receptacle, and must be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically above the flood level rim of the vessel. In no case may the
gap be less than one inch.
   AUXILIARY SUPPLY. Any water source or system other than the public potable
water system, that may be available in the building or on the premises.
   BACKFLOW. The reversal of flow, other than in the intended direction, into
the distribution of the public water system from a user connection.
   BACK PRESSURE. The backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or
other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the city
water supply.
   BACK SIPHONAGE. A form of backflow due to a negative or subatmospheric
pressure within the water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A state device to counteract back pressure or
prevent back siphonage.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement whereby a public water system is
connected, directly or indirectly, with any other nonpotable water system,
sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage, reservoir, plumbing fixture, or other
device which contains, or may contain, contaminated water, sewage, or other
waste or liquid contamination into the public water system as a result of
backflow. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, movable sections, swivel or
changeover devices, or other temporary or permanent devices through which, or
because of which, backflow could occur, are considered to be cross-connections.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA). An approved assembly composed of two
single, independently acting check valves, including tightly closing shutoff
valves located at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing
the watertightness of each check valve.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE (RPBD). An approved
device incorporating two or more check valves and an automatically operating
differential relief valve located between the two checks, two shutoff valves,
and equipped with the necessary appurtenances for testing. The device must
operate to maintain the pressure in the zone between the two check valves, less
than the pressure on the public water system side of the device. At cessation
of normal flow, the pressure between the check valves must be less than the
supply pressure. In the case of leakage of either check valve the differential
relief valve must operate to maintain the reduced pressure by discharging to
the atmosphere. When the inlet pressure drops below two pounds per square inch,
the relief valve must open to the atmosphere thereby providing an atmospheric
zone between the two check valves.
   USER CONNECTION. The point of connection of a user's piping to the public
potable water supply of the city.
   WATER USER. Any person obtaining water from the public water supply of the
city.
('63 Code, § 5-10.102) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.57 POLICY.
   No user connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the
city unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and
regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be
discontinued by the city if a backflow prevention assembly is required by this
chapter and same is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found
that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed, by-passed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be
restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
('63 Code, § 5-10.103) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
Penalty, see § 53.99
§ 53.58 INSPECTION AND DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   The water user's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times
to authorized representatives of the city to determine whether cross-
connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of
these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known the city shall
deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a
physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the
condition in conformance with the state and the city statutes relating to
plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
('63 Code, § 5-10.104) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.59 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service
line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately
inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch
line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:
   (A)   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not
or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not
acceptable as an additional source by the city, the public water system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved
backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of
hazard.
   (B)   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other
objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow
prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from
the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.
   (C)   In the case of premises having internal cross-connection that cannot
be permanently corrected or controlled, or intricate plumbing and piping
arrangements, or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily
accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to
ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an
approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.
('63 Code, § 5-10.105) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.60 TYPE OF PROTECTIVE DEVICE REQUIRED.
   The type of protective assembly required under §
53.58 of this subchapter shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as
follows:
   (A)   In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply
and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system
shall be protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
   (B)   In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the
public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
double check valve assembly.
   (C)   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to
health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential
hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected
by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will
exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
   (D)   In the case of any premises where there are “uncontrolled” cross-
connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
   (E)   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or
other prohibitions or restriction, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air-gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly on each service to the premises.
('63 Code, § 5-10.106) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.61 APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a model and
size approved by the city. The term “Approved Backflow Prevention Assembly”
shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the
standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled: “AWWA
C506-84 Standards for Reduced Pressure Principle and Double Check Valve
Prevention Devices” and have met completely the laboratory and field
performance specification of a recognized laboratory for Cross-Connection
Control, and Hydraulic Research.
   (B)   Backflow preventers which may be subjected to backpressure or
backsiphonage that have been fully tested and have been granted a Certificate
of Approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's
current list of “Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies” may be used without
further test or qualification.
('63 Code, § 5-10.107) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.62 INSPECTION AND TESTINGS.
   It shall be the duty of the water user at any premises where backflow
prevention assemblies are installed to have certified inspections and
operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the
Director of Community Services deems the hazard to be great enough he may
require certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and
tests shall be at the expense of the water user and shall be performed by the
assembly manufacturer's representative, or by a certified tester approved by
the city. It shall be the duty of the Director of Community Services to see
that these tests are made in a timely manner. The water user shall notify the
city in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official
representative may witness the tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be
repaired, over-hauled or replaced at the expense of the water user whenever
said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such test, repairs, and
overhaul shall be kept and made available to the city. Failure of the water
user to comply with the inspection, maintenance, and reporting provisions of
this section shall result in discontinuance of service as prescribed in §§
53.57 and
53.58 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 5-10.108) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.63 SPECIAL CONDITIONS.
   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the
requirements of this subchapter but were approved devices for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under
§
53.57 of this subchapter be excluded from the requirements of these rules so
long as the Director of Community Services is assured that they will
satisfactorily protect the potable water supply system of the city. Whenever
the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than
the minimum maintenance or when the Director of Community Services finds that
the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by
an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this
subchapter at the sole expense of the water user.
('63 Code, § 5-10.109) (Ord. 469-C.S., passed 5-5-88)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be in violation of §
53.18 of this chapter shall be charged a penalty fee of $50 in addition to such
fees as are determined in accordance with §
53.18 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 5-6.22) (Ord. 140-C.S., passed 7-1-70; Am. Ord. 269-C.S., passed
1-21-77)
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, violations of any
provision of this chapter shall be punished as follows:
 
Violation                                               Classification Penalty
First violation                                         Infraction     $10
Second violation                                        Infraction     30
Third violation and subsequent violations within a six- Misdemeanor    100
month period
 
      (2)   Each day any violation of this chapter is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
('63 Code, § 5-7.09)
(Ord. 274-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 465-C.S., passed 12-31-87)
CHAPTER 54: STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Section
   
54.020   Title
   
54.021   Purpose and intent
   
54.022   Definitions
   
54.030   Applicability
   
54.031   Responsibility for administration
   
54.032   Severability
   
54.033   Regulatory consistency
   
54.034   Ultimate responsibility of discharger
   
54.040   Prohibition of illicit discharges
   
54.041   Prohibition of illicit connections
   
54.042   Waste disposal prohibitions
   
54.043   Requirements for reducing pollutants in storm water
   
54.044   Adoption of best management practices
   
54.050   Requirement to eliminate illicit discharges
   
54.051   Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections
   
54.052   Watercourse protection
   
54.053   Requirement to remediate
   
54.054   Requirement to monitor and analyze
   
54.055   Notification of spills
   
54.060   Authority to inspect
   
54.061   Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test
   
54.062   Notice of violation
   
54.063   Appeal
   
54.064   Abatement by city
   
54.065   Charging cost of abatement/liens
   
54.066   Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Federal Clean Water
Act and/or California Porter-Cologne Act
§ 54.020 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Urban Storm Water Quality Management and
Discharge Control Ordinance” of the City of Eureka and may be so cited.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.021 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of citizens, and protect and enhance the water
quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and
consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and the
Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000
et seq.) by reducing pollutants in storm water discharges to the maximum extent
practicable and by prohibiting non-storm water discharges to the storm drainage
facilities.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.022 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES. Activities, prohibitions, practices, or
maintenance procedures that prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants or
discharges directly or indirectly to the municipal storm drain facilities and
waters of the State and/or United States. Best Management Practices include but
are not limited to: treatment facilities to remove pollutants from storm water;
operating and maintenance procedures; facility management practices to control
runoff, spillage or leaks of non-storm water, waste disposal, and drainage from
materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition
of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as
the city determines appropriate for the control of pollutants.
   CITY. The City of Eureka.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, 33 USC § 1251 et seq., and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating and demolition.
   DIRECTOR. The City of Eureka Public Works Director.
   DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS. The introduction of pollutants into the city's
storm drainage facilities or any waters of the United States.
   DISCHARGER. The person, corporation, partnership or other entity directly
causing or allowing the discharge.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. Without limitation, any material that because of its
quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a
significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the
environment if released into the work place or the environment. HAZARDOUS
SUBSTANCES include, but are not limited to, those substances included within
the definitions of “hazardous substance,” “hazardous waste,” “hazardous
material,” “toxic substance,” “solid waste,” or “pollutant or contaminant” in
any local, state or federal law or regulation. (California Health and Safety
Code § 25117).
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An ILLICIT CONNECTION is defined as either of the
following:
       (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain facilities,
including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the
storm drain facilities and any connections to the storm drain facilities from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by a government agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain facilities which has not been documented in plans,
maps or equivalent records and approved by the city.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drainage facilities, except as exempted in §
54.040.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES Industrial permits as
defined in 40 CFR, § 122.26(b)(14).
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMITS. Permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Clean Water Act, 33
USC. 1342, and administered by the State of California under the authority of
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, permitting the discharge of
pollutants into navigable waters of the United States.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain facilities that
is not composed entirely of storm water.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects and
accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes;
sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or
structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete
rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. A pollutant shall also
include any increment or increase in the total volume or rate of storm water
runoff resulting from any activity or development occurring after the effective
date of this chapter in which a storm water limit had been set as a condition
of approval.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the quality of
waters by pollutant(s) to a degree which unreasonably affects, or has the
potential to unreasonably affect, either the waters for beneficial uses or the
facilities which serve these beneficial uses (California Water Code § 13050).
   PORTER-COLOGNE ACT. The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as
amended (California Water Code § 13000 et seq.).
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether,
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. The storm and surface water drainage systems
comprised of storm water control facilities and any other natural facilities
which store, control, treat and/or convey storm and surface water. STORM
DRAINAGE FACILITIES shall include all natural and constructed elements used to
convey storm water from the first point of contact with the surface of the
earth to a suitable receiving body of water or location, internal or external,
to the boundaries of the city. They shall include: pipes, appurtenant features,
culverts, streets, curbs, gutters, pumping stations, channels, streams,
ditches, wetlands, detention/retention basins, ponds, and other storm water
conveyance and treatment facilities whether public or private.
     STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation, and resulting therefrom, including snow melt, surface runoff and
drainage.
   WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. Surface watercourses and water bodies as
defined at 40 CFR § 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite
channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such
waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry storm
water at and during all times and seasons.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.030 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain facilities
generated on any developed and undeveloped lands lying within the city.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.031 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The Public Works Director or designee of the city shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the Public Works Director may be delegated in writing by
the Public Works Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the city.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.032 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.033 REGULATORY CONSISTENCY.
   This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements
of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Act and acts amendatory thereof or
supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.034 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY OF DISCHARGER.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore, this chapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants into waters of the state
and/or U.S. caused by said person. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the city, or any agent or employee thereof for any damages that
result from any discharger's reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.040 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm
drainage facilities or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to
pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water.
   (B)   Discharges from the following activities are exempt and shall not be
considered an illicit discharge when the discharger conducts the activity such
that the least amount of non-storm water as practicable enters the storm water
drainage facilities:
      (1)   Watering of lawns, landscaping, and gardens;
      (2)   Exterior washing of personal motorized vehicles by residents;
      (3)   Draining of water from swimming pools or spas, after the chlorine
or other disinfectant concentrate of such water shows a reading of zero
concentration on a test kit;
      (4)   Flushing of water lines and hydrants, or other discharges from
potable water sources if the chlorine concentration is less than 1.0 milligrams
per liter measured at the point of entry into the storm water drainage system;
      (5)   Flows from firefighting;
      (6)   Crawl space and basement sump pumps which are properly permitted;
      (7)   Condensation from air conditioning units;
      (8)   Gravity drainage from groundwater piping systems, including
foundation and footing drains, and roof drainage downspouts;
      (9)   Discharges from naturally occurring rising ground waters,
floodwaters, springs and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
   (C)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered by the State of California under the authority of
the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in
full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been
granted by the city for any discharge to the storm drain facilities.
   (D)   With written concurrence of the Regional Water Quality Control Board,
the city may exempt in writing other non-storm water discharges which are not a
source of pollutants to the storm drainage facilities nor waters of the U.S.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.041 PROHIBITION OF ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall install, use or maintain a drain, conveyance, pipe,
channel or other connection to the storm water drainage facilities, whether on
the surface or subsurface, that may result in the discharge of a pollutant or
pollutants into the storm water drainage facilities. For example, such illicit
connections include but are not limited to those that could allow sewage,
wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm water drainage facilities and
connections from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether the connection
had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by the city.
   (B)   No person shall install, use or maintain a drain or conveyance
connected from a commercial or industrial premises to the storm water drainage
facilities where such connection or drain is not approved by the city and
documented in city records.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.042 WASTE DISPOSAL PROHIBITIONS.
   No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be
thrown, deposited, left, or maintained, in or upon any public or private
property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of the
storm drainage facilities, or water of the U.S., any refuse, rubbish, garbage,
litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, so that the same may cause or
contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets in proper waste
receptacles for the purposes of collection are exempted from this prohibition.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.043 REQUIREMENTS FOR REDUCING POLLUTANTS IN STORM WATER.
   (A)   Any person engaging in activities that may result in pollutants
entering the city's storm drain facilities or waters of the state and/or U.S.
shall implement Best Management Practices to the extent they are
technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants. Examples of
such activities include, but are not limited to, ownership of and use of
premises that may be a source of pollutants, such as parking lots, gasoline
stations, industrial facilities and business enterprises. The owner or operator
of commercial or industrial facilities shall provide reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal
storm drain facilities or watercourses. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and
maintained at the owner or operator's expense.
   (B)   Any construction contractor performing work in the city shall
implement appropriate Best Management Practices to prevent the discharge of
construction waste, debris or contaminants from construction materials, tools
and equipment from entering the storm water system. Best Management Practices
shall include, but not be limited to the use of filter materials at drain
inlets to retain debris, dirt or other pollutants generated by such work.
   (C)   Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES
storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit.
Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to
the Public Works Director prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site
plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of
the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other
reasonable cause.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
 Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.044 ADOPTION OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   (A)   The Public Works Director or designee shall, as soon as practicable,
formulate and develop a Best Management Practices Manual for activities,
operations, or facilities that may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of the storm drainage facilities or waters of the state and/or
United States. The Best Management Practices Manual shall include appropriate
Best Management Practices for controlling the volume, rate and potential
pollutant load of storm water runoff from existing and new projects as may be
appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants.
Best Management Practices requirements promulgated by any federal, state, or
regional agency shall be incorporated into the Manual as appropriate.
   (B)   The Best Management Practices Manual shall be revised and updated on a
regular basis as needed to address new development, new regulations, or
changing circumstances.
   (C)   The Best Management Practices Manual and all revisions thereto shall
be adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.050 REQUIREMENT TO ELIMINATE ILLICIT DISCHARGES.
   Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter, the Public Works Director
may require by written notice that a person responsible for an illicit
discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and,
if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent
the occurrence of future illicit discharges.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.051 REQUIREMENT TO ELIMINATE OR SECURE APPROVAL FOR ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director may require by written notice that a person
responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain facilities comply with
the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the
connection by a specified date, regardless of whether or not the connection or
discharges to it had been established or approved prior to the effective date
of this chapter.
   (B)   If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of
this chapter, the responsible person can demonstrate that an illegal discharge
will no longer occur, said person may request city approval to reconnect. The
reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible
person's expense.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.052 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes shall keep
and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free
of trash, debris and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition,
the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately-owned structures within
or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard
to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.053 REQUIREMENT TO REMEDIATE.
   Whenever the Public Works Director finds that a discharge of pollutants is
taking place or has occurred which will result in or has resulted in pollution
of storm water, storm drainage facilities, or water of the state and/or U.S.,
the Public Works Director may require by written notice to the owner of the
property and/or the responsible person that the pollution be remediated and the
affected property restored within a time specified in said notice.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.054 REQUIREMENT TO MONITOR AND ANALYZE.
   The Public Works Director may require by written notice of requirement that
any person engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility
which may cause or contribute to storm water pollution, illicit discharges,
and/or non-storm water discharges to the storm drain facilities or waters of
the state and/or U.S., to undertake at said person's expense such monitoring
and analyses and furnish such reports to the city as deemed necessary to
determine compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.055 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain facilities, or water of the state
and/or U.S. from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to
ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of
such a release of a hazardous material said person shall immediately notify
emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services
(911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall
notify the city's Public Works Department in person, by phone or facsimile no
later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by
phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city's
Public Works Department within three business days of the phone notice. If the
discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial
establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an
on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its
recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.060 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this
chapter or whenever the Public Works Director has cause to believe that there
exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which
constitutes a violation of this chapter, the Director may enter such premises
at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records
related to storm water compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses
entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the city is hereby
empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in
obtaining such entry.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.061 AUTHORITY TO SAMPLE, ESTABLISH SAMPLING DEVICES, AND TEST.
   During any inspection as provided herein, the Public Works Director or
designee may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid
in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.062 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Public Works Director finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Director may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice may require without limitation:
   (A)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
   (B)   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
   (C)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
   (D)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination
hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
   (E)   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and
   (F)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMP's.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.063 APPEAL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
54.064 below, any person receiving a Notice of Violation under §
54.062 above may appeal the determination of the Public Works Director to the
City Manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the City Manager within
five days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the City Manager or his or her designee shall take place within 15 days
from the date of the city's receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of
the City Manager or designee shall be final.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.064 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal under §
54.063, within ten days of the decision of the City Manager upholding the
decision of the Public Works Director, then the city or a contractor designated
by the Public Works Director shall enter upon the subject private property and
is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation
and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent
or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the city or
designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth
above.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
 Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 54.065 CHARGING COST OF ABATEMENT/LIENS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after abatement of the nuisance by the City, the Public
Works Director shall notify the property owner of the abatement cost, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount of the assessment with the City Clerk within 15 days. The City
Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the City Council. The decision
of the City Council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be final.
   (B)   If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the
City Council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under
this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Auditor
so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel
as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall
include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the
parcel of land.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
§ 54.066 ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN A VIOLATION OF THE FEDERAL CLEAN WATER
ACT AND/OR CALIFORNIA PORTER-COLOGNE ACT.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the
Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Act and may be subject to the
sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any enforcement
action authorized under this chapter shall also include written notice to the
violator of such potential liability.
(Ord. 705-C.S., passed 1-17-06)
CHAPTER 55: ENERGY
Section
Community Choice Aggregation
   
55.01   Findings and purpose
   
55.02   Participation in Community Choice Aggregation
   
55.03   Severability
COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION
§ 55.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The California Public Utilities Code under Chapter 2.3 of Division 1,
Part 1 allows electric utility customers to aggregate their electric loads as
members of their local community with community choice aggregators, where a
community choice aggregator may be any city, county, or group of cities or
counties who have elected to combine the loads of their programs through the
formation of a joint powers agency established under Chapter 5 (commencing with
Section 6500) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the California Government Code.
   (B)   The City of Eureka has been investigating options to provide electric
services to constituents within its service areas with the intent of achieving
greater local involvement over the provisions of electric services, competitive
electric rates, the development of clean, local renewable energy projects,
reduced greenhouse gas emissions, and the wider implementation of energy
conservation and efficiency projects and programs through a community choice
aggregation (CCA) program.
   (C)   The City of Eureka is a member of the Redwood Coast Energy Authority
(RCEA), a joint powers authority formed by the County of Humboldt, Cities of
Arcata, Blue Lake, Eureka, Ferndale, Fortuna and Rio Dell, Trinidad and the
Humboldt Bay Municipal Water District, to act as a regional agency to promote
sustainable energy initiatives that reduce energy demand, increase energy
efficiency, and advance the use of clean, efficient and renewable resources
available in the region.
   (D)   The RCEA is authorized by ordinance to act as a community choice
aggregator to implement and operate a CCA program under California law.
   (E)   RCEA has established key CCA program goals of maximizing the use of
local renewable resources while also providing competitive rates to customers.
These goals are aimed at supporting local economic development as well as
reducing the environmental impacts resulting from the use of electricity in a
technically and economically feasible manner.
   (F)   To analyze the feasibility of operating a CCA program that achieves
these goals, RCEA has procured independent technical support services to
conduct the appropriate development and operational studies, including
technical, financial and risk analyses. These studies will assist RCEA, its
member agencies, and the community in evaluating a potential rate structure and
energy portfolio, and, ultimately, potential CCA program viability prior to
formal launch of a CCA program through the filing of an Implementation Plan
with the CPUC.
   (G)   Participation in a CCA program implemented and operated by the RCEA,
rather than independently electing to become a community choice aggregator,
will reduce the City's financial exposure from community choice aggregation, if
any, because RCEA's joint power authority structure immunizes its member
agencies from its debts, liabilities and obligations, and therefore the debts,
liabilities and obligations of a CCA program.
   (H)   Electric customers have the right to opt out of the CCA program and
continue to receive service from the existing utility under Public Utilities
Code § 366.2.
   (I)   Under the RCEA CCA program structure, the city will have CCA program
voting privileges on the RCEA Board of Directors as set out in the RCEA Amended
and Restated Joint Powers Agreement effective December 15, 2015.
(Ord. 838-C.S., passed 6-21-16)
§ 55.02 PARTICIPATION IN COMMUNITY CHOICE AGGREGATION.
   Based on all of the above, the City Council of the City of Eureka elects to
implement a Community Choice Aggregation program within the city's jurisdiction
by and through the RCEA, subject to the determination of the RCEA, based on its
CCA program developmental and operational analyses and member agency input,
that a CCA program based on the key goals set out above is not technically or
economically feasible and consequently decides not to launch the CCA program.
(Ord. 838-C.S., passed 6-21-16)
§ 55.03 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining portion of this ordinance. The City
Council of the City of Eureka hereby declares that it would have passed this
ordinance and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences,
clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 838-C.S., passed 6-21-16)
CHAPTER 56: STREETS
Section
General Provisions
   
56.01   Definitions
Encroachments of Streets and Easements
   
56.10   Permits required; application
   
56.11   Regulation of permits
   
56.12   Exceptions
   
56.13   Fees and deposits
   
56.14   Blanket permits
   
56.15   Violation - revocation and other penalties
Street Opening and Pavement Restoration Regulations
   
56.30   Purpose and policy
   
56.31   Prohibition period
   
56.32   Permits
   
56.33   Temporary trench covers
   
56.34   Excavation and backfill
   
56.35   Paving
   
56.36   Repair of excavations in prohibition streets
   
56.37   Defects
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 56.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any street identified as "minor arterial" in the current
California Road System (CRS) Map.
   ASPHALT CONCRETE or AC. Blend of aggregate and asphalt binder meeting the
specifications set forth in the City of Eureka Standard Specifications Section
02610, "Asphalt Concrete" and the Caltrans Standard Specifications Section 39,
"Asphalt Concrete."
   CHIP SEAL. See the definition of SLURRY SEAL.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, a charter city and a municipal corporation duly
organized and validly existing under the laws of the State of California, and
all departments, divisions, and offices thereof.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city or his/her designee.
   CITY PROPERTY. Any real property vested in the city.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the city or his/
her designee.
   CITY STANDARDS. The City of Eureka's standard documents, including but not
limited to plans, specifications, details and special provisions.
   EASEMENT. Any right-of-way or easement for any public purpose vested in the
city.
   ENCROACH. Constructing or placing temporary or permanent structures,
improvements, facilities or materials in, on, over, or under any public right-
of-way or using any right-of-way so as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with
the normal use of that way, including but not limited to the performance of any
of the following acts:
      (1)   Excavating or disturbing the public right-of-way;
      (2)   Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, pole, fence, guard-rail,
wall, pipe, conduit, cable, wire, communication service equipment, or other
facility or structure on, over, or under a public right-of-way;
      (3)   Planting any tree, shrub, grass, or other growing thing within the
public right-of-way;
      (4)   Placing or leaving on the public right-of-way any rubbish, brush,
earth, or material;
      (5)   Constructing, placing, or maintaining on, over, under, or within a
public right-of-way any pathway, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing; any
culvert or other surface drainage or subsurface drainage facility; or any pipe,
conduit, wire, communication service equipment or facility, or cable;
      (6)   Constructing, placing, planting, or maintaining any structure,
embankment, excavation, tree, or other object adjacent to the public right-of-
way which causes or may cause an encroachment.
   ENGINEER. The City Engineer or their designee.
   EXCAVATION. Any hole, cavity or trench made by excavating within the street
right-of-way to access or install a utility line or ay related facility. All
such excavations shall require an encroachment permit.
   EXCAVATOR. The applicant/permittee to whom an encroachment permit is issued
for the purposes of excavation.
   FACILITY. Any fiberoptic, coaxial, or copper cable; communication service
equipment; telephone, telecommunications, electric or other wire, line or
equipment; utility structure; oil, gas, or other pipeline; duct; conduit;
cabinet; tunnel; vault; drain; manhole; splice box; surface location marker;
pole; subsurface tiebacks; soil nails; stairs; access ramps; subsurface
foundations; landscape features, including curbs around planter areas; planter
boxes; clocks; bus shelters; phone booths; bike racks; fencing; retaining
walls; benches; stockpiles; building materials; and other appurtenances or
tangible things located in, upon, above, beneath, or across any public right-
of-way.
   MAJOR ARTERIAL STREET. Any street identified as "other principal arterial"
in the current California Road System (CRS) Map.
   MAJOR DEFECTS. Any defects greater than the deficiency tolerances specified
in the City of Eureka Standards; the Caltrans Standard Specifications and
Details; or Individual Contract Plans and Specifications.
   MICRO PAVING. See the definition of SLURRY SEAL.
   MICRO SURFACING. See the definition of SLURRY SEAL.
   PAVEMENT CONDITION INDEX (PCI). A numerical index between 0 and 100 which is
used to indicate the general condition of a pavement according to ASTM
standards.
   PERMITTEE. Any person, contractor, utility or special district that has been
issued a permit pursuant to this chapter, including any lawful successor,
transferee, or assignee of the original permittee. All obligations,
responsibilities, and other requirements of the permittee shall be binding on
successors in interest of the original permittee.
   PERSON. Any natural person, firm, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust,
organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of
any of them or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights or duties, not including the City of Eureka or the city's officers,
employees, or agents.
   PROHIBITION STREET. Streets that have been repaved within the last five
years or had a preservative treatment such as micro-surfacing or slurry seal
within the past three years, or any street with a Pavement Condition Index
(PCI) of greater than or equal to 80.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area in, upon, above, beneath, or across any land
or interest which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage,
or process of law is reserved for or dedicated to the use of the general public
for travel, and includes any public street, road, highway, freeway, bridge,
lane, court, alley, boulevard, sidewalk, median, parkway, or emergency vehicle
easement.
   PUBLIC STREET. The full width of the surfaced or travel portion, including
shoulders, of any road, street, path, lane, or alley dedicated to, reserved
for, or used by or for the general public when those roads, streets, paths,
lanes, and alleys have been accepted as and declared to be part of the city
system of public streets, except highways forming a part of the state highway
system.
   SLURRY SEAL. A mixture of polymer modified asphalt emulsion, mineral
aggregate, mineral filler, water, and other additives, properly proportioned,
mixed, and spread in accordance with the City of Eureka Standards and the
Caltrans Standard Specifications; usually less than ½ inches in thickness.
   SPECIAL DISTRICT. Any agency of the state for the local performance of
governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries, and includes a
county service area, a maintenance district or area, an improvement district or
improvement zone, or any other zone or area within which a property tax or
assessment will be levied to pay for a service or improvement benefitting that
area.
   STREET. Any public right-of-way or easement for street, road, alley,
highway, lane, court, or other public access purposes vested in the city.
   STREET OVERLAY. One or more courses of asphalt construction on an existing
pavement; usually greater than ½ inches in thickness; generally includes an
asphalt leveling course to correct the contour of the old pavement.
   STRUCTURE. Any physical alteration or improvement below, on, or above the
ground installed or constructed by man, including but not limited to a
building, post, cabinet, fence, vault, sign, pole, guard rail, wall, facility,
pedestrian walking path, sidewalk, driveway, track, surfacing, culvert,
drainage facility, pipe, embankment, or excavation.
   TIDELANDS. Any submerged lands in Humboldt Bay vested in the city.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT. Has the meaning set forth in §
52.01 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
   UTILITY. Any person or entity providing electricity, gas, telephone,
telecommunications, water, or other services to customers, and which pursuant
to state law or local franchise is entitled to install its facilities in the
public right-of-way.
   WEARING SURFACE DEFECTS. The defects in the surface of a roadway that is in
direct contact with traffic and that resists the resulting abrading, crushing,
or other disintegrating action.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
ENCROACHMENTS OF STREETS AND EASEMENTS
§ 56.10 PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to excavate in or to construct,
install, or maintain any improvement, structure, or encroachment in, on, over,
or under any city property, tidelands, street or easement without first
obtaining from the Director of Public Works a permit therefor, or to maintain
the same without such permit or in violation of the terms or conditions
thereof.
   (B)   Permits shall be issued by the Director of Public Works only upon
receipt of a complete written application and payment of the required fees and
deposits. Application shall be on forms provided by the city and shall include
the following information unless waived by the City Engineer:
      (1)   The name and residence of the applicant;
      (2)   The location, purpose, and dimensions of the proposed excavation,
construction, improvement, structure, or encroachment;
      (3)   The name and address of the person who will perform the work; and
      (4)   Such additional information as the Director of Public Works may
require based on the nature, scale, duration or potential impacts of the
proposed work.
      (5)   A current City of Eureka Business License.
      (6)   Current evidence of insurance.
      (7)   Twenty-four hour phone number and name for emergencies.
      (8)   The name, telephone number, and mailing address (fax number, cell
phone, and e-mail address if available) of the person who will receive all
office correspondence from the City of Eureka.
      (9)   If the project includes street excavations, plans indicating the
following shall be submitted:
         (a)   Name of the street to be excavated and the nearest cross street.
         (b)   Distance of proposed excavation from the face of curb.
         (c)   Distance of proposed excavation from the intersection.
         (d)   The size of the excavation (length and width).
         (e)   The location of any above ground facilities to be installed,
showing:
            1.   Distance from curb and any street facilities/furnishings.
            2.   Purpose of the facility.
            3.   Size of the facility.
            4.   Location of doors and door swings.
         (f)   The location of any existing underground facilities and the
location of underground facilities to be installed showing:
            1.   Conduit vaults, maintenance holes, pipes, etc.
         (g)   Structural detail and additional information for structures to
be installed such as vaults and maintenance holes.
         (h)   The construction method of the structure to be installed.
         (i)   Construction detail, location, size, design criteria and the
purpose of the facility to be installed.
         (j)   Cross section of a typical trench indicating:
            1.   The approximate depth of the facility to be installed.
            2.   Trench backfill material, depth, compaction and layer depths.
            3.   Pavement section detail (type and depths).
            4.   Plans, structural details, and trench cross section must be
signed and stamped by a licensed Civil Engineer, when legally required.
      (10)   A traffic control plan.
         (a)   No disruption of traffic is allowed after 4:00 p.m. and before
8:00 a.m. unless specifically approved for these hours.
      (11)   Estimated start and completion dates. A permit is valid from the
construction start date specified on the approved permit until the specified
completion date.
   (C)   If the permittee damages other facilities during their work and
additional work is needed beyond the scope of the original permit, the
permittee will need an additional encroachment permit or amended permit at the
discretion of the Engineer.
   (D)   The original permittee shall maintain and restore the site including
any affected concrete, pavement, signage or striping to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer.
   (E)   Except in an emergency, permits shall be obtained in advance of any
work. An emergency is considered to exist only when life or property is
endangered or when an essential utility service is or may be interrupted during
weekends, holidays, or between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of normal working days.
In the event of an emergency, the person performing the work shall notify the
City of Eureka and apply for an encroachment permit for "emergency work" within
four hours after the City of Eureka's office opens.
   (F)   Some permits may be valid on specific dates. They may be approved with
special conditions specifying dates:
      (1)   When work shall be performed.
      (2)   When work shall be completed.
      (3)   Date and time before which work shall not start.
   (G)   Permits expire and become void, unless otherwise amended:
      (1)   Sixty days after the start date, if no work has begun.
      (2)   If the work is not diligently proceeding and there are delays of
more than four working days after the work has started, unless the delays are
caused by weather or other circumstances beyond the permittee's control.
      (3)   When the work, including the trench restoration, is completed or on
the date specified on the permit as the expiration date.
      (4)   When the insurance certificate for the permittee expires.
      (5)   If the city receives notification that the permittee's insurance
has been cancelled.
   (H)   The work is determined to be proceeding diligently if:
      (1)   After a project begins, work continues on a regular basis, except
for weekends, holidays, inclement weather, labor disputes, or any emergency
beyond the control of the permittee.
      (2)   The permittee ensures that all necessary materials and supplies are
on hand and ready for use so as not to delay the excavation and the prompt
restoration of the public right-of-way.
   (I)   A valid permit may be extended by requesting an extension prior to the
expiration date by specifying the dates that need to be changed and explaining
the reason for the extension. Proof of insurance through the extension period
must be provided. The Engineer reserves the right to deny a request for
extension.
   (J)   If an application has been withdrawn or an approved permit is
cancelled prior to the start of work the applicant or permittee may request a
refund of any deposit or bond funds; all other permit fees are non-refundable.
   (K)   To request a refund, a request must be submitted in writing to the
City Engineer. The request shall include:
      (1)   The reason for cancellation or withdrawal.
      (2)   The permit number.
   (L)   By accepting an encroachment permit, the permittee and the owner of
the facility(ies) for which the permit has been issued agree:
      (1)   To follow all laws, rules, regulations, and permit conditions.
      (2)   To assure that their employees, contractors, and subcontractors,
comply with all laws, rules, regulations, and permit conditions.
      (3)   To indemnify the City of Eureka against all claims for personal
injury or property damage that may arise in connection with the work.
   (M)   The encroachment permit shall be available during work periods at the
project site, until the project is completed and approved by the Engineer.
Permit(s) shall be shown to the City of Eureka employees upon request.
   (N)   The permittee shall provide notification to the public as required by
the City Engineer when working within the public right-of-way. Required notice
procedures may include posters, door hangers or other means of informing
residents of the nature and duration of the work and to providing a point of
contact for emergencies or complaints.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.11 REGULATION OF PERMITS.
   The following regulations shall be applicable to permits issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   No permit shall be issued unless the use proposed is in the public
interests and there will be no substantial injury to city property, tidelands,
streets or easements or prolonged impairment of its use as a result thereof.
   (B)   The permit shall be revocable, and the right thereunder shall be
subordinate to any prior right of the city to use the street or easement for
public purposes. The permit shall be conditional upon the right of the city to
require the permittee to relocate or remove any structure or encroachment
constructed, installed, or maintained thereunder at the permittee's expense
where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, that action is
reasonable and necessary to avoid a crossing conflict for the benefit of any
public agency.
   (C)   The permit shall be conditioned upon all work performed thereunder
conforming to City Standards.
   (D)   Encroachment permits are not valid if other required permits are not
obtained or required notifications are not given.
   (E)   The Director of Public Works may require such surety bond or deposit
of money as in his judgment is necessary to secure performance of the
conditions of the permit and the requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   The Director of Public Works may, for reasons of city convenience,
arrange to do the work of the restoration of city property, tideland or street
surfaces at the expense of the permittee. If the permittee fails to refill any
excavation or to restore the street or easement to its condition prior to the
excavation, the Director of Public Works shall have the right to perform the
work and to collect from the permittee in the name of the city the cost
thereof.
   (G)   The Director of Public Works shall have the right to remove any
structure or encroachment constructed, installed, or maintained in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, and to restore the city property, tideland,
street or easement to its condition prior to the excavation, construction, or
installation, and to collect in the name of the city the cost thereof.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.12 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   An excavation or encroachment may be made without first obtaining a
permit for the repair or replacement of a facility previously installed or
constructed only when necessary for the immediate protection or preservation of
life or property, and provided the permit shall be obtained on the first
business day thereafter, and further provided that the excavation or
encroachment is made in a manner which fully protects the health, safety, and
welfare of the general public.
   (B)   A public utility which holds a franchise issued by the city or state
which authorizes the use of the city streets for infrastructure shall not be
required to obtain a permit for routine maintenance operations in streets or
easements. For the purpose of this section, routine maintenance shall be
defined as isolated spot repairs which are not part of a larger coordinated
project and are four square feet or four feet long, or smaller. This exception
shall not relieve the permittee from notifying the city of the work being
performed nor does it waive the right of the Director of Public Works to
regulate the location of utilities and to resolve conflicts between the various
users of the streets.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to signs and
other similar installations.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.13 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   A fee schedule may be adopted by resolution of the Council
establishing permit fees and inspection fees for the various types of
excavations, installations, construction, and encroachments. The permit fee
shall be paid at the time the application for the permit is filed, and the
inspection fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit. Permit fees
represent the value of staff time in processing a permit application and are
non-refundable.
   (B)   All past due fees, fines and penalties owed by the applicant must be
paid before a permit will be issued.
   (C)   If a permit violation occurs no other application will be processed
until the fines and penalties have been paid and all permit conditions are met.
   (D)   If an account is past due or not in good standings, a permit cannot be
issued until the account is brought into good standing. To bring the account to
good standing, all fees and fines must be paid.
   (E)   The following persons shall be exempt from the payment of the permit
and inspection fees:
      (1)   Every public district, public agency, or political subdivision
having lawful authority to use the streets or easements of the city for the
purposes proposed;
      (2)   Special assessment districts constructing public improvements under
proceedings conducted by the Council;
      (3)   The city and its employees and officers while acting within the
scope of their official duties; and
      (4)   Contractors acting under a specific contact with the city under
which the entire cost of the proposed excavation, installation, or construction
is borne by the city.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.14 BLANKET PERMITS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works may issue to any applicant a blanket
permit for a series of excavations, installations, or encroachments of the same
type and may prescribe a procedure for the payment of the fees therefor on a
monthly or annual basis. The provisions of this section shall be broadly
construed to reduce the administrative costs of both the applicants and the
city.
   (B)   Applicants seeking blanket permits are encouraged to communicate
planned excavations with the city, other utility owners and/or other applicants
in an effort to coordinate project schedules and minimize impacts to the
roadway and traveling public.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.15 VIOLATIONS - REVOCATION AND OTHER PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter may be enforced though administrative
citation, as an infraction or misdemeanor, or by any remedy available to the
city under this code or under state law.
      (1)   Any fines shall be paid by the permittee prior to issuance of any
additional permits for work in the City of Eureka.
   (B)   Suspension. Whenever the Engineer finds it necessary to suspend an
encroachment permit to protect the public health or safety from imminent
danger, the Engineer may immediately suspend any such permit pending a hearing
for remedial action or revocation. The Engineer shall, within three working
days of the emergency suspension, give a written notice of such suspension to
the permittee, by personal service or by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the last known address of the permittee. The permittee may, within 15 days
after service of such a written notice of suspension, file with the City
Manager a written request for hearing regarding the suspension. The City
Manager or his or her designee shall schedule a hearing on the suspension
within five working days of receipt of a request for hearing. If the City
Manager or his or her designee, after the hearing, finds that the public health
or safety requires correction or alteration of any condition caused by, or
existing on the site of the encroachment, he or she shall issue one or more of
the following:
      (1)   An order to correct any particular noncompliance.
      (2)   A revocation of the encroachment permit.
      (3)   A continued suspension of the encroachment permit, until such time
as the dangerous condition is corrected.
      (4)   A modification or reinstatement of the encroachment permit, with
conditions as necessary to prevent harm to the public.
   (C)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall, within ten days of the
hearing, render a written opinion, stating the findings upon which the decision
is based, and the action taken. The decision of the City Manager or his or her
designee shall be final, except a decision to revoke the permit which may be
appealed to the City Council in accordance with §
39.01 of this Code.
   (D)   Revocation. The Engineer may recommend that the City Manager revoke a
permit where he or she finds that:
      (1)   The permittee has violated any provision of this code or conditions
of the permit;
      (2)   The permittee has failed to pay any required fees, or to post or
maintain any bond or insurance required by this chapter;
      (3)   The encroachment for which the permit was granted adversely affects
the safety, capacity, or integrity of the city's public right-of- way or
increases the city's liability exposure;
      (4)   The encroachment is causing the city to incur substantial
additional maintenance costs; or
      (5)   Material misrepresentations, omissions, or inaccuracies were made
in the application for the permit.
   (E)   The Engineer shall give the permittee at least ten days' written
notice of a hearing before the City Manager or his or her designee on the
proposed revocation of a permit issued pursuant to this Chapter, setting forth
the grounds for such action. If, after reviewing all evidence presented before
or at the public hearing, the City Manager or his or her designee makes any one
of the five findings set forth above, he or she may revoke the permit.
   (F)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall, within ten days after
the close of the hearing, render a written opinion, stating the findings upon
which the decision is based, and the action taken. The decision of the City
Manager or his or her designee may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with §
39.01 of this code.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
STREET OPENING AND PAVEMENT RESTORATION REGULATIONS
§ 56.30 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   The public right-of-way is a unique public resource held in trust for
the benefit of the public. This physically limited resource requires proper
management to maximize its efficiency and minimize the costs to taxpayers, to
protect against foreclosure of future economic expansion because of premature
exhaustion of the public right-of-way, and to minimize the inconvenience to and
negative effects on the public from use of the public right-of-way by
contractors and utility companies.
   (B)   To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the City of Eureka shall
endeavor to coordinate its Capital Improvement Programs with those of utility
companies and franchisees with facilities in, on, under or above the public
right-of-way. Information about any planned work in the right-of-way shall be
shared at the earliest possible time. Utility owners and franchisees are
encouraged to coordinate their street excavations so that all work is done
simultaneously and the street is not excavated more than once within a 12-month
period.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.31 PROHIBITION PERIOD.
   (A)   For streets having recently received new pavement consisting of at
least a one-half inch thick layer of asphalt, the prohibition period shall be
five years from the date of installation.
   (B)   For those streets with chip seal, slurry seal coating, or micro paving
(or similar) with less than one-half inch of new pavement, the prohibition
period shall be three years from the date of installation.
   (C)   For streets not sealed or paved within the last three to five years
the prohibition period shall end when the PCI drops below 80 according to the
city's most recent PCI survey/study.
   (D)   Utilities shall plan well enough in advance to determine alternate
methods of making necessary repairs to avoid excavating in prohibition streets.
Exceptions are as follows:
      (1)   Emergencies that endanger life or property.
      (2)   Interruption of essential utility service.
      (3)   Work that is mandated by city, state, or federal law.
      (4)   Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing
service exists.
      (5)   Situations in which no alternative course of action exists, as
determined by the Engineer in writing setting forth the facts giving rise to
the conclusion that no alternative exists.
   (E)   To excavate in a Prohibition Street a waiver must be obtained. Before
issuing a permit for work in a Prohibition Street, the Engineer will verify
that the applicant has analyzed all feasible alternatives to make the necessary
repairs using a trenchless method to avoid excavating a prohibition street
whenever possible.
   (F)   To request a waiver, the applicant must submit a written request to
the Engineer. The request shall accompany a completed application for an
Encroachment Permit along with the following additional information:
      (1)   The reason(s) the work was not performed before the street was
paved.
      (2)   The reason(s) the work cannot be deferred until after the
prohibition period.
      (3)   The reason(s) the work cannot be performed at another location.
      (4)   The reason(s) it is justified to excavate the Prohibition Street.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.32 PERMITS.
   Any and all construction work within the public right-of-way shall require
an encroachment permit in conformance with §
56.10. The contractor and all subcontractors performing the work shall apply
for and obtain the permit.
§ 56.33 TEMPORARY TRENCH COVERS.
   (A)   Every trench must be backfilled to the existing surface and shall
include a minimum three inch layer of temporary cold asphalt concrete or
covered by steel trench plates the same day.
   (B)   If backfilled, the trench shall be flush with the existing surface and
include a minimum three inch layer of temporary cold mix asphalt concrete.
   (C)   If steel plates are used, the plates shall overlap the existing
pavement by a minimum of 12 inch, secured against movement in any direction and
shall be ramped to the elevation on the adjacent pavement. Temporary ramps
shall be constructed of fine grained asphalt and shall have a maximum slope of
5.0% (1:20) with a minimum of 18 inches of taper to the plate edge.
   (D)   Steel plates may be required to be inset into the paved surface, made
flush and restrained to avoid movement. This requirement shall apply to steel
plates that will remain in place for more than 14 days in areas where the
excavations are located within the vehicular travel lane, outside the travel
lane but used for bicycle or pedestrian traffic or as directed by the City
Engineer.
   (E)   The permittee is responsible for maintenance of the steel plates,
shoring, asphalt concrete ramps, and ensuring that they meet minimum
specifications.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.34 EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL.
   All excavation and backfill shall be in conformance with the City Standards
and Caltrans Standard Specifications Section 19 Earthwork.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.35 PAVING.
   (A)   Asphalt pavement shall be placed in conformance with the City
Standards and Caltrans Standard Specifications Section 39 Asphalt Concrete.
   (B)   Trenches shall be paved in accordance with the City of Eureka
Standards and the following requirements:
      (1)   After the trench has been backfilled, and immediately prior to
placing asphalt concrete, the existing asphalt concrete shall be saw cut, or
milled according to City of Eureka Standards, to a vertical face.
      (2)   The cut shall be a "T-Cut" according to City of Eureka Standards
and the new asphalt concrete paving shall be butt joined to the existing
asphalt concrete vertical face. No feathering of new paving to existing paving
is allowed. The vertical faces shall be tack coated.
      (3)   To allow for proper placement of the new pavement section, damaged
pavement outside of the original trench cut lines shall be removed by cutting
in lines perpendicular to or parallel to the original trench lines. No diagonal
cuts are to be made.
      (4)   Undamaged pavement of five feet or less between two damaged areas
shall also be removed.
      (5)   "T-Cap" section shall be in accordance with the City of Eureka
Standards and shall include a minimum of 1.5" of Asphalt Concrete Pavement.
      (6)   Projects which will result in more than 15% or more of the surface
to be T-capped in any segment of roadway, shall require full lane width paving.
Curb returns will be used as reference points for calculations and limits of
paving and for these purposes, are included within the area of the
intersections. The actual limits of paving however, will be determined by the
City Engineer and may be extended to include projects which, begin or end mid-
section or continue over multiple city blocks.
   (C)   Pavement shall be restored within 14 working days from the time the
entire trench is backfilled, unless delay is excused due to circumstances
beyond the contractor's control, such as inclement weather.
   (D)   For minor excavations such as service installations, the pavement
shall be restored with in 30 working days from the time the entire trench is
backfilled, unless delay is excused due to circumstances beyond the
contractor's control, such as inclement weather.
   (E)   All damaged pavement markings and striping shall be replaced and
restored by the permittee within 14 days of pavement restoration.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.36 REPAIR OF EXCAVATIONS IN PROHIBITION STREETS.
   Any excavation in Prohibition Streets will be repaired with full lane width
paving (paving from the center line to the edge of the lane) in accordance with
§
56.35 Paving, except that the final asphalt concrete wearing surface shall be a
minimum of 2.5" thick and shall be done by a paving machine or spreader box.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
§ 56.37 DEFECTS.
   (A)   Work not in compliance City Standards shall be rejected by the city
and removed and redone by the permittee to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
   (B)   By obtaining an encroachment permit, the permittee expressly
warranties all work to be free from defects for a period of one year after the
permit expiration date. Should the trench repair fail within a year as
determined by the City Engineer based on City or Caltrans Standards, the
permittee shall repair the affected area at the City Engineer's discretion.
   (C)   Defects may include wearing surface failure, trench settlement,
pavement smoothness or surface fluctuations resulting in an increase in
ponding. Repairs shall be in conformance with the City and Caltrans standards,
based on the type and severity of defect, as determined by the City Engineer.
   (D)   When the City of Eureka determines that an excavation or defect is
hazardous or constitutes a public nuisance or threat to public health, safety,
or welfare, the Engineer may order the responsible party to remedy the
condition immediately.
   (E)   If the responsible party refuses or fails to make the needed repairs
immediately, the City of Eureka will make the repairs and:
      (1)   The responsible party will be charged all the actual costs
including administration, construction, consultant fees, equipment, inspection,
notification, and remediation made necessary by the action or inaction of the
permittee.
      (2)   The repair or restoration by the City of Eureka does not relieve
the responsible party from liability for future pavement failures.
      (3)   If the responsible party fails or refuses to pay the restoration
cost, the City may use any legal means to recover the costs, including but not
limited to property liens and/or court action.
(Ord. 887-C.S., passed 8-6-19)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
         
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
         
73.   BICYCLES
         
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
         
75.   MOBILE VENDORS OPERATING UPON A STREET
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   State approval required
   
70.03   Obedience to officers and traffic laws
   
70.04   Interference with police and other officers
   
70.05   Application of provisions
   
70.06   Exemptions
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Authority to install; installation
   
70.16   Signs required
   
70.17   Obedience required
   
70.18   Authority to remove, relocate, and discontinue
   
70.19   Hours of operation
   
70.20   Lane markings; distinctive roadway markings
   
70.21   Unauthorized painting of curb
Administration and Enforcement
   
70.35   Police administration
   
70.36   Traffic Engineer
   
70.37   Authority of Police and Fire Department officials
   
70.38   Persons other than officials shall not direct traffic
   
70.39   Traffic studies and reports
   
70.40   Report of damage to certain property
   
70.41   Removal of vehicles from streets
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. Any unnamed street less than 25 feet in width between property lines.
   CENTRAL TRAFFIC DISTRICT. All streets and portions of streets within the
area bounded by the south line of Seventh Street, the east line of J Street,
the west line of Broadway, and the north city limits.
   COACH. Any motor bus, motor coach, trackless trolley, or passenger stage
used as a common carrier for passengers.
   CURB. The lateral boundary of the roadway, whether such curb shall be marked
by curbing construction or not. CURB, as used in this chapter, shall not
include the line dividing the roadway of a street from parking strips in the
center of a street or from tracks or rights-of-way of public utility companies.
   DIVISIONAL ISLAND. A raised island located in the roadway and separating
opposing or conflicting streams of traffic.
   GRADE SEPARATION. Every structure by means of which any street passes over
or under any stationary rails, tracks, or other street.
   HENDERSON CENTER BUSINESS DISTRICT.
      (1)   That territory:
         (a)   Bounded on the north one block north of Henderson Street;
         (b)   Bounded on the east by the east line of H Street;
         (c)   Bounded on the south by one block south of Harris Street;
         (d)   Bounded on the west by the west line of D Street.
      (2)   The Henderson Center Business District is for businesses only;
residential units are excluded from this definition for the purpose of coaster
enforcement.
   HOLIDAYS.
      (1)   January 1; the third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther
King's birthday; the third Monday in February, known as “President's Day;” the
Friday before Easter, from 12:00 noon until 5:00 pm.; the last Monday in May,
known as “Memorial Day;” July 4; the first Monday in September; September 9,
known as “Admission Day;” the second Monday in October, known as “Columbus
Day;” the fourth Monday in October, known as “Veterans Day,” or such other day
as shall be designated under state law as Veterans' Day; Thanksgiving Day; the
Friday after Thanksgiving Day; December 25; and every day appointed by the
President or Governor as a public feast, thanksgiving, or holiday.
      (2)   If January 1, February 12, July 4, September 9, Veterans Day, or
December 25 falls upon a Saturday or Sunday, the Friday preceding the Saturday
or the Monday following the Sunday shall be a holiday.
   LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in the city.
   PARKWAY. That portion of a street other than a roadway or a sidewalk.
   PARKING METER. Any device that accepts payment for the use of parking
spaces. Such devices include, but are not limited to, parking meters, pay
stations, and any software application that processes payments from a mobile
device, for the purpose of controlling the period of time a parking meter space
is occupied by any vehicle.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing,
or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified by
this chapter except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or laws of the city prohibiting or
limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
specified times.
   PASSENGER LOADING ZONE. The space adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Police Department or any officer
authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of
traffic regulations.
   STOP. When required, shall mean the complete cessation of movement.
   VEHICLE CODE. The California Vehicle Code.
('63 Code, §§ 3-6.101 - 3-6.120) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 701-C.S.,
passed 10-18-05; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23)
§ 70.02 STATE APPROVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any provision of this chapter which regulates traffic or delegates the
regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of
the Department of Public Works of the state is required by state law shall
cease to be operative six months after receipt by the Council of written notice
of withdrawal of approval of the Department of Public Works of the state.
   (B)   Whenever the provisions of this chapter delegate authority to a city
officer or authorize action by the Council to regulate traffic upon a state
highway in any way which by state law requires the prior approval of the
Department of Public Works of the state, no such officer shall exercise such
authority, nor shall such action by the Council be effective with respect to
any state highway, without the prior approval in writing of the Department of
Public Works of the state when and to the extent required by Cal. Veh. Code
Divisions 9 and 11.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1801) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICERS AND TRAFFIC LAWS.
   (A)   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with or to perform any act
forbidden by any lawful order, signal, or direction of a traffic or police
officer, a member of the Fire Department, or a person authorized by the Chief
of Police or by law.
('63 Code, § 3-6.303)
   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for a pedestrian or any person driving any
vehicle or other conveyance upon any street to do any act forbidden or to fail
to perform any act required as applicable to any such person pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.304)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.04 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE AND OTHER OFFICERS.
   (A)   No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police
officer or other officer or employee of the city in his enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration, or concealment of any
chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other
employee or officer of the city in connection with the enforcement of the
parking regulations of this chapter shall, if done for the purpose of evading
the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction.
('63 Code, § 3-6.306) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
interference alleged consisted of speech only.
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.05 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Regulations applying to persons riding bicycles or animals. Every
person riding a bicycle or riding or driving an animal upon a highway shall
have all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
the driver of a vehicle by the provisions of this chapter except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no application.
('63 Code, § 3-6.305)
   (B)   Public employees to obey traffic regulations. The provisions of this
chapter shall apply to the operator of any vehicle owned by or used in the
service of the United States, the state, and any county or city, and it shall
be unlawful for any such operator to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by the Vehicle Code.
('63 Code, § 3-6.307)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 34-C.S., passed 4-3-65)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.06 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking, and
standing of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the police or fire
department, any public ambulance, any public utility vehicle, or any private
ambulance, which public utility vehicle or private ambulance has qualified as
an authorized emergency vehicle, when any vehicle mentioned in this section is
operated in the manner specified by the Vehicle Code in response to an
emergency call.
   (B)   The provisions of division (A) of this section shall not, however,
relieve the operator of any such vehicle from his obligation to exercise due
care for the safety of others or the consequences of his wilful disregard of
the safety of others.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the parking or standing of
vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of a city department or public utility
while necessarily in use for construction or repair work or to any vehicle
owned or operated by the United States Post Office Department while in use for
the collection, transportation, or delivery of United States mail.
('63 Code, § 3-6.308) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL; INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Authority to install.
      (1)   The Traffic Engineer shall have the power and duty to place and
maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, official traffic-control
devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Whenever the Vehicle Code requires for the effectiveness of any
provision thereof that traffic-control devices be installed to give notice to
the public of the application of such law, the Traffic Engineer is hereby
authorized to install, or cause to be installed, the necessary devices, subject
to any limitations or restrictions set forth in the law applicable thereto.
      (3)   The Traffic Engineer may also place and maintain, or cause to be
placed or maintained, such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem
necessary or proper to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he
shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering
principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards,
limitations, and rules as may be set forth in this chapter or as may be
determined by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
('63 Code, § 3-6.401)
   (B)   Installation.
      (1)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby directed to install and maintain
official traffic signals at those intersections and other places where traffic
conditions are such as to require that the flow of traffic be alternately
interrupted and released in order to prevent or relieve traffic congestion or
to protect life or property from exceptional hazard.
      (2)   The Traffic Engineer shall ascertain and determine the locations
where such signals are required by field investigations, traffic counts, and
other traffic information as may be pertinent, and his determinations therefrom
shall be made in accordance with those traffic engineering and safety standards
and instructions set forth in the Planning Manual of Instructions, Part 8,
Traffic, issued by the Division of Highways of the Department of Public Works
of the state.
      (3)   Whenever the Traffic Engineer installs and maintains an official
traffic signal at any intersection, he shall likewise erect and maintain at
such intersection street name signs clearly visible to traffic approaching from
all directions unless such street name signs have previously been placed and
are maintained at any such intersection.
('63 Code, § 3-6.406)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 34-C.S., passed 4-3-65)
§ 70.16 SIGNS REQUIRED.
   No provision of the Vehicle Code or of this chapter for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator unless appropriate
legible signs are in place giving notice of such provisions of the traffic
laws.
('63 Code, § 3-6.402) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE REQUIRED.
   The operator of any vehicle or train shall obey the instructions of any
official traffic-control device placed in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other authorized
person, subject, however, to the exceptions granted the operator of an
authorized emergency vehicle when responding to emergency calls.
('63 Code, § 3-6.403) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.18 AUTHORITY TO REMOVE, RELOCATE, AND DISCONTINUE.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to remove, relocate, or
discontinue the operation of any traffic-control device not specifically
required by the California Vehicle Code or by this chapter whenever he shall
determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or
required the installation no longer exist.
('63 Code, § 3-6.404) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.19 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The Traffic Engineer shall determine the hours and days during which any
traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those
cases where such hours or days are specified by the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.405) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.20 LANE MARKINGS; DISTINCTIVE ROADWAY MARKINGS.
   (A)   Lane markings. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to mark
center lines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the
course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating
lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the
center line of the highway.
('63 Code, § 3-6.407)
   (B)   Distinctive roadway markings. The Traffic Engineer is hereby
authorized to place and maintain distinctive roadway markings as described in
the Vehicle Code on those streets or parts of streets where the volume of
traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous
to drive on the left side of such markings or signs and markings. Such markings
or signs and markings shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by
the Department of Public Works of the state pursuant to the provisions of the
Vehicle Code.
('63 Code, § 3-6.408)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.21 UNAUTHORIZED PAINTING OF CURBS.
   No person, unless authorized by the city, shall paint any street or curb
surface; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to
the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with
the provisions of any resolution or law of the city pertaining thereto.
('63 Code, § 3-6.409) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 70.35 POLICE ADMINISTRATION.
   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the enforcement of the street
traffic regulations of the city and the state vehicle laws applicable to street
traffic in the city. He shall cooperate with the Traffic Engineer and other
officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions and carry out those
duties specially imposed upon the Police Department by this chapter and the
traffic laws of the city.
('63 Code, § 3-6.201) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.36 TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   (A)   Designation. For the purposes of this chapter, the Director of Public
Works is hereby designated the Traffic Engineer of the city. Whenever a power
is granted to the Traffic Engineer or a duty is imposed upon him, the power may
be exercised or the duty may be performed by his deputy or by a person
authorized in writing by him.
('63 Code, § 3-6.205)
   (B)   Powers and duties. It shall be the general duty of the Traffic
Engineer to determine the installation of proper timing and maintenance of
traffic-control devices and signals, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic
accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering and traffic
investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials
in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to
carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by the laws of the city.
Whenever, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Traffic Engineer is
required or authorized to place or maintain official traffic-control devices or
signals, he may cause such devices or signals to be placed or maintained.
('63 Code, § 3-6.206)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.37 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Officers of the Police Department and such officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or audible or other signal in conformance with the traffic laws, except that in
the event of a fire or other emergency, or to expedite traffic or to safeguard
pedestrians, officers of the Police Department or members of the Fire
Department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions to the contrary contained in this chapter or the Vehicle Code.
('63 Code, § 3-6.301)
   (B)   At places where large numbers of people and vehicles are to gather or
have gathered, the provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent
any police officer from prohibiting any person from parking any vehicle upon or
using any street or sidewalk, or from prohibiting any pedestrian from using any
street or sidewalk, and such police officer shall have authority to direct the
parking of vehicles in any reasonable manner, way, or direction. It is hereby
declared to be unlawful for any person to fail to promptly obey such police
officer's order, signal, or command, regardless of any other provision of this
chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.311)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.38 PERSONS OTHER THAN OFFICIALS SHALL NOT DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   No person, other than an officer of the Police Department, member of the
Fire Department, a person authorized by the Chief of Police, or a person
authorized by law, shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand, or
other signal, except that persons may operate, when and as provided by this
chapter, any mechanical push button signal erected by order of the Traffic
Engineer.
('63 Code, § 3-6.302) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.39 TRAFFIC STUDIES AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Traffic accident studies. Whenever the accidents at any particular
location become numerous, the Chief of Police shall cooperate with the Traffic
Engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial
measures.
('63 Code, § 3-6.202)
   (B)   Traffic accident reports. The Chief of Police shall maintain a
suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards
referring to them shall be filed alphabetically and/or by location. Such
reports shall be available for the use and information of the Traffic Engineer.
('63 Code, § 3-6.203)
   (C)   Annual traffic safety reports. The Chief of Police shall annually
prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the City Manager. Such
report shall contain information on traffic matters in the city as follows:
      (1)   The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the
number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; and,
      (2)   The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent
data on the safety activities of the police.
('63 Code, § 3-6.204)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.40 REPORT OF DAMAGE TO CERTAIN PROPERTY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle or the person in charge of any animal
involved in any accident resulting in damage to any property publicly owned or
owned by a public utility, including, but not limited to, any fire hydrant,
parking meter, lighting post, telephone pole, or electric light or power pole,
or resulting in damage to any tree, traffic-control device, or other property
of a like nature located in or along any street shall, within 24 hours after
such accident, make a written report of such accident to the Police Department.
   (B)   Every such report shall state the time when and the place where the
accident took place, the name and address of the person owning and of the
person operating or in charge of such vehicle or animal, the license number of
every such vehicle, and a brief description of the property damage in such
accident.
   (C)   The operator of any vehicle involved in an accident shall not be
subject to the requirements or penalties of this section if and during the time
he is physically incapable of making a report, but in such event he shall make
a report as required by division (A) of this section within 24 hours after
regaining ability to make such report.
('63 Code, § 3-6.309) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 70.41 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM STREETS.
   Any regularly employed and salaried officer of the Police Department of the
city may remove or cause to be removed:
   (A)   Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or
highway for 72 or more consecutive hours;
   (B)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. when such parking or standing is
prohibited by ordinance or resolution of the city and signs are posted giving
notice of such removal;
   (C)   Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street or highway
where the use of such street or highway, or a portion thereof, is necessary for
the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or highway or for the
installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or
highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose other than the
normal flow of traffic, or where the use of the street or highway, or any
portion thereof, is necessary for the movement of equipment, articles, or
structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or
interfere with such use or movement; provided signs giving notice that such
vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to such
removal.
('63 Code, § 3-6.310) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 34-C.S., passed 4-3-
65)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of this Traffic Code expressly declared to be an infraction
is punishable by:
   (A)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation;
   (B)   A fine not exceeding $200 for the second violation of the same
ordinance within one year;
   (C)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the same
ordinance within one year.
('63 Code, § 1-2.07) (Ord. 362-C.S., passed 5-18-82)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Driving through funeral processions
   
71.02   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
71.03   Commercial vehicles using private driveways
   
71.04   Riding or driving on sidewalks; exemption
   
71.05   New pavement and markings
   
71.06   Limited access roadways
   
71.07   Use of freeways
   
71.08   Obedience to barriers and signs
   
71.09   Traffic entering intersections
   
71.10   Self-propelled wheel chairs
   
71.11   Use of coasters, roller skates
   
71.12   Doors in sidewalks
   
71.13   One-way streets and alleys
   
71.14   Grade separations
   
71.15   Trains blocking crossings
   
71.16   Regulation of speed by traffic signals
Turning Movements
   
71.25   Turning markers and restricted turn signs
   
71.26   Right turn restricted
Special Stops
   
71.40   Traffic Engineer to erect stop signs
   
71.41   Stopping at stop signs
   
71.42   Emerging from alley, driveway, or building
Obstructions
   
71.55   Height of obstructions
   
71.56   Exceptions
   
71.57   Scope of provisions
   
71.58   Enforcement of provisions
   
71.59   Abatement by city
Trucks; Heavy Vehicles and Equipment
   
71.70   Truck routes authorized
   
71.71   Commercial vehicles prohibited from using certain streets
   
71.72   Permit required for excess load
   
71.73   Machinery with projections
Pedestrians
   
71.85   Marked crosswalks
   
71.86   Special pedestrian traffic signals
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a
funeral procession or a parade provided such vehicles are conspicuously so
designated. The directing of all vehicles and traffic on any street over which
such funeral procession or parade wishes to pass shall be subject to the orders
of the Police Department.
('63 Code, § 3-6.801) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.02 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall attach himself with his hands, or catch on, or hold on with
his hands or by other means to any moving vehicle or train for the purpose of
receiving motive power therefrom.
('63 Code, § 3-6.802) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.03 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES USING PRIVATE DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a commercial vehicle in, on, or
across any private driveway approach or sidewalk area or the driveway itself
without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property if a sign or
marking is in place indicating the use of such driveway is prohibited.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, a commercial vehicle shall mean a
vehicle having a rated capacity in excess of ½-ton.
('63 Code, § 3-6.803) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.04 RIDING OR DRIVING ON SIDEWALKS; EXEMPTION.
   No person shall ride, drive, or propel, or cause to be propelled, any
vehicle or animal across or upon any sidewalk, except over permanently
constructed driveways, or when it is necessary for any temporary purpose to
drive a loaded vehicle across a sidewalk provided written permission has been
previously obtained from the Traffic Engineer, or when permitted by Cal.
Vehicle Code, § 21663. Persons who, by reason of physical disability, are
unable to move about as a pedestrian shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section while operating self-propelled wheel chairs or invalid tricycles.
('63 Code, § 3-6.804) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.05 NEW PAVEMENT AND MARKINGS.
   No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any
newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier
sign, cone marker, or other warning device is in place warning persons not to
drive over or across such pavement or marking or when any such device is in
place indicating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed.
('63 Code, § 3-6.805) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.06 LIMITED ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on or from any limited access roadway except
at such entrances and exits as are lawfully established.
('63 Code, § 3-6.806) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.07 USE OF FREEWAYS.
   No person shall drive or operate any bicycle, motor-driven cycle, or any
vehicle which is not drawn by a motor vehicle upon any street established as a
freeway, as defined by state law, nor shall any pedestrian walk across or along
any such street so designated and described except in spaces set aside for the
use of pedestrians provided official signs are in place giving notice of such
restrictions.
('63 Code, § 3-6.807) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.08 OBEDIENCE TO BARRIERS AND SIGNS.
   No person, public utility, or department of the city shall erect or place
any barrier or sign on any street unless it is of a type approved by the
Traffic Engineer, nor shall any person disobey the instructions, remove, tamper
with, or destroy any barrier or sign lawfully placed on any street by any
person, public utility, or department of the city.
('63 Code, § 3-6.808) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.09 TRAFFIC ENTERING INTERSECTIONS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
('63 Code, § 3-6.809) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.10 SELF-PROPELLED WHEELS CHAIRS.
   No person shall operate a self-propelled wheel chair or invalid tricycle
within any sidewalk area in the central traffic district; provided, however,
such vehicles may be so operated by any person who, by reason of physical
disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian; and provided,
further, written permission has been previously obtained from the Police
Department.
('63 Code, § 3-6.811) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.11 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding in or
by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device to go upon any roadway
or upon the sidewalk in the central traffic district or the Henderson Center
business district.
('63 Code, § 3-6.812)
   (B)   No person shall skate or use or ride any skateboard, or similar device
in, upon, or around the following described publicly owned property in the
city: The "Old Town Square," more commonly known as the "Old Town Gazebo,"
located at the corner of 2nd and F Streets, Clark Plaza, East Plaza, or any
other publicly owned property within the city posted prohibiting skateboard
use.
('63 Code, § 3-6.815)
(Ord. 462-C.S., passed 5-21-87; Am. Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 701-
C.S., passed 10-18-05)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.12 DOORS IN SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Doors in sidewalks used to cover an opening for an elevator, stairway,
or chute shall be kept in such condition that they will not endanger persons or
property, and it shall be unlawful for any person owning or being in charge or
control of any such doors in sidewalks or other openings in the sidewalk
leading to the basement to permit such doors to remain open except when such
elevator, stairway, or chute is being used for loading, unloading, or
transferring merchandise or material.
   (B)   The requirements of this section shall be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any other laws of the city pertaining to doors or other openings in
sidewalks.
('63 Code, § 3-6.814) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.13 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates any one-way
street or alley, the Traffic Engineer shall place and maintain signs giving
notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs
are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall
be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
('63 Code, § 3-6.601) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 71.14 GRADE SEPARATIONS.
   (A)   Use by pedestrians. No pedestrian shall be in or upon any grade
separation except such grade separations as shall have pedestrian walks
specifically designated or constructed thereon; provided, however, the
provisions of this section shall not apply, in the event of an emergency, to
persons employed to do work or labor upon such grade separations or to members
of the Police Department when engaged in law enforcement or traffic
regulations.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1601)
   (B)   Use by bicycles. No person shall ride a bicycle upon any grade
separation.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1602)
   (C)   Use by animals. No person shall ride or drive any animal, even though
tethered or harnessed, in or upon any grade separation.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1603)
   (D)   Use by vehicles. Unless otherwise directed by a member of the Police
Department or other authorized person, vehicles in or upon any grade separation
shall at all times stay to the right of the center of all grade separations,
slow moving vehicles shall remain as close as possible to the right-hand side
or curb of the grade separation, and where a grade separation is marked with
traffic lanes, vehicles shall cross the markings only when overtaking and
passing other vehicles. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to
cross any such marking unless such movement can be made with safety.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1604)
   (E)   Stopping, standing, or parking. No operator of any vehicle shall stop,
stand, or park such vehicle in or upon any grade separation except in the event
of an emergency, or when necessary to avoid injury or damage to persons or
property, or in compliance with the direction of a member of the Police
Department or other authorized person, or with the direction of a sign or
signal.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1605)
   (F)   Removal of vehicles. When any vehicle in or on any grade separation is
stopped for any reason and is obstructing or may obstruct the flow of traffic,
any member of the Police Department may move such vehicle or have such vehicle
moved to the nearest terminus of such grade separation and beyond to a place of
safety. The registered owner and the operator of such vehicle shall be
responsible for all reasonable charges for such moving services.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1606)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.15 TRAINS BLOCKING CROSSINGS.
   No person shall cause or permit any railroad train or railroad cars, or
similar vehicle on rails, to stop or stand or be operated in such a manner as
to prevent the use of any street for the purposes of travel for a period of
time longer than ten minutes; provided, however, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to railroad trains, cars, or similar vehicles on rails while
blocking or obstructing a crossing because of an accident which requires the
operator of the train, car, or similar vehicle on rails to stop at or near the
scene of the accident.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1701) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.16 REGULATION OF SPEED BY TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to regulate the timing of traffic
signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner
at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the
district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice
thereof.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1403) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.25 TURNING MARKERS AND RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   (A)   Turning markers. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place
official traffic-control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating
the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the
Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to locate and indicate more than one lane
of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left-hand turns,
and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than
as prescribed by law or ordinance.
('63 Code, § 3-6.501)
   (B)   Restricted turn signs. The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, left, or U-turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The
making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and
permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on
the signs, and such signs may be removed when such turns are permitted.
('63 Code, § 3-6.502)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 34-C.S., passed 4-3-65)
§ 71.26 RIGHT TURN RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No driver of a vehicle shall make a right turn against a red or stop
signal at any intersection which is sign-posted giving notice of such
restriction.
   (B)   The Traffic Engineer shall post appropriate signs giving effect to the
provisions of this section where he determines that the making of right turns
against a traffic signal stop indication would seriously interfere with the
safe and orderly flow of traffic.
('63 Code, § 3-6.504) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
SPECIAL STOPS
§ 71.40 TRAFFIC ENGINEER TO ERECT STOP SIGNS.
   Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the city designates and describes
any street, or portion thereof, as a through street, or any intersection at
which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any
railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the Traffic
Engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs on each and every street
intersecting such through street, or portion thereof, so designated, and at
those entrances to other intersections where a stop is required, and at any
railroad crossing so designated; provided, however, stop signs shall not be
erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is
controlled by an official traffic control signal. Every such sign shall conform
with, and shall be placed as provided in, the Vehicle Code.
('63 Code, § 3-6.701) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 34-C.S., passed 4-3-
65)
§ 71.41 STOPPING AT STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be through streets for the purposes of this
section.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall apply at one or more entrances to
intersections as such entrances and intersections are established by resolution
of the Council.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall apply at those highway railroad
grade crossings as established by resolution of the Council.
('63 Code, § 3-6.702) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 71.42 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall
stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the
sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway.
('63 Code, § 3-6.703) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 71.55 HEIGHT OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   Corners of intersecting streets. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
occupant of any corner lot or premises in the city to install, set out,
maintain, permit, or allow the installation, setting out, maintenance, or
existence of any sign, fence, hedge, shrubbery, tree, natural growth, or other
obstruction to a view higher than three feet above the adjacent street curb
level between the curb line and the property line or within that triangular
area of the private lot or premises between the property lines adjacent to the
corner and a diagonal line joining points on the property lines 20 feet from
the point of their intersection, or in the case of rounded corners, the area
circumscribed by the curve and a chord to the curve, said chord being a line
drawn between the point of tangency at the beginning of the curve and the point
of tangency at the end of the curve.
('63 Code, § 3-7.01)
   (B)   Alleys and driveways. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant
of any premises of the city to install, set out, maintain, permit, or allow the
installation, setting out, maintenance, or existence of any sign, fence, hedge,
shrubbery, tree, natural growth, or other obstruction to a view higher than
three feet above the adjacent street curb level between the curb line and the
property line or within that triangular area of the private lot or premises
between the property lines adjacent to the corner of a private or public alley
or driveway and a diagonal line joining points on the property or driveway line
five feet from the point of their intersection.
('63 Code, § 3-7.02)
(Ord. 2822, passed 11-18-59)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.56 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to intersections in
commercial districts controlled by an official traffic-control device or
signal, permanent buildings, public utility poles, official warning signs or
signals, or to places where the contour of the ground is such that there can be
no cross visibility at the intersection.
('63 Code, § 3-7.03) (Ord. 2822, passed 11-18-59; Am. Ord. 328-C.S., passed 9-
16-80)
§ 71.57 SCOPE OF PROVISIONS.
   No obstruction to cross visibility shall be deemed to be excepted from the
application of the provisions of this chapter because of its being in existence
on November 18, 1959, the date of adoption of this chapter, unless expressly
excepted by the terms of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-7.06) (Ord. 2822, passed 11-18-59)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.58 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be under the
direction of the Traffic Engineer. The Traffic Engineer may designate
representatives who may investigate violations of this chapter, give such
notice as may be required to carry out the provisions of this section, and
perform such other duties in connection with the enforcement of this chapter as
may be imposed upon them by the Traffic Engineer.
('63 Code, § 3-7.04) (Ord. 2822, passed 11-18-59)
§ 71.59 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   In addition to the remedy by prosecution for violation of this chapter, any
obstruction maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a nuisance, and upon failure to abate the same within 20 days after the
posting upon the premises of a notice to abate the nuisance, signed by the
Traffic Engineer or his authorized representative, the Traffic Engineer or his
authorized representative may enter upon the premises and remove or eliminate
the obstruction. In such event the cost to the city of the abatement of the
nuisance shall be a personal obligation against the owner of the premises upon
which the nuisance was maintained, recoverable by the city in an action before
any court of competent jurisdiction.
('63 Code, § 3-7.05) (Ord. 2822, passed 11-18-59)
TRUCKS; HEAVY VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT
§ 71.70 TRUCK ROUTES AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any
street, or portion thereof, as a street, the use of which is permitted by any
vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three tons, the Traffic
Engineer is hereby authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as
“Truck Routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight
limit of three tons.
   (B)   When any such truck routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight
limit of three tons shall drive on such routes and none other; provided,
however, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three
tons may come from a truck route having ingress and egress by direct route to
and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or
deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or
structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering
materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration,
remodeling, or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted
streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission of the state; or
      (2)   Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in
the construction, installation, or repair of any public utility.
   (D)   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles
exceeding a maximum gross weight of three tons.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1301) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 71.71 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED FROM USING CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   Whenever any resolution of the city designates and describes any
street, or portion thereof, as a street, the use of which is prohibited by any
commercial vehicle, the Traffic Engineer shall erect and maintain appropriate
signs on those streets affected by such resolution.
   (B)   Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the
Council are hereby declared to be streets, the use of which is prohibited by
any commercial vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of
the state.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1302) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 71.72 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   No person shall move or operate upon any of the city streets any
vehicle with a load in excess of that permitted by the Vehicle Code without a
written permit from the Traffic Engineer.
   (B)   The Traffic Engineer may, by written permit, authorize a load in
excess of that permitted by the Vehicle Code if, in his judgment, the streets
upon which such vehicle is to be operated can safely withstand the additional
weight or if the applicant shall guarantee to the city that all costs of repair
to the streets or to the public property of the city damaged by the movement of
such load shall be paid in full. Such permit shall be granted upon such
conditions and upon depositing such bond as the Traffic Engineer in his
discretion may require.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1501) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.73 MACHINERY WITH PROJECTIONS.
   No person shall operate over the city streets any vehicle, piece of
equipment, or machinery which has lugs, cleats, flanges, or other projections
on the wheels or tracks. If the tread of the track has projections or
corrugations, a filler block may be placed on each section so that a flat
bearing surface will be in contact with the pavement at all times.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1502) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
PEDESTRIANS
§ 71.85 MARKED CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Authority to establish.  
      (1)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish and maintain
crosswalks and to designate them by appropriate devices or painted signs upon
the surface of the roadway.
      (2)   The Traffic Engineer may place signs at or adjacent to an
intersection in respect to any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not
cross in the crosswalk so indicated.
      (3)   Other than crosswalks at intersections, no crosswalk shall be
established in any block which is less than 480 feet in length, and such
crosswalk shall be located as nearly as practicable at mid-block.
('63 Code, § 3-6.901)
   (B)   Crossing in crosswalks. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than
by a crosswalk in the central traffic district or in any business district.
('63 Code, § 3-6.902)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 71.86 SPECIAL PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall obey the indication of special traffic signals installed
for pedestrians only and shall disregard the indication of a vehicular traffic
signal at any location where special pedestrian traffic signals are in place.
('63 Code, § 3-6.903) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
Stopping, Standing and Parking for Certain Purposes and in Certain Places
   
72.001   Application of regulations
   
72.002   Stopping and standing in parkways
   
72.003   No stopping zones and no parking areas authorized
   
72.004   No parking areas
   
72.005   Parking vehicles for sale
   
72.006   Repairing, greasing or washing vehicles on streets
   
72.007   Parking adjacent to schools
   
72.008   Parking on narrow streets
   
72.009   Parking on grades
   
72.010   Parking by vehicles for hire
   
72.011   Emergency parking signs
Stopping, Standing, or Parking Restricted or Prohibited
   
72.024   Parking lot closures
   
72.025   Twelve-minute parking
   
72.026   Thirty-minute parking
   
72.027   One-hour parking
   
72.028   Two-hour parking
   
72.029   Four-hour parking
   
72.030   Parking parallel on one-way streets
   
72.031   Diagonal parking
   
72.032   Parking space markings
   
72.033   No stopping zones
   
72.034   Parking on city-owned property
   
72.035   Operating and parking vehicles on private property
On-Street Parking
   
72.050   Parking meter zones defined; installation; street markings
   
72.051   Days and hours of operation
   
72.052   Operational procedure
   
72.053   Parking overtime; extending time beyond limit
   
72.054   Improper use of parking meters; deposit of coins by unauthorized
persons
   
72.055   Use of parking meter standards
   
72.056   Rule of evidence
   
72.057   Use of revenue
   
72.058   Parking meter time limits and rates
   
72.059   Parking meter enforcement
Off-Street Parking
   
72.070   [Reserved]
   
72.071   Off-street parking proceedings
   
72.072   Definitions
   
72.073   Administration by City Manager; establishment of rates and time limits
   
72.074   Compliance with parking regulations
   
72.075   Improper use of parking meters
   
72.076   Parking after parking meter time expires
   
72.077   Method of parking
   
72.078   Parking meter enforcement
   
72.079   Permit parking
   
72.080   Unlawful parking
   
72.081   Timed parking maps
Loading and Unloading
   
72.095   Establishing loading zones; curb markings
   
72.096   Effect of permission to load or unload
   
72.097   Standing for loading or unloading only
   
72.098   Standing in passenger loading zones
   
72.099   Standing in alleys
   
72.100   Bus zones
   
72.101   Curb parking
   
72.102   Special passenger loading zones
   
72.103   Bicycle parking zones
   
72.104   Funeral zones
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES AND IN CERTAIN PLACES
§ 72.001 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing, or
parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified by
this chapter except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic-control device.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or
parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more
restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code or laws of the city prohibiting or
limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at
specified times.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1001) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 72.002 STOPPING AND STANDING IN PARKWAYS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within any parkway.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1002) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.003 NO STOPPING ZONES AND NO PARKING AREAS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to maintain, by appropriate
signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking
areas, and restricted parking areas as defined and described in this chapter.
   (B)   When curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle
shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb
marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1003) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.004 NO PARKING AREAS.
   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, park, or leave standing such
vehicle in any of the following places except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer, or
other authorized officer, or traffic sign or signal:
   (A)   Within any divisional island unless authorized and clearly indicated
with appropriate signs or markings;
   (B)   On either side of any street between the projected property lines of
any public walk, public steps, street, or thoroughfare terminating at such
street when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon
the curb surface;
   (C)   In any area where the Traffic Engineer determines that the parking or
stopping of a vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life
or property when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint
upon the curb surface;
   (D)   In any area established by resolution of the Council as a no parking
area when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the
curb surface;
   (E)   Upon, along, or across any railroad track in such manner as to hinder,
delay, or obstruct the movement of any railroad engine or car traveling upon
such track;
   (F)   In any area where the parking or stopping of any vehicle would
constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property;
   (G)   On any street or highway when the use of such street or highway, or a
portion thereof, is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the
street or highway or the installation of underground utilities, or when the use
of the street or highway, or any portion thereof, is authorized for a purpose
other than the normal flow of traffic, or when the use of the street or
highway, or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment,
articles, or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would
prohibit or interfere with such use or movement provided signs giving notice of
such no parking are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the effective
time of such no parking;
   (H)   At any place within 20 feet of a point on the curb immediately
opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone when such place is indicated by
appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface:
   (I)   At any place within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection in the
central traffic district or in any business district when such place is
indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface, except
that a bus may stop at a designated bus stop; or
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the approach to any traffic signal, boulevard stop
sign, or official electric flashing device when such prohibition is indicated
by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1004) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.005 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE.
   No operator of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street in the
city for the principal purpose of advertising or displaying it for sale unless
authorized by resolution of the Council.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1006) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.006 REPAIRING, GREASING OR WASHING VEHICLES ON STREETS.
   (A)   Repairing, greasing vehicles on streets. No person shall construct, or
cause to be constructed, repair, or cause to be repaired, grease, or cause to
be greased, any vehicle, or any part thereof, upon any public street in the
city; provided, however, temporary emergency repairs may be made upon a public
street.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1007)
   (B)   Washing and polishing vehicles on streets. No person shall wash, or
cause to be washed, or polish, or cause to be polished, any vehicle, or any
part thereof, upon any public street in the city when a charge is made for such
service.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1008)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.007 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings
indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school
property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere with traffic or
create a hazardous situation.
   (B)   When official signs or markings are placed prohibiting parking upon
that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a
vehicle in any such designated place.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1009) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.008 PARKING ON NARROW STREETS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to place signs or markings
indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not
exceed 20 feet or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or
markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
   (B)   When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon
narrow streets, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in
violation of any such sign or marking.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1010) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.009 PARKING ON GRADES.
   No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle unattended on a highway
when upon any grade exceeding 3% without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by
turning them against the curb or by other means.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1011) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.010 PARKING BY VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to
be used in the transportation of persons or property for hire on any street
while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a
written permit to do so from the Chief of Police, which permit shall designate
the specific location where such vehicle may stand.
   (B)   Whenever any permit is granted pursuant to the provisions of this
section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no
person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location
other than as designated in such permit. In the event the holder of any such
permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of
the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the
Chief of Police upon the filing of the record of such conviction with such
officer, and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six
months have elapsed from the date of such revocation.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1012) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-
19-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.011 EMERGENCY PARKING SIGNS.
   (A)   Whenever the Chief of Police shall determine that an emergency traffic
congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private
assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or for other reasons, the Chief of
Police shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be
erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of
vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as the Chief of Police shall
direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall
remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the Chief of
Police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.
   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, park, or stand any vehicle
contrary to the directions and provisions of such signs.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1013) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED
§ 72.024 PARKING LOT CLOSURES.
   (A)   When authorized signs have been posted on a city-owned parking lot, no
operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicles in any posted
parking lot between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. The decision to post
a lot under this section shall be made by the City Manager after consultation
with the Chief of Police and City Traffic Engineer.
   (B)   Violation of this section is an infraction and subject to fines as
provided in §
10.99(c).
(Ord. 671-C.S., passed 8-19-03)
§ 72.025 TWELVE-MINUTE PARKING.
   (A)   A green curb marking shall mean no standing or parking for a period of
time longer than 12 minutes at any time between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays as defined in §
72.051 of this chapter.
   (B)   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been
determined by the Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving
notice thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such
vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking, sign, or parking meter in
violation thereof.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1101) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 488-C.S., passed 1-
19-89; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.026 THIRTY-MINUTE PARKING.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays as
defined in §
72.051 of this chapter for a period of time longer than 30 minutes.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1102) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 488-C.S., passed 1-
19-89; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.027 ONE-HOUR PARKING.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays as
defined in §
72.051 of this chapter for a period of time longer than one hour.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1103) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 488-C.S., passed 1-
19-89; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.028 TWO-HOUR PARKING.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays as
defined in § 72.051 of this chapter for a period of time longer than two hours.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1104) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 488-C.S., passed 1-
19-89; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.029 FOUR-HOUR PARKING.
   When authorized signs, parking meters, or curb markings have been determined
by the Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice thereof,
no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays as
defined in § 72.051 of this chapter for a period of time longer than four
hours.
(Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23)
§ 72.030 PARKING PARALLEL ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be
stopped or parked within 18 inches of the left-hand curb facing in the
direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street unless signs are in place
prohibiting such stopping or standing. No person shall park any vehicle on any
street except facing in the direction of traffic movement.
   (B)   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and
traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall
stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless
signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.
   (C)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine when standing
or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street or
when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any one-
way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways and shall erect
signs giving notice thereof.
   (D)   The requirements of parallel parking imposed by this section shall not
apply in the event any commercial vehicle is actually engaged in the process of
loading or unloading freight or goods, in which event such vehicle may be
backed up to the curb provided such vehicle does not extend beyond the center
line of the street and does not block traffic thereby.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1105) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.031 DIAGONAL PARKING.
   (A)   On any of the streets or portions of streets established by resolution
of the Council as diagonal parking zones and when signs or pavement markings
are in place indicating such diagonal parking, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to park such vehicle except:
      (1)   At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings
allotting space to parked vehicles and entirely within the limits of such
allotted space; or
      (2)   With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of the
curb.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply when such vehicle is
actually engaged in the process of loading or unloading passengers, freight, or
goods in which event the provisions applicable in §
72.029 of this chapter shall be complied with.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1106) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.032 PARKING SPACE MARKINGS.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to install and maintain
parking space markings to indicate parking spaces adjacent to curbings where
authorized parking is permitted.
   (B)   When such parking space markings are placed on the highway, subject to
other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left
standing, or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape
of such vehicle makes compliance with the provisions of this section
impossible.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1107) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.033 NO STOPPING ZONES.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer shall designate established no stopping zones by
placing and maintaining appropriate signs or markings indicating that stopping
of vehicles is prohibited and indicating the hours and days when stopping is
prohibited.
   (B)   During the hours and on the days designated on the signs or markings,
it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to stop such vehicle on
any of the streets, or parts of streets, established by resolution of the
Council as no stopping zones.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1108) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.034 PARKING ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whenever the City Manager shall determine that the orderly, efficient
conduct of the city's business requires that parking or standing of vehicles on
city property be prohibited, limited, or restricted, the City Manager shall
have the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating
that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited, or restricted.
   (B)   When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place
giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to
the directions or provisions of such signs.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1109) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.035 OPERATING AND PARKING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park or stand his
vehicle in any private parking area within the city, and which is situated on
private property, without the consent of the owner, manager, or lessee,
provided the area is conspicuously posted against such parking with signs
referring to the ordinance codified in this action and bearing the name and
telephone number of the Police Department.
   (B)   The Police Department shall require the notarized signature of the
owner, manager, or lessee of the property, parking lot, or space on a “consent
to enforcement” form, which shall be kept on file at the Police Department, and
give to the Police Department the authorization to enforce parking restrictions
in parking facilities property posted pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall be an infraction, punishable as
specified in §
70.99.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1110) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 532-C.S., passed 9-
19-91) Penalty, see §
70.99
ON-STREET PARKING
§ 72.050 PARKING METER ZONES DEFINED; INSTALLATION; STREET MARKINGS.
   (A)   Defined.
      (1)   Parking meter zones shall be those streets or portions of streets
established by resolution of the Council as zones within which the parking of
vehicles shall be controlled, regulated, and inspected with the aid of parking
meters.
      (2)   The Traffic Engineer shall cause parking meters to be installed and
maintained in all parking meter zones.
   (B)   Manner of installation.
      (1)   Parking meters shall be installed upon the curb or sidewalk area
immediately adjacent to each parking space. Each parking meter shall be placed
in such a manner as to show or display by a sign or signal that the parking
space adjacent thereto is or is not legally in use.
      (2)   Each parking meter shall be set to display, after the operational
procedure has been completed, a sign or signal indicating legal parking for
that period of time conforming to the limit of parking time for the zone in
which the parking meter is installed and shall continue to operate from the
time of the completion of the operational procedure until the expiration of the
time fixed as the parking limit, or a portion thereof, for the part of the
street upon which the parking meter is placed. Each parking meter shall also be
so arranged that, upon the expiration of the legal parking time, the parking
meter will indicate by a mechanical operation and by proper signal that the
lawful parking period has expired.
   (C)   Street markings. The Traffic Engineer shall cause white lines or
markings to be painted or placed upon the curb or street adjacent to each
parking meter designating the parking space for which such parking meter is to
be used, and each vehicle parking adjacent or next to any parking meter shall
park within the lines or markings so established unless the size or shape of
such vehicle makes compliance impossible.
(Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 2886, passed 11-21-61; Am. Ord. 947-C.S.,
passed 8-1-23)
§ 72.051 DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The provisions of this chapter relating to the operation of parking meters
shall be effective between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on every day
except Sundays and holidays.
('63 Code, § 3-5.04) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 9-C.S., passed 1-17-
64; Am. Ord. 198-C.S., passed 1-5-73; Am. Ord. 488-C.S., passed 1-19-89; Am.
Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23)
§ 72.052 OPERATIONAL PROCEDURE.
   Immediately after the occupancy of a parking meter space, the operator of a
vehicle shall deposit a coin of the United States in the parking meter for such
space and, if necessary, turn a crank, knob, or handle in accordance with the
instructions posted on the face of the parking meter.
('63 Code, § 3-5.05) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61)
§ 72.053 PARKING OVERTIME; EXTENDING TIME BEYOND LIMIT.
   (A)   Parking overtime. No operator of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle
to remain parked in any parking space during any time that the parking meter is
showing a signal indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such
time immediately after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the
parking meter to show legal parking.
('63 Code, § 3-5.06)
   (B)   Extending time beyond limit.
      (1)   No person shall follow the operational procedure, or any part of
the operational procedure, for the purpose of increasing or extending the
parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time which has been
established for the parking space adjacent to which such parking meter is
placed.
      (2)   No person shall permit a vehicle to remain parked beyond the period
of legal parking time established for any parking meter zone.
('63 Code, § 3-5.07)
(Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 2886, passed 11-21-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.054 IMPROPER USE OF PARKING METERS; DEPOSIT OF COINS BY UNAUTHORIZED
PERSONS.
   (A)   Improper use of meters. No person shall deposit, or cause to be
deposited, in any parking meter any defaced or bent coin or any slug, device,
or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States or deface, injure,
tamper with, open, or wilfully break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter.
('63 Code, § 3-5.08)
   (B)   Deposit of coins by unauthorized persons. No person, other than the
owner or operator of a vehicle, shall deposit any coin in any parking meter
without the knowledge or consent of such owner or operator of the vehicle using
the parking space immediately adjacent to such parking meter.
('63 Code, § 3-5.09)
(Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.055 USE OF PARKING METER STANDARDS.
   No person shall attach anything to or permit a bicycle, news rack, or any
other article or thing to lean against a parking meter or a parking meter
standard.
('63 Code, § 3-5.10) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.056 RULE OF EVIDENCE.
   The parking or standing of any motor vehicle in a parking space, at which
space the parking meter displays a sign or signal indicating illegal parking,
shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle has been parked or
permitted to stand in such space for a period of time longer than permitted by
this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-5.11) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61)
§ 72.057 USE OF REVENUE.
   All moneys collected from parking meters in the city shall be devoted
exclusively to the following purposes:
   (A)   For the purchasing, leasing, installing, repairing, maintaining,
operating, removing, regulating, and policing of parking meters in the city and
for the payment of any and all expenses relating or incidental thereto;
   (B)   For the purchasing, leasing, acquiring, improving, operating, and
maintaining of off-street parking facilities in the city;
   (C)   For the painting and maintenance of traffic-control devices and
signals;
   (D)   For the painting and marking of the streets and curbs required for the
direction of traffic and the parking of motor vehicles;
   (E)   For the proper regulation, control, and inspection of parking and
traffic upon the public streets;
   (F)   To be pledged as security for the payment of the principal and
interest on off-street parking revenue bonds issued by the city or any parking
district organized within the city; and
   (G)   For traffic-control and regulations, including, but not limited to,
traffic enforcement, traffic engineering, traffic circulation, and traffic
enforcement officers' salaries.
('63 Code, § 3-5.12) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 2886, passed 11-21-61)
§ 72.058 PARKING METER TIME LIMITS AND RATES.
   The Traffic Engineer shall cause parking meters, when installed, to be so
adjusted as either to show legal parking during a period of 12 minutes upon and
after the deposit of the minimum amount required by the meter; provided,
however, the maximum parking time indicated by any parking meter shall not
exceed the time limit for parking established at such location by any ordinance
or resolution of the Council.
('63 Code, § 3-5.13) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 294-C.S., passed 9-14-
78; Am. Ord. 315-C.S., passed 9-18-79)
§ 72.059 PARKING METER ENFORCEMENT.
   Every police officer and every city employee charged with the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter relating to time limitations in parking meter
zones shall have the duty, when any vehicle is parked in violation of any
provision of this chapter, to issue a written notice thereof stating the
parking meter number, the state vehicle license number, the make of such
vehicle, the time and date of such illegal parking, a reference to the
appropriate section of this chapter, and fixing a time and place for an
appearance by the registered owner in answer to such notice. Such notice shall
be in the same form and subject to the same procedure as set forth in Cal. Veh.
Code § 40202 and laws of the state applicable to traffic violations within the
city.
('63 Code, § 3-5.14) (Ord. 2867, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 2886, passed 11-21-61)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 72.070 [RESERVED]
§ 72.071 OFF-STREET PARKING PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   General powers of city. The whole or any part of the city may be
created and operated as a district or districts for the acquisition,
improvement, administration, maintenance, operation, and disposal of public
motor vehicle parking places. Bonds to pay the cost thereof may be issued and
paid. Revenues from on-street and off-street parking facilities may be
allocated and pledged. Annual ad valorem assessments may be levied and
collected. Contributions may be made. Covenants and agreements with the
bondholders for the security and payment of such bonds may be made, and the
Transportation Safety Commission shall have the powers, jurisdiction, and
authority, all as now or hereafter provided in the Parking District Law of 1951
(being Cal. Streets and Highways Code §§ 35100 et seq.) (referred to as "Act"
in this section), except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (B)   Provisions to take precedence. The provisions of this section shall be
controlling to the extent that they are in conflict with any of the provisions
of the Act.
   (C)   Other procedures permitted. The provisions of this section shall not
be exclusive. The Council shall have the power to provide other procedures or
to follow parking place or district procedures now or hereafter provided by
general law.
   (D)   Investigation act. Before ordering any acquisitions or improvements,
or both, or the creation of any district pursuant to the provisions of this
section, the Council shall find that the public convenience and necessity
require such acquisitions or improvements, or both, in the manner provided in
Section 17 of Article XIII of the Constitution of the state.
      (1)   Preliminary determination of necessity. A resolution of preliminary
determination shall be adopted describing in general terms the proposed
improvement or acquisition and setting a time and place when and where any and
all persons interested may appear and show cause, if any they have, why the
Council should not find and determine that the public convenience and necessity
require the proposed acquisition or improvement without compliance with the
Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation, and Majority Protest Act of 1931
(being Cal. Streets and Highways Code §§ 2800 et seq.).
      (2)   Notice and hearing. The resolution shall contain a notice of the
time and place of hearing. A copy of the resolution shall be published in one
or more issues of a newspaper published and circulated in the city, and a copy
shall be posted on or near the Council chambers' door or on a bulletin board in
or adjacent to the city hall. The posting and publication shall be had at least
ten days before the date of hearing. The resolution may be consolidated with
the resolution of intention.
      (3)   Objections. Any person interested may object to undertaking the
proceedings without first complying with the provisions of the said
Investigation Act of 1931.
      (4)   Final determination of necessity. If no protests are made, or when
the protests shall have been heard and overruled, the Council may adopt a
resolution finding and determining that the public convenience and necessity
require the proposed improvements and/or acquisitions and that the said
Investigation Act of 1931 shall not apply. Such findings may be incorporated in
the resolution ordering the improvement and/or acquisition.
      (5)   Modification. When proceedings are held for a change and
modification, the resolution of intention to change and modify shall be deemed
a resolution of intention, and the resolution ordering the changes and
modifications shall be deemed a resolution ordering the improvement or
acquisition as to the changes and modifications.
      (6)   Jurisdiction. The resolution determining the convenience and
necessity shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of the
members of the Council, and such findings and determinations shall be final and
conclusive.
      (7)   Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply when
investigation proceedings have been avoided or taken pursuant to the said
Investigation Act of 1931.
      (8)   Finality. When proceedings for any improvements and/or
acquisitions, or any part thereof, have been undertaken without compliance with
the said Investigation Act of 1931 or without proceedings pursuant to this
division (D), proceedings may thereafter be held pursuant to this division (D)
with reference thereto, and the order of the Council determining the
convenience and necessity therein shall be final and conclusive.
   (E)   Zones. If, in the judgment of the Council, varying benefits will be
derived by the different parcels of land lying within the assessment district,
the district may be divided into zones according to benefits.
      (1)   Number. The district may be divided into as many zones, up to the
total number of parcels of land in the district, as may be deemed necessary,
and each zone shall be composed of and include all the lands within the
district which will be benefitted in like measure.
      (2)   Percentage. The Council shall also determine the percentage of the
sum to be raised each year by the levy and collection of the special assessment
taxes in the district for the payments on the principal and interest of the
bonds which will be raised from the lands in each zone.
      (3)   Resolution of intention. When the district is divided into such
zones, the resolution of intention shall so state, giving the percentages to be
raised from lands in each zone.
      (4)   Designation. Each zone shall be designated by a different letter or
number and shall be plainly shown on the map or plat of the assessment district
filed in the office of the City Clerk and referred to in the resolution of
intention, either by separate boundaries, coloring, or other convenient and
graphic method, so that all persons interested may with accuracy ascertain
within which zone any parcel of land is located.
      (5)   Plat. It shall be sufficient, in all cases where the assessment
district is to be divided into such zones according to benefits, if the
resolution of intention states that fact and refers to the plat or map for the
boundaries and all details concerning the zones.
   (F)   Formation of parking district without petition. The city may prepare a
report, adopt a resolution of intention, and form a parking district without
any petition therefor.
   (G)   Parking lots not required to be in parking district. It shall not be
necessary for the proposed parking lots to be located within the parking
district.
   (H)   Elapse of time. It shall not be necessary for any specified time to
elapse between the performance of acts.
   (I)   Period of notice. The first publication and mailing of any resolution
or notice shall be not later than ten days before the day fixed therein for
hearing or other act.
   (J)   Resolution sufficient. The Council may act by resolution when an
ordinance is provided.
   (K)   Issuance of bonds. The bonds may be issued before contracting or
obtaining options for the purchase of the land, property, or rights-of-way to
be acquired, or before obtaining a judgment in eminent domain for the
acquisition thereof.
   (L)   Maturity of bonds. The bonds may be made payable on July 2 of each
year in such amounts as the Council shall determine. The last installment shall
mature not later than 39 years from the second day of July next succeeding ten
months after their date.
   (M)   Registration. The bonds may be made registrable as to principal and
interest, or as to principal only, and may be made de-registrable.
   (N)   Divisions. The bonds may be issued in different divisions with
different dates and dates of maturity.
   (O)   Sale. The bonds may be sold below par in the manner determined by the
Council.
   (P)   Bonds; source of payment. Any bonds issued pursuant to these
proceedings and the interest thereon shall be payable from annual ad valorem
assessments levied upon the taxable real property within the district, and the
limitations upon the rate or period thereof provided in the Act shall not
apply. The bonds may also be payable from on-street and off-street parking
revenues.
   (Q)   Enlargement of district. The boundaries of the district heretofore or
hereafter formed may be enlarged from time to time in the following manner:
      (1)   Resolution of intention. The territory to be annexed shall be set
forth in a resolution of preliminary determination and of intention to be
adopted by the Council, which resolution shall give notice that the matter, and
all persons interested, will be heard by the Council at a time to be stated
therein.
      (2)   Publication. The resolution shall be published twice in a newspaper
of general circulation published in the city and posted as provided in division
(D)(2) of section.
      (3)   Hearing. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time. At the
hearing, the Council shall have the power to determine whether or not the
entire territory, or only a portion thereof, shall be annexed and whether the
district will be benefitted by the annexation.
      (4)   Order. The Council shall by resolution order the annexation of such
territory, defining its boundaries therein. Its decision thereon shall be final
and conclusive.
      (5)   Ad valorem assessment. Thereafter, the property annexed shall be
subject to special levies for maintenance and operation and for any bonds
issued for the acquisition or construction of improvements, the same as are the
properties already in the parking district.
   (R)   Additional street meter pledge. The Council may, from time to time,
pledge street meter revenues from without or within the parking district.
   (S)   Additional parking place pledge. The Council may, from time to time,
pledge revenues from off-street parking places theretofore or thereafter
acquired in other than the proceedings in addition to those acquired in the
proceedings.
   (T)   Supplemental procedures. When proceedings are held under the Act, its
provisions may be supplemented by other proceedings or as otherwise provided in
the resolution of intention.
   (U)   Inclusion of territory in more than one district. Territory included
in one parking district may be included in another parking district if the
Council shall find that the territory will be benefitted by being included in
the subsequent parking district.
   (V)   Rental of facilities. The city may acquire, construct, rent, lease,
maintain, repair, manage, and operate all or any portion of any real and
personal property, including the leasing of property for parking, the leasing
of the operation of the property, and the leasing for commercial purposes of
surplus space or space which is not economic to use for parking purposes.
   (W)   Incidental uses.
      (1)   As an incident to the operation of any parking facility, the city
may devote a portion of its property to uses such as retail stores, bus depots,
gasoline service stations, helicopter landing areas, or any other commercial
uses when, in its judgment, it is convenient or necessary to conduct or permit
such use in order to utilize properly the property in a parking facility. Any
such incidental use shall be secondary to the primary use as a parking
facility, and the portion of the land devoted to the incidental use shall not
exceed 25% of the surface area of the property. If a building is erected on the
property for the purpose of parking motor vehicles, the incidental use of the
building shall not occupy more than 25% of the floor area.
      (2)   Neither the Transportation Safety Commission nor the Council shall
manage or operate surplus space devoted to commercial purposes other than
parking vehicles but shall lease such space to private operators.
   (X)   Sale of property. The Council, by four-fifths vote of all of its
members, may determine that any parcel of property acquired from the proceeds
of the bonds or any improvements, extensions, or replacements thereof or
additions thereto are no longer needed for off-street parking purposes or that
such facilities may be otherwise better provided. The property shall thereafter
be sold and disposed of, either during or after the term of the bonds. The
proceeds of the sale shall be used for the following purposes and in the
following order of priority:
      (1)   For the purchase of other off-street parking places or facilities
for the parking district, or for improvements, additions, and extensions to the
existing facilities thereof;
      (2)   To pay the principal and interest on the parking bonds of this
issue or any additional parking bonds of the district then outstanding; and
      (3)   To make the refunds provided in § 35705 of the Act. No property
shall be sold until after proceedings for changes and modifications have been
held as provided in the Act.
(Ord. 2755, passed 9-2-58; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.072 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC PARKING FACILITY. Any lot, space, or area within the city now or
hereafter used for off-street vehicular parking by members of the public and
owned or operated for such use by the city.
('63 Code, § 3-4.301) (Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61)
§ 72.073 ADMINISTRATION BY CITY MANAGER; ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES AND TIME
LIMITS.
   (A)   Administration by City Manager. The operation, management and
designation of pay-to-park of all public off-street parking facilities in the
city are hereby placed under the control of the City Manager, subject to the
policy direction of the Council.
   (B)   Establishment of rates and time limits.
      (1)   The Council, by resolution, may establish the rates and parking
time limits, and days and hours during which they shall apply, for the parking
of vehicles on public off-street parking facilities.
      (2)   Establishment of rates and time limits. The Council, by resolution,
hereby establishes a range of acceptable hourly paid parking rates for parking
meter zones as no less than $0.50 and no more than $3.00 per hour, Monday
through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., except for holidays. Parking rates
shall become effective upon the programming of the parking meter for that rate.
The current schedule of meter rates shall be available on the city's fee
schedule.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works is authorized to adjust hourly parking
meter rates in increments of $0.25 at a time, and by a maximum of $0.50 total,
per calendar year, within the established range of rates. The Director is
further authorized to adjust the hours of operation and parking time limits of
public parking lots. All rate adjustments and adjustments to the hours of
operation shall be determined by conducting an occupancy survey of the parking
meter zone or lot. All parking meter rates heretofore shall be and remain in
effect, unless otherwise set or adjusted by the Director or Council.
(Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23)
§ 72.074 COMPLIANCE WITH PARKING REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any
vehicle registered in his name or controlled by him to be parked upon any part
of any public parking facility without first complying with the rules,
regulations, restrictions, and requirements relating to the use thereof,
including the payment of fees therefor, as specified by appropriate curb or
pavement markings, signs, or notices placed or posted on or about such public
parking facilities or on each parking meter.
('63 Code, § 3-4.304) (Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.075 IMPROPER USE OF PARKING METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, or cause to be deposited, in
any parking meter in any public off-street parking facility any defaced or bent
coin, or any slug, device, or metallic substitute for any coin required for the
normal operation thereof, or to deface, injure, tamper with, open, or wilfully
break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any such parking meter, or any part
thereof.
('63 Code, § 3-4.305) (Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.076 PARKING AFTER PARKING METER TIME EXPIRES.
   No operator of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle to remain parked in any
parking space during any time that the parking meter is showing a signal
indicating that such space is illegally in use other than such time immediately
after the original occupancy as is necessary to operate the parking meter to
show legal parking.
('63 Code, § 3-4.306) (Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.077 METHOD OF PARKING.
   The Traffic Engineer shall cause lines or markings to be painted or placed
upon the surface of public parking facilities adjacent to each parking meter
designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used. Each vehicle
parking adjacent to such parking meter shall be parked or placed within the
lines or markings so established. It shall be unlawful to park or place any
vehicle across or outside any such line or marking or to park or place the
vehicle in such a position so that the same shall not be entirely within the
space designated or delineated by such lines or markings.
('63 Code, § 3-4.307) (Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.078 PARKING METER ENFORCEMENT.
   Every police officer and every city employee charged with the enforcement of
the provisions of this subchapter and the rules, regulations, restrictions, and
requirements relating to the use of public off-street parking facilities as may
be prescribed by the Council, shall have the duty, when any vehicle is parked
in violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter, to issue a written
notice thereof stating the parking meter number, the state vehicle license
number, the make of such vehicle, the time and date of such illegal parking, a
reference to the appropriate section of this subchapter, and fixing a time and
place for an appearance by the registered owner in answer to such notice. Such
notice shall be in the same form and subject to the same procedure as set forth
in the Cal. Veh. Code § 40202 and laws of the state applicable to traffic
violations within the city.
('63 Code, § 3-4.308) (Ord. 2887, passed 11-21-61)
§ 72.079 PERMIT PARKING.
   Upon the recommendation of the Transportation Safety Commission, the City
Manager shall have the authority to define and set aside any portion of any
city-owned public parking facility for permit parking and to issue permits
therefor in accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   The maximum number of permits to be issued upon any lot shall be
limited to a number which the City Manager determines will not substantially
impair the use of such lot by non-permit parkers.
   (B)   The City Manager may issue parking meter permits to applicants
therefor upon the payment of a fee in an amount to be determined by the City
Manager based upon the average receipts from meters in parking lots for a
period equivalent to that covered by the permit. Such permit shall designate
the parking lot and the parking space for which it is issued and shall be
affixed to the rear window of the vehicle for which it is issued. Such permit
may contain such instructions as to its use as may be deemed appropriate by the
City Manager. Applications for such permits shall be made on forms furnished by
the City Manager.
   (C)   The authority granted to the City Manager by the provisions of this
section shall include the authority on any city-owned parking lot to convert
metered spaces to unmetered spaces and unmetered spaces to metered spaces, as
may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this section.
   (D)   The holder of a valid parking permit, properly displayed, may park in
the space on the lot for which such permit is issued, but only in such space,
without further payment or deposit of coins.
   (E)   The City Manager may revoke any parking meter permit for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   When the person to whom such permit has been issued has failed to
pay the fee therefor as provided in this section; or
      (2)   When the City Manager determines that such permit parking
substantially impairs the use of such parking lot by non-permit holders.
('63 Code, § 3-4.309) (Ord. 11-C.S., passed 3-6-64; Am. Ord. 947-C.S., passed
8-1-23)
§ 72.080 UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any
vehicle registered in his name, or operated or controlled by him, to be parked
in any space in any city-owned public parking facility adjacent to which there
is a sign indicating that such space is reserved for permit parking only
without displaying a valid permit therefor, as provided in §
72.079 of this of this subchapter, except that this prohibition shall not apply
to the use of such spaces during the period from 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. or on
Sundays or holidays.
('63 Code, § 3-4.310) (Ord. 11-C.S., passed 3-6-64)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.081 TIMED PARKING MAPS.
   Parking time limit maps, which establish timed parking zones throughout the
city, will be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 947-C.S., passed 8-1-23)
LOADING AND UNLOADING
§ 72.095 ESTABLISHING LOADING ZONES; CURB MARKINGS.
   (A)   Authority to establish loading zones.
      (1)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to determine and mark
loading zones and passenger loading zones as follows:
         (a)   At any place in the central traffic district or any business
district; and
         (b)   Elsewhere in front of the entrance to any place of business or
in front of any hall or place used for the purpose of public assembly.
      (2)   In no event shall more than one-half the total curb length in any
block be reserved for loading zone purposes.
      (3)   Loading zones shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of
all curbs within such zones.
      (4)   Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by white paint upon the
top of all curbs within such zones.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1201)
   (B)   Curb markings.
      (1)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized, subject to the
provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required herein
shall place, the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing
regulations, and such curb markings shall have the meanings as set forth:
         (a)   Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time
except as permitted by the California Vehicle Code and except that a bus may
stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.
         (b)   Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and
holidays for any purpose other than the loading and unloading of passengers or
materials provided the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume
more than three minutes and the loading or unloading of materials shall not
consume more than 20 minutes.
         (c)   White shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking for any
purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or for the purpose of
depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which depositing shall not exceed
three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows:
            1.   When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mail
box, the restrictions shall apply at all times.
            2.   When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions
shall apply at all times.
         (d)   Blue shall mean a parking space for the exclusive use of
vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued to
disabled persons pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22511.5 or to disabled veterans
as specified in Cal. Veh. Code § 9105.
      (2)   When the Traffic Engineer, as authorized pursuant to the provisions
of this division (B) has caused curb markings to be placed, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking in
violation of any of the provisions of this division (B).
('63 Code, § 3-6.1202)
(Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 303-C.S., passed 12-5-78)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.096 EFFECT OF PERMISSION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD.
   (A)   Permission granted pursuant to the provisions of this section to stop
or stand a vehicle for the purposes of loading or unloading materials shall
apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time
necessary therefor and in no event for more than 20 minutes.
   (B)   The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial
deliveries and the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and
United States mail.
   (C)   Permission granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter to
stop or park for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include
the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the
time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes.
   (D)   Persons exercising the privileges granted by the provisions of this
section shall be in close attendance to the vehicle at all times during which
the vehicle is stopped or standing for the purposes of loading or unloading and
shall be prepared to move the vehicle in the event the need for vehicle access
arises during the loading or unloading operation.
   (E)   Within the total time limits specified by the provisions of this
section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate
necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting the abuse
of the privileges granted.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1203) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 225-C.S., passed 1-
18-74)
§ 72.097 STANDING FOR LOADING OR UNLOADING ONLY.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone
for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or material
for such time as is set forth in §
72.096 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1204) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.098 STANDING IN PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any passenger loading zone
for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers for such time
as is set forth in §
72.096 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1205) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.099 STANDING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose other than
the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. Such loading or
unloading of persons or materials shall be carried out in accordance with the
requirements and limitations set forth in §
72.096 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1206) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 225-C.S., passed 1-
18-74)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.100 BUS ZONES.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to establish bus zones
opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers
of passengers and to determine the location thereof.
   (B)   Bus zones shall normally be established on the far side of an
intersection.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1207(a),(b)) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 324-C.S.,
passed 6-4-80; Am. Ord. 331-C.S., passed 1-6-81)
Cross-reference:
   Specific bus zones established, see
Ch. 74, Sch. II
§ 72.101 CURB PARKING.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, LIMITED CURB PARKING
SPACE shall mean an area open for lawful parking alongside of and adjacent to a
curb, which area is not of sufficient length to permit two or more vehicles to
freely move for parking therein at the same time.
   (B)   Right-of-way. Any person seeking to park his vehicle in a limited curb
parking space, which vehicle arrives at such parking space prior to any other
vehicle, and who proceeds beyond such space a distance not to exceed ten feet
for the purpose of backing his vehicle therein, shall have the right-of-way
over any person driving or attempting to drive any other vehicle directly into
such limited curb parking space or who in any manner obstructs such limited
curb parking space, and the driver of such other vehicle shall yield the right-
of-way to the driver who first arrived at such parking space.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1208) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
§ 72.102 SPECIAL PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, SPECIAL PASSENGER
LOADING ZONE shall be that area adjacent to the curb, not more than 60 feet in
length, located between two approved permanent or portable signs in front of,
or adjacent to and within the projected real property boundaries of any church,
theater, club, or place of business or public gathering. Such signs shall be
provided by and paid for by the church, theater, club, or place of business or
public gathering for which they are used and shall be approved by the Traffic
Engineer.
   (B)   Loading and unloading. No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand,
or park such vehicle in any special passenger loading zone when approved
permanent or portable signs are in place for any period of time longer than is
necessary for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three
minutes.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1209) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.103 BICYCLE PARKING ZONES.
   When the Traffic Engineer shall determine that the establishment of a
bicycle parking zone is reasonably necessary or desirable for the regulation of
traffic, or to provide facilities for the temporary parking of bicycles being
operated upon public streets, or to safeguard life or property, he is hereby
authorized to set aside a space on the street not more than 36 feet in length
for the parking of bicycles during such hours of such days as are found by him
to be best suited for the accomplishment of the purposes set forth in this
section. When a bicycle parking zone is so established, the Traffic Engineer
shall cause appropriate signs to be posted thereat during such hours giving
notice that parking of other vehicles is prohibited. No person shall stop,
stand, or park any other vehicle in front of such zone while such signs are in
place.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1210) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 72.104 FUNERAL ZONES.
   No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park such vehicle for any
period of time longer than is necessary for the loading or unloading of
passengers and not to exceed three minutes at any place between the limit
markers or signs placed within the projected real property boundaries of any
undertaking establishment, private residence, or any public or private place at
any time during or within 40 minutes prior to the beginning of any funeral or
funeral service unless the operator of such vehicle is directed by, or has
received permission from, the director or other person in charge of such
funeral or funeral service to park such vehicle in such place provided such
director or person in charge shall have placed and maintained prior to and
during the time limit specified two approved portable signs, one at each
extremity of such place, upon the sidewalk or pavement area and within two feet
of the curb.
('63 Code, § 3-6.1211) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Bicycle registration required
   
73.03   Certificate of registration; license tags
   
73.04   Transfer of bicycle ownership
   
73.05   Bicycle dealers excepted
   
73.06   Riding bicycles on sidewalks
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. Any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by
human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears having either two or
three wheels (one of which is at least 20 inches in diameter) or having a frame
size of at least 14 inches, or having four or more wheels.
('63 Code, § 3-1.06)
   DOWNTOWN AREA. That territory:
      (1)   Bounded on the south by the south line of Seventh Street;
      (2)   Bounded on the east by the east line of J Street;
      (3)   Bounded on the west by the west line of A Street;
      (4)   Bounded on the north by the north city limits.
('63 Code, § 3-1.08)
   HENDERSON CENTER BUSINESS DISTRICT. That territory:
      (1)   Bounded on the north by a line parallel with Henderson Street and
lying 120 feet northerly of the northerly line thereof;
      (2)   Bounded on the east by a line parallel with “F” Street and lying
120 feet easterly of the easterly line thereof;
      (3)   Bounded on the south by a line parallel with Harris Street and
lying 180 feet southerly of the southerly line thereof;
      (4)   Bounded on the west by a line parallel with “E” Street and lying
120 feet westerly of the westerly line thereof.
('63 Code, § 3-1.09)
(Ord. 419-C.S., passed 2-2-85)
§ 73.02 BICYCLE REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Bicycles do not have sufficient identification numbers to properly
safeguard or protect them from theft or to properly identify them when used in
the perpetration of depredations and crimes, and it is necessary and essential
and for the best interests of the city and the owners of such bicycles that
each bicycle owned or operated in the city have suitable registration
identification and that the use thereof be regulated so that this condition may
be lessened or eliminated.
('63 Code, § 3-1.01)
   (B)   The owner or operator, if the owner does not live within the city, of
every bicycle within the city shall register such bicycle with the Police
Department, giving the name and address of the owner thereof, the name and
address of the parents, or guardian if such owner shall be a minor, the make
and type of the bicycle, and any and all other facts or information requested
by the Chief of Police, and shall exhibit such bicycle to the Chief of Police,
or any police officer authorized by the Chief of Police to inspect such
bicycle, when required so to do. Application for such registration and
identification, license plates, and certificate of registration shall be made
on forms provided by the Police Department.
('63 Code, § 3-1.02)
(Ord. 2124, passed - - )
§ 73.03 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; LICENSE TAGS.
   (A)   Upon application by such bicycle owner or operator being made, signed,
and filed, a certificate of registration shall be issued, signed by the Chief
of Police and delivered to the applicant, which certificate shall be in such
form as prescribed by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall also cause
to be issued to such applicant a license tag, plate, or other means of
identification which shall be immediately attached and affixed to the bicycle
in such place and in such manner as may be designated by the Chief of Police,
and such identification shall remain thereon at all times while such bicycle is
owned or operated by the applicant.
   (B)   The applicant shall thereupon be permitted to operate such bicycle in
the city, and it shall be unlawful to operate such bicycle within the city
until the provisions of this section have been complied with.
('63 Code, § 3-1.03) (Ord. 2124, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 73.04 TRANSFER OF BICYCLE OWNERSHIP.
   Upon the sale, barter, exchange, pawning, or other hypothecation of such
bicycle, the owner or operator thereof shall forthwith and immediately notify
the Police Department, and the certificate of registration, license plate, or
other means of identification shall be of no further force or effect. The
purchaser or new owner, or the pawnbroker or person with whom such bicycle has
been hypothecated, shall immediately make application to the Police Department
for a new certificate of registration and license plate or other means of
identification before the bicycle shall be operated in the city.
('63 Code, § 3-1.04) (Ord. 2124, passed - - )
§ 73.05 BICYCLE DEALERS EXCEPTED.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any bona fide wholesale or
retail dealer in bicycles; provided, however, such wholesale or retail dealer
may, if he desires, apply for such license and receive such registration
certificate and identification plate.
('63 Code, § 3-1.05) (Ord. 2124, passed - - )
§ 73.06 RIDING BICYCLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within the Henderson
Center Business District or the Downtown Area.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to police officers in the
course of their regular duties.
('63 Code, § 3-1.07) (Ord. 419-C.S., passed 2-2-85; Am. Ord. 523-C.S., passed
2-14-91)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Bus zones
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   It is hereby determined upon the basis of an Engineering and Traffic Survey,
that the speed permitted by state law upon the following streets is less than
is necessary for the safe operation of vehicles thereon and it is hereby
declared that the speed limit shall be as set forth in this section, on those
streets or parts of streets designated when signs are erected giving notice
thereof.
Street Speed Limit (MPH)
Street                                                        Speed Limit (MPH)
B Street from Seventh Street to Harris Street                 25
Buhne Street from Fairfield Street to J Street                25
Buhne Street from J Street to Harrison Avenue                 30
California Street from Seventh Street to Harris Street        25
Campton Road from Oak Street to city limits                   35
Central Avenue from Harris Street to South Avenue existent as 25
of 12/1/2024*
Dolbeer Street from Harris Street to Hemlock Street           25
E Street from Seventh Street to Fourteenth Street             25
E Street from Fourteenth Street to Henderson Street           30
E Street from Henderson Street to Harris Street               25
E Street from Harris Street to city limits                    30
F Street from Harris Street to city limits                    30
Fairfield Street from Wabash Avenue to Harris Street existent 25
as of 12/1/2024*
Fairway Drive from F Street to city                           30
Fourteenth Street from Broadway to J Street                   25
Fourteenth Street from J Street to West Avenue                30
Glen Street from Harris Street to Gibson Street existent as   25
of 12/1/2024*
Glen Street from Gibson Street to Allard Avenue               25
H Street from Seventh Street to Manzanita Avenue              30
H Street from Manzanita Avenue to Oak Street                  35
Harris Street from Broadway to Harrison Avenue                30
Harrison Avenue from Myrtle Avenue to Lucas Street            30
Harrison Avenue from Lucas Street to Harris Street            25
Harrison Avenue from Harris Street to Manzanita Avenue        30
Henderson Street from Broadway to S Street                    30
Hodgson Street from F Street to W Street                      30
I Street from Seventh Street to Harris Street                 30
J Street from Seventh Street to Harris Street                 30
M Street from Seventh Street to Fourteenth Street             25
McCullens Avenue from Glen Street to Broadway existent as of  25
12/1/2024*
McFarlan Street from Myrtle Avenue to Hillside Drive          25
Myrtle Avenue from Fifth Street to West Avenue                30
Myrtle Avenue from West Avenue to Harrison Avenue existent as 30
of 12/1/2024*
S Street from West Avenue to Harris Street                    30
Seventh Street from Broadway to J Street                      25
Seventh Street from J Street to Myrtle Avenue                 30
Sixth Street from Broadway to O Street                        25
Sixth Street from O Street to Myrtle Avenue                   30
Union Street from Wabash Avenue to city limits                25
Wabash Avenue from Broadway to H Street                       30
West Avenue from Fifth Street to Myrtle Avenue                25
West Avenue from Myrtle Avenue to County Lane                 30
Notes:
   *12/1/2024 is the date Ordinance 959-C.S. was drafted
 
('63 Code, § 3-6.1401) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 133-C.S., passed
12-5-70; Am. Ord. 223-C.S., passed 1-4-74; Am. Ord. 276-C.S., passed 8-19-77;
Am. Ord. 287-C.S., passed 12-16-77; Am. Ord. 406-C.S., passed 6-19-77; Am. Ord.
499-C.S., passed 7-23-89; Am. Ord. 809-C.S., passed 3-17-15; Am. Ord. 960-C.S.,
passed 1-21-25) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. BUS ZONES.
   Pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code § 22500(i) the following locations are designated
as bus stops for the loading and unloading of passengers:
 
Street        Side  Location
Broadway      West  From the south line of Tomlinson Street to a point 30 feet
                    southerly therefrom
                    From a point 42 feet northerly of the north line of
Broadway      East  McCullens Avenue to a point 74 feet northerly of the north
                    line of McCullens Avenue
                    From a point 42 feet easterly of the east line of "Q"
Fourth Street North Street to a point 79 feet easterly of the east line of "Q"
                    Street
                    From a point 17 feet southerly of the south line of Third
"R" Street    East  Street to a point 85 feet southerly of the south line of
                    Third Street
 
('63 Code, § 3-6.1207(c)) (Ord. 2930, passed 4-17-63; Am. Ord. 324-C.S., passed
6-4-80; Am. Ord. 331-C.S., passed 1-6-81)
Penalty, see § 70.99
CHAPTER 75: MOBILE VENDORS OPERATING UPON A STREET
Section
   
75.01   Authority
   
75.02   Definitions
   
75.03   Required conditions
§ 75.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the city by §
22455(b) of the California Vehicle Code, which permits local authorities to
regulate the type of vending and the time, place and manner of vending from
vehicles upon the street in order to promote public safety.
(Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16)
§ 75.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOWNSTREAM. The direction that traffic moves as it travels away from an
intersection on a one-way street.
   MOBILE VENDOR. Any vehicle from which a product is made, sold, or
distributed at retail.
   STREET. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. STREET includes
HIGHWAY.
   UPON A STREET. Legally parked adjacent to the curb.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled or moved
upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power.
   VEND or VENDING. To sell, offer for sale, display, barter, exchange, or
otherwise provide a product from a vehicle.
(Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16)
§ 75.03 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Obstructions. A mobile vendor shall not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or block a driveway or alleyway.
   (B)   Intersections. A mobile vendor shall not operate within 50 feet of any
street intersection (measured from the back of the nearest perpendicular
sidewalk) unless on-street parking spaces are delineated, in which case the
mobile vendor shall not operate within the two parking spaces located nearest
to the corner. This restriction shall not apply on the downstream sides of one-
way streets.
   (C)   Alleys. A mobile vendor shall not operate within 25 feet of an alley
unless on-street parking spaces are delineated, in which case the mobile vendor
shall not operate within the parking space located nearest to the alley. This
restriction shall not apply on the downstream sides of one-way streets.
   (D)   Streets prohibited. A mobile vendor shall not operate on Fourth
Street, Fifth Street, or Broadway.
   (E)   Schools. A mobile vendor shall not stand, stop, park, or operate
within 300 feet of any property on which a K-12 school is located between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any school day.
   (F)   Waste. Mobile vendors shall maintain a clearly designated waste
receptacle in the immediate vicinity of the mobile vending sales while in
operation.
   (G)   Vending side. Mobile vendors shall not distribute anything from the
vehicle or operate in a manner that causes any person to stand in the street or
parking lane.
   (H)   Utility connections. A mobile vendor shall not be connected to an
external source of water, electricity, or sewer.
   (I)   Compliance with other laws and regulations. Mobile vendors shall obey
all local, state, and federal laws.
   (J)   Business improvement districts. Mobile vendors which operate, or
intend to operate, within a business improvement district shall pay associated
fees.
(Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
         
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
         
91.   ANIMALS
         
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
         
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
         
94.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
         
95.   MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
         
96.   PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
         
97.   SMOKING
         
98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
99.   TRAINS AND RAILROADS
         
100.   HARBOR REGULATIONS
         
101.   FILMING.
         
102.   BEEKEEPING
         
103.   PRIVATE SECURITY AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
         104.   MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Findings
   
90.03   Provisions supplementary to other laws
Prohibitions
   
90.15   Abandonment prohibited
   
90.16   Use of alley, street or public parking lot for storage of vehicles
   
90.17   Permits
Administration and Enforcement
   
90.30   Enforcement by Chief of Police
   
90.31   Authority of peace officer or city employee to remove vehicles
   
90.32   Authority of contractor to remove abandoned vehicle
   
90.33   Right of entry
   
90.34   Abatement and removal procedures
   
90.35   Storage of vehicles
   
90.36   Notice and hearing for low value vehicles
   
90.37   Disposition; prohibition against reconstruction
   
90.38   Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles, California Highway Patrol
   
90.39   City administrative costs
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Shall mean and include the following:
      (1)   PUBLIC NUISANCE VEHICLE. Any vehicle or parts thereof, that is
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative, that is left on public or
private property, not including highways; and that creates a condition tending
to reduce the value of private property, promotes blight and deterioration,
invites plundering, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance
endangering the health and safety of minors, harbors rodents and insects, or,
jeopardizes health, safety and general welfare.
      (2)   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle is “abandoned” if it is left on a
highway, public property, or private property in such inoperable or neglected
condition that the owner's intention to relinquish all further rights or
interests in it may be reasonably concluded. In reference to highways,
“abandonment” is presumed to have occurred if a vehicle is left 72 hours or
more on the highway, or is parked, resting or otherwise immobilized on any
highway or public right-of-way; and lacks an engine, transmission, wheels,
tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment necessary to operate
safely on the highway. Such vehicles are presumed to be a hazard to public
health, safety, and welfare and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a
peace officer or other designated employee.
      (3)   WRECKED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is damaged to such an extent that
it cannot be operated upon the highway. A vehicle which has been wrecked in a
traffic accident, and which has been removed from the roadway to a storage
facility, but which has not been claimed by its owner will not be considered an
abandoned vehicle.
      (4)   DISMANTLED VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is partially or wholly
disassembled.
      (5)   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle that cannot be moved under
its own power.
   AXLE. A structure or portion of a structure consisting of one or more
shafts, spindles, or bearings in the same vertical transverse plane by means of
which, in conjunction with wheels mounted on said shafts, spindles, or
bearings, a portion of the weight of a vehicle and its load, if any, is
continuously transmitted to die roadway when the vehicle is in motion.
   BUS.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) of this definition, a BUS is any
vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used, or maintained for carrying
more than 15 persons, including the driver.
      (2)   A vehicle designed, used, or maintained for carrying more than ten
persons, including the driver, which is used to transport persons for
compensation or profit, or is used by any nonprofit organization or group, is
also a BUS.
      (3)   This definition does not alter the definition of a schoolbus,
school pupil activity bus, general public paratransit vehicle, farm labor
vehicle, or youth bus.
      (4)   A vanpool vehicle is not a bus.
   CAMPER. A structure designed to be mounted upon a motor vehicle and to
provide facilities for human habitation or camping purposes. A camper having
one axle shall not be considered a vehicle.
    EMPLOYEE. A city employee designated by the Chief of Police.
   HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular traffic. Highway includes a
street, and all or any part of the entire width of the right-of-way of said
highway.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self-propelled. MOTOR VEHICLE does not
include a self-propelled wheelchair, motorized tricycle, or motorized
quadricycle, if operated by a person who, by reason of physical disability, is
otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian. For purposes of Cal. Vehicle
Code, Chapter 6 (commencing with § 3000) of Division 2, MOTOR VEHICLE includes
a recreational vehicle as that term is defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code,
§ 18010(a), but does not include a truck camper.
   MOTOR TRUCK or MOTORTRUCK. A motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained
primarily for the transportation of property.
   PEACE OFFICER. An individual as defined in Cal. Penal Code, Chapter 4.5
(commencing with § 830) of Title 3 of Part 2.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer,
with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational,
emergency, or other occupancy, that meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   It contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room
area, excluding built-in equipment, including, but not limited to, wardrobe,
closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms.
         (b)   It contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at
maximum horizontal projections.
         (c)   It is built on a single chassis.
         (d)   It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently
towable on the highways without a permit.
      (2)   A park trailer, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
18009.3.
   SEMITRAILER. A vehicle designed for carrying persons or property, used in
conjunction with a motor vehicle, and so constructed that some part of its
weight and that of its load rests upon, or is carried by, another vehicle.
   TRAILER COACH. A vehicle, other than a motor vehicle, designed for human
habitation or human occupancy for industrial, professional, or commercial
purposes, for carrying property on its own structure, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle. A PARK TRAILER, as described in Cal. Health and Safety Code, §
18009.3, is a trailer coach.
   TRUCK TRACTOR.
      (1)   A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other
vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load, other than a part of the
weight of the vehicle and the load so drawn. As used in this section, LOAD does
not include items carried on the truck tractor in conjunction with the
operation of the vehicle if the load-carrying space for these items does not
exceed 34 square feet.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (a) of this definition, a TRUCK TRACTOR,
operated by a motor carrier whose owner is licensed by the Department of the
California Highway Patrol to transport explosives pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code,
Division 14 (commencing with § 31600), may be equipped with a cargo container
used exclusively for the transportation of explosives or munitions-related
security material, as specified by the United States Department of Defense.
   VEHICLE. A device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be
propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human
power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
('63 Code, § 3-10.01) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92; Am. Ord. 739-C.S., passed
3-17-09)
§ 90.02 FINDINGS.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state under Cal. Veh. Code, § 22660 to remove
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts as public
nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and declarations:
   (A)   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles or parts, on private or public property, including
highways, creates a condition tending to reduce the value of private property,
promotes blight and deterioration, invites plundering, creates fire hazards,
constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety
of minors, creates a harborage for rodents and insects and is injurious to the
health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle or parts, on private or public property, including
highways, is declared to constitute a nuisance which may be abated in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-10.02) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.03 PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTARY TO OTHER LAWS.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles. It shall supplement and be in addition to
other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the city, county,
state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.
('63 Code, § 3-10.11) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 90.15 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22523)
   (B)   No person shall park or leave a vehicle on a highway for 72
consecutive hours or more.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22651(k))
   (C)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property
without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the property.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22523)
('63 Code, § 3-10.03) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.16 USE OF ALLEY, STREET OR PUBLIC PARKING LOT FOR STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any
vehicle shall park, store or leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of
any licensed or unlicensed vehicle on any alley, street, or public parking lot
for more than a consecutive period of 72 hours. Successive acts of parking
within a 0.2-mile area shall be presumed to be a single act of parking for
purposes of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter,
the following vehicles may only be parked in Limited Industrial Districts and
General Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Any motor vehicle over 20 feet long, measured from the extreme
forward point to the extreme rear point, including extensions;
      (2)   Any motor vehicle, over 96 inches wide, measured at its widest
point excluding side-view mirrors or similar extensions, designed, used or
maintained for the transportation of property;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle, including buses, motor trucks, trailers,
semitrailers, trailer coaches, or truck tractors as defined in the Cal. Vehicle
Code, over 96 inches wide, measured at its widest point excluding side-view
mirrors or similar extensions, designed, used or maintained for the
transportation of property;
      (4)   Any motor vehicle which is designed, used or maintained as an
implement of husbandry or a special purpose or equipment machine;
      (5)   Any non-motorized vehicle, such as a semitrailer, trailer, trailer
coach, utility trailer, two or more axle camper, or a one-axle camper, which
has been detached from its drawing vehicle; or
      (6)   Any “recreational vehicle (RV)”, over 20 feet long measured from
the extreme forward point to the extreme rear point, including extensions. The
term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) shall have the same meaning as set forth in Cal.
Health and Safety Code, § 18010 or successor statute.
   (B)   Recreational vehicle parking permits.
      (1)   The Chief of Police may issue a temporary permit for the overnight
parking of a recreational vehicle prohibited by this chapter if there is a
finding that the vehicle is used on a daily basis and on-premises parking is
not reasonably available. Recreational vehicle parking permits are obtained by
a resident prior to the date and time the vehicle is parked. A permit issued
based on this finding shall not be valid for longer than six months.
      (2)   The Chief of Police may issue a temporary permit to persons who
demonstrate by way of written statement from a licensed medical doctor, that
the recreational vehicle prohibited by this chapter must be kept near a
residence for medical reasons.
   (C)   Exceptions. Section 90.16 shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   (a)   Recreational vehicles as defined in Cal. Health and Safety
Code, § 18010, or unattached boat or personal water craft trailer, parked for
the purpose of loading, or other short-term use, provided that a permit has
been issued in advance by the Chief of Police. A permit may be issued for
loading, unloading, or other short-term use not to exceed 24 hours, provided
that:
            1.   No more than 16 such periods are allowed in a calendar month;
and
            2.   No more man eight days consecutively; and
            3.   No more than 144 in any 12-month period.
         (b)   Such parking shall be limited to the area in front of the
residence from which the loading or unloading will occur, or in reasonable
proximity thereto if the front of the residence is not available for parking.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit sleeping in a
vehicle prohibited by §
130.02 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
      (3)   A permit may be issued for any oversized motor vehicle parked while
used in performing or assisting in performing services or repairs on
residential property. The permit will be valid for 45 days and will be renewed
only upon proof that the vehicle is continuing to be used in performing the
services described herein.
      (4)   Any oversized motor vehicle which is parked for not more than 24
consecutive hours to make emergency repairs to such vehicle. Nothing herein
shall be construed to permit violation of any restriction on vehicle repair
elsewhere in the Eureka Municipal Code.
      (5)   Any non-motorized vehicle, such as a semitrailer, trailer, trailer
coach, utility trailer, two or more axle camper, or a one-axle camper which has
been detached from its drawing vehicle parked for a period not to exceed four
hours in any area other than a residential district. Successive acts of parking
within a .2-mile area shall be presumed to be a single act of parking for
purposes of this chapter.
      (6)   Any recreational vehicle parked in reasonable proximity to a park
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall develop, maintain and keep current a written
policy designed to provide due process in accordance with Cal. Veh. Code
sections governing the towing of vehicles and due and timely noticing of
persons who own or have possession, custody or control of any vehicle subject
to being towed and stored under authority of this section.
('63 Code, § 3-10.22) (Ord. 572-C.S., passed 8-4-94; Am. Ord. 739-C.S., passed
3-17-09)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.17 PERMITS.
   (A)   Twenty-four hours. Up to 16 RV parking permits are allowed per
resident per month. No more than eight parking permits can be linked together
consecutively. The maximum permit days per year is 144. Permits are limited to
the area in front of the residence or in reasonable proximity when the front of
the residence is not available.
   (B)   Daily use. The Chief of Police may issue a temporary permit for
overnight parking of a recreational vehicle if there is a finding that the
vehicle is used on a daily basis and on-premises parking is not reasonably
available. A permit issued based on this finding shall not be valid for longer
than six months. Pending review of your “reason for permit,” you will be
temporarily granted a seven-day permit. You will be notified by either e-mail
or phone should additional justification be required, or if your application is
approved, modified or denied.
   (C)   Medical. The Chief of Police may issue a temporary permit to persons
who demonstrate by way of written statement from a licensed medical doctor,
that the recreational vehicle must be kept near a residence for medical
reasons. Pending final approval of your application you will be granted a
temporary ten-day permit. You are required to have a licensed medical doctor
complete the attached application form and return the form to the Eureka Police
Department within this ten-day time period. You will be notified by either e-
mail or phone should additional justification be required, or if your
application is approved, modified or denied.
   (D)   Construction. A permit may be issued for any oversized motor vehicle
parked while used in performing or assisting in performing services or repairs
on residential property. The permit will be valid for up to 45 days and will be
renewed only upon proof that the vehicle is continuing to be used in performing
the services described herein. Pending final approval of your “reason for
permit,” you will be granted a temporary seven-day permit. You will be notified
by either e-mail or phone should additional justification be required, or if
your application is approved, modified or denied.
(Ord. 739-C.S., passed 3-17-09)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 90.30 ENFORCEMENT BY CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or by law, the provisions of
this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police or
employees designated in writing by the Chief of Police.
('63 Code, § 3-10.04) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.31 AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICER OR CITY EMPLOYEE TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Any peace officer or any other employee, in the territorial limits in
which the officer or employee is authorized to act, who has reasonable grounds
to believe that a vehicle has been abandoned, may remove the vehicle from a
highway or from public or private property.
('63 Code, § 3-10.05)
   (B)   Any peace officer may remove a vehicle located within the territorial
limits in which the officer or employee may act, when any vehicle is abandoned,
parked or left standing upon a highway for 72 hours or more consecutive hours.
('63 Code, § 3-10.06)
   (C)   Motor vehicles which are abandoned, parked, resting, or otherwise
immobilized on any highway or public right-of-way and which lack an engine,
transmission, wheels, tires, doors, windshield, or any other part or equipment
necessary to operate safely on the highways of this state are a public nuisance
and may be removed immediately upon discovery by a peace officer or employee.
('63 Code, § 3-10.07)
(Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22669, 22651(k)) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.32 AUTHORITY OF CONTRACTOR TO REMOVE ABANDONED VEHICLE.
   Any person performing a franchise or contract awarded pursuant to Cal. Veh.
Code § 22710 subdivision (a), may remove a vehicle from a highway or from
public or private property, after a determination by a peace officer or other
employee, that the vehicle is abandoned, as determined pursuant to Cal. Veh.
Code § 22523.
('63 Code, § 3-10.08) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
Statutory reference:
   Statutory authority, see Cal. Veh. Code § 22669
§ 90.33 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the Chief of Police and his
designated employees may enter upon private property for the purposes specified
in this chapter to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, obtain information as to
the identity of a vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part
thereof declared a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-10.09)
   (B)   When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to
any person or persons for the abatement of abandoned vehicles, such person or
persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property
to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts declared to be a nuisance
pursuant to this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-10.10)
(Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
Statutory reference:
   Statutory authority, see Cal. Veh. Code, § 22663
§ 90.34 ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon discovery on public or private property, excluding a highway, of
an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle which lacks an engine, transmission, wheels,
tires, doors, windshield, or other major part or equipment necessary to operate
safely on the highway, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause
the abatement and removal of said vehicle in accordance with the procedure
prescribed in this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law or this chapter, not less than a
ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle or part thereof as
a public nuisance shall be issued for a vehicle abandoned on public or private
property, excluding a highway, unless the property owner and the owner of the
vehicle have signed releases authorizing removal and waiving further interest
in the vehicle or part thereof, except as provided in Cal. Veh. Code § 22661
(c).
   (C)   The ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part
thereof, when required by this chapter, shall contain a statement of hearing
rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and of the
owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner
that he (or she) may appear in person at a hearing or may submit a sworn
written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the
land, with his (or her) reason for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The
notice of intention to abate shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail,
to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the last registered and legal owners of record unless the vehicle is in such
condition that the identification numbers are not available to determine
ownership.
   (D)   A request for a hearing shall be made to the Chief of Police within
ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the
vehicle or at the time of signing a release.
   (E)   Upon a request for a hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner
of the land upon which such vehicle is located, a public hearing shall be held
before the Chief of Police or his designee.
   (F)   If such a request is not received within such period, the appropriate
public body, agency, or officer shall have the authority to remove the vehicle.
   (G)   The Chief of Police or his designee shall hear all facts and testimony
it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the
condition of the vehicle or parts, and the circumstances concerning its
location on the private property or public property. The Chief of Police or his
designee shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
   (H)   The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located is authorized to
appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his (or her)
reason for such denial.
   (I)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the landowner and that he (or she) has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the local authority shall not
assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property
on which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from
the owner.
   (J)   If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a
sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle
on his (or her) land within such time period, this statement shall be construed
as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner
submitting such request.
   (K)   The Chief of Police or his designee may impose such conditions and
take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry
out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the
vehicle, or parts, if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the
conclusion of the public hearing, the Chief of Police or his designee may find
that a vehicle, or parts, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is
inoperative on private or public property and order the same be removed from
the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter
and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged
against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a
description of the vehicle or parts and correct identification number and
license number of the vehicle, if available.
   (L)   Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Chief of Police or
his designee by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council within
five days after his decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the City Council
which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed
appropriate. The Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the appellant, to the owner of the land, and the owner of the
vehicle. In conducting the hearing, the City Council shall not be limited to
the technical rules of evidence.
   (M)    This section shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not
visible from the street or other public or private property; or a vehicle or
part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property
in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle
dealer, or junk yard.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22661) ('63 Code, § 3-10.12) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.35 STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever a peace officer or employee removes a vehicle from a highway,
or from public or private property, unless otherwise provided, he shall take
the vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety or to a garage
designated by the city, where the vehicle shall be placed in storage.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22850)
   (B)   At the time of removal, the officer or employee shall determine the
amount of mileage on the vehicle.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22850)
   (C)   A vehicle placed in storage shall be released to the owner or person
in control of the vehicle only if the owner or person furnishes, to the law
enforcement agency or employee who placed the vehicle in storage, satisfactory
proof of current vehicle registration. The agency which caused the vehicle to
be stored may, in its discretion, issue a notice to appear for the registration
violation, if the two days immediately following the day of impoundment are
weekend days or holidays.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22850.3)
('63 Code, § 3-10.13)
   (D)   Whenever a peace officer or employee directs the storage of any
vehicle, the vehicle's registered and legal owners of record, or their agents,
shall be given notice and the opportunity for a post-storage hearing if
required by Cal. Veh. Code § 22852.
('63 Code, § 3-10.15)
(Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.36 NOTICE AND HEARING FOR LOW VALUE VEHICLES.
   If a vehicle is determined to have a value not exceeding $300, a peace
officer or employee shall provide notice and the opportunity for a hearing in
accordance with Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22851.2 through 22851.12.
('63 Code, § 3-10.14) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.37 DISPOSITION; PROHIBITION AGAINST RECONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap
yard, automobile dismantler's yard, or other suitable site.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22662) ('63 Code, § 3-10.16)
   (B)   After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not be reconstructed or be
made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless
carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates, pursuant to Cal.
Veh. Code § 5004, in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made
operable.
(Cal. Veh. Code § 22661(f)) ('63 Code, § 3-10.17)
(Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.38 NOTICE TO DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES, CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROL.
   (A)   Notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles within five
days after the date of removal, identifying the vehicle or part thereof and any
evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, the
registration card, certificates of ownership, or license plates.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22661(a)) ('63 Code, § 3-10.18)
   (B)   An employee, other than a peace officer or employee of a sheriffs
department, designated to remove vehicles pursuant to Cal. Veh. Code, § 22669
may do so after he or she has mailed or personally delivered a written report
identifying the vehicle and its location to the Department of California
Highway Patrol located nearest to the vehicle.
(Cal. Veh. Code, § 22669) ('63 Code, § 3-10.19)
(Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.39 CITY ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   (A)   The last registered owner of record is responsible for abandonment and
is thereby liable for the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle. The
City Council, by resolution, shall from time to time determine and fix an
amount to be assessed as vehicle abatement administrative, hearing and appeal
costs. The cost in the resolution shall not include costs and expenses which
are not incurred by the city.
('63 Code, § 3-10.20)
   (B)   If the administrative, hearing and appeal costs and the cost of
removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to
division (A) above are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the
final disposition of an appeal therefrom, a statement of these charges shall be
sent to the owner by the city. If not paid, such costs shall be assessed
against the owner's parcel of land pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 25845 and
shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall
have the same priority of other taxes.
('63 Code, § 3-10.21)
(Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise specifically provided, shall be subject to the penalty contained in §
10.99.
   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of §
90.15 shall pay a penalty set forth in §
10.99, and in addition, such person shall provide proof that the costs of
removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid. No part of any fine
imposed shall be suspended.
(Cal. Veh. Code § 22523)
   (C)   Proof that the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle have
been paid shall not be required if proof is provided to the court that the
vehicle was stolen prior to abandonment. That proof may consist of a police
report or other evidence acceptable to the court.
('63 Code, § 3-10.03) (Ord. 542-C.S., passed 4-2-92)
Statutory reference:
   Statutory authority, see Cal. Veh. Code §§ 22523, 22651(k)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.101   Purpose
   
91.102   Definitions
   
91.103   Schedule of fees and charges
   
91.104   Violations and penalties
   
91.105   Interference with Animal Control Officer
   
91.106   Right of entry
   
91.107   Severability
   
91.108   Construction of chapter
Duties of Animal Ownership
   
91.201   Adequate care
   
91.202   Parental liability
   
91.203   Abandonment of animals
   
91.204   Scoop law
   
91.205   Animals at large
   
91.206   (Reserved)
   
91.207   (Reserved)
   
91.208   Tethering
   
91.209   Animals in vehicles
Impoundment
   
91.301   Authorization to impound
   
91.302   Notice
   
91.303   Care of impounded animals
   
91.304   Reclaiming impounded animals
   
91.305   Impound fees
Requirements and Limitations of Animal Ownership
   
91.401   Limitations on ownership
   
91.402   Livestock
   
91.403   Poultry
   
91.404   Dogs
   
91.405   Exceptions and discounts
   
91.406   Miniature pigs
   
91.407   Miniature goats
   
91.408   Permits for pet dealers, grooming salons, and pet shops
   
91.409   Dog fancier’s license
   
91.410   Cat fancier’s license
   
91.411   Exotic animal fancier’s license
   
91.412   Registration records
Dairies
   
91.501   Maintenance
   
91.502   Abandonment
Horse Drawn Carriages
   
91.601   Operations
   
91.602   Care
   
91.603   Carriages
   
91.604   Operators and drivers
Rabies Control
   
91.701   Rabies vaccine for dogs and cats
   
91.702   Reporting animal bites
   
91.703   Suspicion of rabies
   
91.704   Quarantine of animals on owner’s property
   
91.705   Disposition of rabid animals
Potentially Dangerous, Vicious, and Nuisance Animals
   
91.801   Procedure
   
91.802   Seizure and immediate impoundment
   
91.803   Limitations
   
91.804   Requirements for ownership of a potentially dangerous or vicious
animal
   
91.805   Requirements for ownership of a vicious animal
   
91.806   Requirements for ownership of a public nuisance animal
   
91.807   Procedure for destruction of vicious animals
   
91.808   Removal from list
   
91.809   Penalty
Irresponsible Owner
   
91.901   Determination
   
91.902   Penalty
Hearings
   
91.1001   Purpose
   
91.1002   Notice of hearing
   
91.1003   Notice of determination
   
91.1004   Appeal
Miscellaneous Provisions
   
91.1101   Animals as prizes, promotions, and novelties
   
91.1102   Sale of animals
   
91.1103   Animal waste: keeping; receptacles; cleaning
   
91.1104   Burial of deceased animals
   
91.1105   Feeding wildlife
§ 91.101 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the keeping and handling of
domestic animals within the city with an emphasis on public safety, quality of
life, and responsible animal ownership.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.102 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply, unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ABANDON.  The act of leaving an animal without adequate food, adequate
water, or adequate care for 24 hours or more; or leaving an animal in a
situation where the conditions present an immediate, direct, and serious threat
to the life, safety, or health of the animal or to public safety. It also means
to desert, forsake, or absolutely give up an animal on public property or on
another's property without having secured another owner or custodian for the
animal.
   ALTER.  To permanently render an animal incapable of reproduction.
   ANIMAL.  Includes any members of the kingdom Animalia, except for Homo
sapiens.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person who is appointed by the Chief of Police
for the purpose of aiding in the enforcement of any ordinance or law relating
to the welfare, licensing, control, quarantine, seizure, or impoundment of
animals. The Chief of Police or his or her designee will supervise the Animal
Control Officer.
   AT LARGE.  Any domestic animal away from the premises or property of its
owner, and not under physical restraint, such as a leash no longer than six
feet in length. A domestic animal will not be considered at large when: (1) the
animal is assisting a peace officer who is engaged in law enforcement duties;
or (2) the animal is enrolled in and actually participating in a training or
obedience course, exhibition, or competition conducted by an organization on
private or public property with the permission of the owner or operator of the
grounds or facilities.
   CARE. The responsible practice of good animal husbandry, handling,
production, management, confinement, feeding, watering, protection, shelter,
transportation, treatment, exercise, enrichment, and when necessary,
euthanasia, that is appropriate for the age, species, condition, size, and type
of animal. It also refers to the provision of veterinary care when needed to
prevent suffering or impairment of health.
   CARRIAGE.  Any non-motorized vehicle with four wheels that carries people.
   CAT FANCIER.  An owner who wishes to keep four or more cats four months of
age or older on any enclosure, premises, building structure, lot or area. Cat
fanciers must obtain a cat fancier's license from the city.
   DOG FANCIER.  An owner who wishes to keep four or more dogs four months of
age or older on any enclosure, premises, building structure, lot or area. Dog
fanciers must obtain a dog fancier's license from the city.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Includes dogs and cats, except feral animals, as well as
horses, donkeys, mules, burros, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, camels,
rabbits, and fowl commonly kept or raised as farm or livestock animals.
   ENCLOSURE.  A fence or structure to prevent the entry of young children, and
that is suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures
that may be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering the dog within the
enclosure. When in use, the enclosure must be securely locked and have secure
sides and bottom, sufficient to prevent the animal from escaping.
   ESTRUS.  A regularly recurrent state of sexual receptivity during which the
female of most mammals will accept the male and is capable of conceiving, often
referred to as "heat" or "in season".
   EXERCISE.  The opportunity for an animal to move sufficiently to maintain
normal muscle tone and mass for the age, species, size, and condition of the
animal.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal kept as a pet other than those species defined in
this section as “household pet” or “livestock”. Reptiles, amphibians, arachnids
and birds of the orders Psittaciformes, Passeriformes, and Piciformes are
considered EXOTIC ANIMALS. This section is not meant to allow endangered,
protected or wild animals to be kept as pets in violation of any federal or
state law in the absence of legally required permits.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL FANCIER.  An owner who wishes to keep eleven or more exotic
animals on any enclosure, premises, building structure, lot or area. Exotic
animal fanciers must obtain an exotic animal fancier's license from the city.
   FEED.  Food that is of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to maintain
each animal in good health; is accessible to each animal; is prepared so as to
permit ease of consumption for the age, species, condition, size, and type of
each animal; is provided in a clean and sanitary manner; is placed so as to
minimize contamination by excrement and pests; and is provided at suitable
intervals for the species, age, and condition of the animal, but at least once
daily, except as prescribed by a veterinarian or as dictated by naturally
occurring states of hibernation or fasting normal for the species.
   HEARING ENTITY/OFFICER. The Chief of Police or the Chief of Police's
designee.
   HOUSEHOLD PETS. Includes cats, dogs, domesticated rodents, and other kindred
animals usually and ordinarily kept as household pets. Birds of the orders
Psittaciformes, Passeriformes, and Piciformes are considered exotic animals.
   IMPOUNDMENT.  Refers to the taking up and confining of an animal by an
Animal Control Officer or peace officer in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter or other applicable law or regulation.
   LIVESTOCK.  Any bovine animal, swine, horse, pony, mule, burro, sheep, goat,
rabbit or other animal regularly raised for meat, fur, wool or milk. This term
does not include miniature pigs or miniature goats kept as pets.
   NUISANCE ANIMAL.  Any animal that gives offense to human senses or
substantially interferes with the rights of persons, other than its owner, to
the enjoyment of life or property. The term includes, but is not limited to,
any animal that:
      (1)   On three separate occasions within a 36-month period has been cited
and/or impounded for being off its owner's property in violation of any state
or local law that prohibits running at large.
      (2)   Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner.
      (3)   Harasses or intimidates persons on public property or private
property other than that owned by or under the control of its owner.
      (4)   Repeatedly chases vehicles that are not on its owner's property.
      (5)   Excessive, continuous, or untimely noises or other utterances to
the annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort of neighbors or others in the
vicinity of the property where the animal is maintained.
      (6)   Has been allowed by its owner to produce odors that annoy, disturb,
or cause discomfort to persons in the vicinity of the property where the animal
is maintained.
      (7)   Is one of a number of animals maintained on the property owned or
controlled by its owner so as to be offensive to persons or dangerous to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
      (8)   Has, when unprovoked, bitten any person who is lawfully on the
owner's property causing less than severe injury.
      (9)   Is unattended or at large while in estrus.
   OWNER. The primary or responsible person who possesses, has title to or an
interest in, harbors, or has control, custody, or possession of an animal, or
feeds the animal for 14 or more consecutive days. An owner must be a person 18
years of age or older.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL.  Any animal, except a trained dog assisting a
peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, that because of its
disposition, behavior, training or other characteristic constitutes a danger to
person or domestic animal, as determined by the Animal Control Officer under
the provisions of this chapter. A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMAL includes all of
the following:
      (1)   An animal that, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within
the prior 36-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive
action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the animal and person are
off of the owner's property.
      (2)   Any animal that, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less
than severe injury; or
      (3)   Any animal that, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within
the prior 36-month period, has killed or severely injured a domestic animal off
the owner's property.
   POULTRY. Pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, and all other
domesticated fowl other than household pets and racing-homing pigeons.
   RACING-HOMING PIGEONS. Those pigeons, identified by seamless leg bands that
are kept and maintained for the specific purpose of racing or message carrying.
Pigeons kept or raised for market or other commercial purposes are not racing-
homing pigeons for the purposes of this chapter.
   SEVERE INJURY.  Any physical injury that results in one or more of the
following: one or more broken bones; one or more disfiguring lacerations,
avulsions, cuts, or puncture wounds requiring medical attention; two or more
sutures or staples; permanent nerve damage; or transmittal of an infectious or
contagious disease.
   SHELTER.  Shelter that is suitable for the species, age, condition, size,
and type of each animal; provides adequate space for each animal to express
normal behavior for its species, age, condition, size, and type of each animal;
is safe and protects each animal from injury, rain, sleet, snow, hail, direct
sunlight, the adverse effects of heat or cold, physical suffering, and
impairment of health; is properly lighted; is properly cleaned; enables each
animal to be clean and dry, except when detrimental to the species; and, for
dogs and cats, provides a solid surface, resting platform, pad, floor mat, or
similar device that is large enough for the dog or cat to lie on in a normal
manner and can be maintained in a sanitary manner. Under this chapter, shelters
with wire, grid, or slat floors that permit the animal's feet to pass through
the openings, sag under the animal's weight, or otherwise do not protect the
animal's feet or toes from injury are not adequate shelter. Materials not
suitable for shelters include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Metal or plastic drums;
      (2)   Abandoned vehicles;
      (3)   Uncovered porches or decks;
      (4)   Lean-tos; or
      (5)   Any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection
from the elements.
   UNLICENSED DOG.  Any dog for which a registration fee has not been paid to
the city for the current year or to which a metal tag has not been attached as
required by this Code.
   UNPROVOKED.  An aggressive act by an animal that is not prompted by torment,
physical abuse, or injury to the animal. It will also refer to an aggressive
act by an animal where the animal was not protecting itself, another animal,
its owner, or another person from being assaulted. It will also refer to an
aggressive act by an animal where the animal was not protecting real property
belonging to its owner from a crime being committed on the owner's property at
that time. An incident will also be considered unprovoked if an animal injures
law enforcement personnel while they are lawfully carrying out their duties.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any animal that, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury,
inflicts multiple bites, injures multiples parties in the same incident, kills
a person, or any animal previously determined to be a dangerous animal that,
after its owner has been notified of this determination, continues or escalates
the behavior of a potentially dangerous animal or is involved in a subsequent
incident, as determined by the Animal Control Officer in accordance with this
chapter.
   WATER.  Clean, fresh, and potable water of a drinkable temperature that is
provided in a suitable manner, in sufficient volume, and at suitable intervals,
appropriate for the weather and temperature, to maintain normal hydration for
the age, species, condition, size, and type of each animal. Except as
prescribed by a veterinarian, animals must have access to water at all times.
Water must be provided in clean and durable receptacles that are accessible to
each animal and are placed so as to minimize contamination of the water by
excrement and pests.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.103 SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES.
   Fees and charges referred to in this chapter will be as set forth in a
resolution adopted by the City Council and on file in the City Clerk's office.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.104 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Each violation of this chapter constitutes a separate offense under §
10.99 of the Eureka Municipal Code. A violation is punishable as a misdemeanor
or infraction, chargeable at the City Attorney's discretion.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.105 INTERFERENCE WITH ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.
   It is unlawful to resist or interfere with the Animal Control Officer in the
performance of their official duties, or to fail or refuse to exhibit the
registration of any Animal required to be licensed by this chapter when
requested by the Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.106 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   In the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter the Animal Control Officer has authority to enter any premises upon
which any animal is kept for the purpose of picking up, seizing, or impounding
any animal found running at large, or staked, herded, or grazing thereon,
contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or for the purpose of ascertaining
whether such animal is registered or licensed as provided in this chapter, or
for the purpose of inspecting the premises to ascertain whether any law of the
city or state relating to the care, treatment, or impounding of animals or
birds, or to the prevention of cruelty to animals or birds, is being violated;
provided, however, the right of entry will be exercised only during the hours
of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., and no building will be entered without the consent
of the owner or tenant, unless exigent circumstances exist.
   (B)   If any owner or tenant objects to such entry into any building, the
Animal Control Officer may secure a warrant authorizing entry to search the
building and arrest any person there present violating, or attempting to
violate, any law of the city or state relating to the care, treatment, or
impounding of animals or birds or to the prevention of cruelty to animals or
birds.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.107 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter is held invalid it will not offset other
provisions that can be given effect without the offending provision.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.108 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize the keeping, maintaining,
or handling of any animal that is otherwise prohibited or restricted by law,
regulation, or permit requirement.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
DUTIES OF ANIMAL OWNERSHIP
§ 91.201 ADEQUATE CARE.
   An owner or custodian of an animal must provide that animal with adequate
feed, water, shelter, exercise, and veterinary care. No owner or custodian of
an animal can keep or permit to be kept upon any premises any animals in foul,
offensive, obnoxious, filthy, or unsanitary conditions.
   (A)   An owner or custodian must, when ordered to do so by an Animal Control
Officer, provide care, feed, water, shelter, exercise, or veterinary care.
   (B)   An owner or custodian must, when ordered to do so by an Animal Control
Officer, clean or disinfect any stable, barn, stall, pen, coop, enclosure,
building, or other place where any animal is kept, and/or any box, bin, or
receptacle used for the accumulation of manure or waste.
   (C)   The provisions of this section are applicable to any place where
domestic animals are kept, including animal shelters, pounds, dealers, pet
shops, exhibitors, kennels, catteries, groomers, boarding and establishments
with a dog and/or cat fancier's license. An Animal Control Officer or law
enforcement officer may enter any of these facilities at any time during the
hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. to inspect such facility for compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Violations of this section will be grounds for immediate impoundment
by the Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.202 PARENTAL LIABILITY.
   The parent or guardian of a minor is responsible for all actions required of
an owner under this chapter. The parent or guardian, not the minor, will be
liable for any violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.203 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.
   No person may abandon any animal in any public place, including but not
limited to the right-of-way of any public highway, road, or street, or on the
property of another.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.204 SCOOP LAW.
   An owner or custodian is responsible for immediately removing and properly
disposing of their animal’s feces by placing it in a closed or sealed container
or bag and depositing it in a garbage receptacle. This section does not apply
to guide, service, or signal dogs as defined by Cal. Civil Code, § 54.1. This
section does not authorize any person to enter or allow their animal to enter
upon the private property of another.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.205 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   No owner or custodian may allow any domestic animal under their control to
run at large on public property or the private property of another. This
section does not apply to domestic cats.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.206 [RESERVED.]
§ 91.207 [RESERVED.]
§ 91.208 TETHERING.
   (A)   No person is allowed to tether, fasten, chain, tie, or restrain a dog,
or cause a dog to be tethered, fastened, chained, tied, or restrained, to a dog
house, tree, fence, or any other stationary object unless one of the following
apply:
      (1)   The dog is attached to a running line, pulley, or trolley system by
means other than a choke collar or pinch collar.
      (2)   The dog is tethered, fastened, chained, or tied pursuant to the
requirements of a camping or recreation area.
      (3)   The dog is tethered, fastened, chained, or tied no longer than is
necessary for the person to complete a temporary task that requires the dog to
be restrained for a reasonable period. In no event may this period be more than
30 minutes.
      (4)   The dog is tethered, fastened, chained, or tied while actively
engaged in conduct that is directly related to shepherding livestock or other
agricultural activity if the restraint is necessary to accomplish such conduct.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter are enforced in accordance with Cal. Health
& Safety Code, § 122335.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.209 ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person is allowed to transport or carry, on any public highway or
public roadway, any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely
enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cab or container, cage, or other
device that will prevent the animal from falling, being thrown, or jumping from
the motor vehicle.
   (B)   No person is allowed to leave an animal in any unattended vehicle
without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to
extreme temperatures that adversely affect or have the potential to imminently
affect the animal's health or welfare. If an animal is left unattended in
violation of this division, any Animal Control Officer, firefighter, fire
marshal, or law enforcement officer is authorized to remove the animal from the
vehicle if they determine the animal is being confined in a manner that is
detrimental to its health and safety, and after making a reasonable attempt to
contact the owner.
   (C)   The animal will be impounded and taken to a veterinarian for any care
needed and then placed at an animal shelter. A written notice will be left
attached to the vehicle with the impounding officer's name, badge number, and
contact information, as well as the time, date, and location where the animal
is being held.
   (D)   Any person who violates this division will be responsible for all
costs and expenses incurred by the city resulting from the violation,
including, but not limited to, animal care and medical treatment, impound
costs, and removal costs.
(Ord. 914 C.S., passed 4-20-2021)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 91.301 AUTHORIZATION TO IMPOUND.
   An animal may be impounded at the discretion of the Animal Control Officer
for good cause. Instances warranting impoundment include, but are not limited
to, the following:
   (A)   The owner or custodian of the animal consents to the impoundment.
   (B)   The animal is at large.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the
animal may be rabid.
   (D)   The Animal Control Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that the
animal is a dangerous or vicious animal as defined in this chapter.
   (E)   To protect an animal that is injured, sick, starving or suffering from
heat, cold or confinement or needs immediate care.    
   (F)   When the Animal Control Officer has reasonable grounds to believe that
immediate impoundment of the animal is necessary to protect the public health
or safety of any person or animal.
   (G)   The impoundment is authorized by the Chief of Police.
   (H)   Any other violation of the provisions of this chapter warranting, in
the discretion of the Animal Control Officer and for good cause.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.302 NOTICE.
   If there is a known address or owner for the animal, the Animal Control
Officer will when possible serve a notice of impoundment within 24 hours of the
impoundment, either in person or by attaching to the owner's door if the owner
has been ascertained and located. The notice will state:
   (A)   The date of impoundment and the place where the animal is impounded;
   (B)   The grounds for impoundment; and
   (C)   The action to be taken to retrieve the animal from impoundment, if
any.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.303 CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   The Animal Control Officer or designee will ensure that all impounded
animals receive suitable and adequate food, water and shelter. Designee in this
case will include a veterinarian, the Humboldt County Animal Shelter, or any
other responsible caretaker.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.304 RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   The owner or person entitled to the custody of any animal taken up, seized,
or impounded at the Police Department may redeem such animal by paying to the
Police Department the charges and fees, including registration fees, accruing
up to the time of such redemption.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.305 IMPOUND FEES.
   The Animal Control Officer may charge, receive, and collect fees and charges
for services and impounding animals as established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. All such monies will be paid into the city
treasury to be credited to the general fund.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
REQUIREMENTS AND LIMITATIONS OF ANIMAL OWNERSHIP
§ 91.401 LIMITATIONS ON OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Rabbits. No person may keep, harbor, or maintain more than 20 rabbits
upon any property within the city that is smaller than 5,000 square feet. No
person may keep, harbor, or maintain more than 40 rabbits on any property.
   (B)   Livestock. Unless otherwise expressly permitted by this chapter or by
variance obtained from the city, no person may keep, harbor, or maintain on any
premises within the city any bovine animal, swine, horse, pony, mule, burro,
sheep, goat, or other domestic livestock.
   (C)   Prohibited animals.
      (1)   No person may keep animals belonging to the following orders, with
the exception of a properly permitted and licensed zoo.
         (a)   Anseriformes - (e.g., swans and screamers) except ducks and
geese;
         (b)   Artiodactyla - (e.g., cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, deer, elk,
alpacas and llamas), except: miniature pigs or miniature goats with a current,
valid license;
         (c)   Carnivora or hybrids of these - (e.g., otters, wolves, bears,
coyotes, foxes, tigers, leopards, cougars, lions, lynx, mink, skunks, weasels,
badgers, mongooses and raccoons), except domestic dogs and domestic cats; wolf
hybrids of any type are prohibited;
         (d)   Chiroptera - (e.g., bats, myotis and flying foxes);
         (e)   Crocodylia - (e.g., alligators, crocodiles, gavials and
caimans);
         (f)   Lithobates catesbeianus - commonly known as the American
bullfrog;
         (g)   Marsupialia - (e.g., koalas, kangaroos, opossums, sugar gliders
and wallabies);
         (h)   Perissodactyla (e.g., donkeys, jackasses, mules, and zebras) -
with the exception of horses, ponies and miniature horses;
         (i)   Primates - old world, new world and primitive primates (e.g.,
chimpanzees, gorillas, monkeys, lorises and lemurs);
         (j)   Raptors - (e.g., eagles, hawks, falcons and owls) except as
allowed by Title 14 CCR § 670;
         (k)   Rodentia - (e.g., porcupines, prairie dogs, and nutria) except
rodentia: (a) where neither the female nor the male of the species exceeds or
will exceed 4 pounds in weight before or at maturity; and (b) that are derived
from a self-sustaining captive population;
         (l)   Reptilia - (e.g., lizards, snakes, turtles) are allowed with the
following exceptions: (a) front fanged venomous snakes and (b) heloderma and
(c) lizards where either the female or the male of the species exceeds or will
exceed eight feet in length from nose to tip of tail before or at maturity; (d)
Trachemys scripta elegans commonly known as the Red Eared Slider;
         (m)   Struthioniformes - (e.g., ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, emus
and kiwis);
         (n)   Order Xenarthra-Sloths - (e.g., anteaters, armadillos, etc.);
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or permit any animal
permitted under this division except in an escape-proof enclosure.    
   (D)   Extraordinary relief. If any person believes that they are entitled to
extraordinary relief from the provisions of this section or the enforcement
thereof because enforcement of this section in the particular instance would be
unreasonable and result in unreasonable hardship or damage to that person, such
person may request a hearing for the grant of extraordinary relief before the
City Manager or their designee. If, after a hearing held after seven days'
notice to the applicant, the City Manager or their designee finds that
enforcement of this section in the applicant's case would be unreasonable or
unnecessary and would result in unreasonable hardship or damage, any of the
provisions or regulations of this section may be modified or abated in harmony
with the general purposes and objectives hereof. The decision of the City
Manager is final as to the city.
   (E)   Violations. Any person found in violation of this section may be
provided with up to 30 days to remove any excess or prohibited animals from the
premises, unless the keeping of the animals is deemed a public safety hazard,
in which case the Animal Control Officer can require the immediate removal of
the animal(s) or seize the animal(s), at the Animal Control Officer's
discretion. If 30 days' notice is given, at the end of the 30-day period, if
any excess or prohibited animals are still present on the premises, a fine will
be levied for each excess or prohibited animal, and any Animal Control Officer
or peace officer will have authority to seize any excess or prohibited animals.
Any seized animal will be subject to regular impound procedures. The owner of
the animal may claim the animal if the owner is able to pay the required
impound fees and provide proof the owner will no longer keep, harbor, or
maintain any animals in violation of this section.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.402 LIVESTOCK.
   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain on any premises within the city any
livestock as defined in this subchapter unless that person can abide by the
following provisions:
   (A)   No livestock may be kept on property with a multifamily housing unit
or complex.
   (B)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain a horse, pony, miniature horse
or bovine on any property within the city that is smaller than 21,000 square
feet in size. The property must be an additional 11,000 square feet in size for
each additional horse, pony, miniature horse or bovine.
   (C)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain a goat, sheep or pig on any
property within the city that is smaller than 11,000 square feet in size.
   (D)   Two goats, sheep or pigs may be kept on a property that is 11,000
square feet or larger. The property must be an additional 11,000 square feet in
size for each additional goat, sheep or pig. This does not apply to properly
licensed miniature goats and miniature pigs.
   (E)   All feed must be stored and waste disposed of in a manner that
prevents the attraction of rodents, flies, and other pests.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.403 POULTRY.
   Keepers of poultry within city limits must abide by the following
provisions:
   (A)   No poultry may be kept on property with a multifamily housing unit or
complex.
   (B)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain more than ten total poultry on
any property within the city that is smaller than 5,000 square feet in size.
   (C)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain more than 20 birds on any
property larger than 5,000 square feet in size.
   (D)   All poultry must be provided a coop consisting of a covered, predator-
proof shelter that is thoroughly ventilated, provides adequate protection from
the elements, is designed to be easily cleaned, and provides a feeder and
watering space sufficient for the number of birds being kept.
   (E)   All coops must be maintained in orderly and working condition at all
times and must be cleaned regularly so as to prevent odors from being
perceptible from other properties. All feed must be stored and waste disposed
of in a manner that prevents the attraction of rodents, flies, and other pests.
   (F)   Coops must be kept at least 15 feet away from any property line and
any dwelling unit.
   (G)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain on any premises in the city
any crowing rooster.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.404 DOGS.
   (A)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain on any premises in the city
more than three dogs, each of which is over the age of four months, unless that
person possesses a valid dog fancier's license from the city.
   (B)   Every owner of a dog over the age of four months must register the dog
with the city and pay an annual dog license fee within 30 days of acquiring the
dog.
   (C)   Every owner of a dog must thereafter pay an annual dog license fee to
the city within 30 days of the anniversary of the dog's initial registration
with the city.
   (D)   The amounts of both the initial and subsequent dog license fees are
established by resolution of the City Council.
   (E)   The provisions of this section do not apply to any dog owned by, or in
the custody of, a nonresident of the city who is visiting or temporarily
residing in the city for a period not exceeding 30 days.
   (F)   A dog license will not be issued unless the applicant shows the
license clerk a valid certificate of canine anti-rabies vaccination, which
adequately describes the physical features of the dog and the date of
vaccination, and bears the signature of a licensed veterinarian.
   (G)   With each dog registration, the city will issue a license tag bearing
an identification number and the date of expiration, together with the words
"Eureka Dog License" plainly inscribed thereon. Such license tag must be
securely fixed to a collar, harness, or other device to be worn at all times by
the dog for whom the registration is issued, except while such dog remains
indoors or in an enclosed yard or pen.
   (H)   A license tag or decal issued for one dog cannot be transferred or
attached to any other dog.
   (I)   If a license tag is lost or stolen, the owner can apply for a
replacement tag. The city will require a declaration regarding the
circumstances and payment of a fee prior to issuing a replacement.
   (J)   It is unlawful for an unauthorized person to remove a current license
tag from any dog.
   (K)   Pursuant to the city's Schedule of Fees, the cost of licensing will be
reduced for any dog that is altered if the owner provides a veterinary
certificate as proof of surgical altering.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.405 EXCEPTIONS AND DISCOUNTS.
   (A)   A license fee will not be levied for any dog license issued for any
assistance dog. As used in this chapter, "assistance dogs" are dogs specially
trained as guide dogs, signal dogs or service dogs. Owners of assistance dogs
may apply for an assistance dog license free of charge. All active applications
that have been endorsed will be kept on file with the Director of Finance.
      (1)   Whenever a person applies for an assistance dog identification tag,
the person must sign an affidavit stating as follows:
         By affixing my signature to this affidavit, I hereby declare I fully
understand that Section 365.7 of the Penal Code prohibits any person to
knowingly and fraudulently represent themselves, through verbal or written
notice, to be the Owner or trainer of any canine licensed as, to be qualified
as, or identified as, a guide dog, signal dog or service dog, as defined in
subdivisions (d), (e), and (f) respectively, of Section 365.5 of the Penal Code
and paragraph (6) of subdivision (b) of Section 54.1 of the Civil Code, and
that a violation of Section 365.7 of the Penal Code is a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment in a county jail not exceeding six months, by a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by both that imprisonment and
fine.
      (2)   Upon the death or retirement of an assistance dog, the owner or
person in possession of the assistance dog identification tag must immediately
return the identification tag to the department that issued the tag.
   (B)   A fee will not be levied for any dog license issued to a licensed
service-animal training organization or dog owner when such dog is currently
enrolled in a service-animal training program with a licensed training
organization.
   (C)   Dogs that are certified in writing by a licensed veterinarian as not
being suitable subjects for sterilizing due to health or age reasons will be
assessed the altered license fee for one year. If the dog, at a later date, is
determined by the veterinarian to be suitable for sterilization, then the
current standard license fee amount will apply.
   (D)   A fee will not be collected or received for any dog license issued for
a dog used in active duty status with a governmental law enforcement agency.
   (E)   Nothing in this section may be construed to limit the access of any
person in violation of the American's with Disabilities Act of 1990.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.406 MINIATURE PIGS.
   (A)   No person may keep, harbor, or maintain on any premises in the city
more than two miniature pigs over the age of four weeks, and only if that
person has a valid license or permit from the city.
      (1)   No miniature pig may be kept on property with a multi-family
housing unit or complex.
      (2)   No breeding of miniature pigs is permitted in the city.
      (3)   The owner or keeper of any miniature pig must maintain proper hoof
and tusk care for the animal.
   (B)   The owner of a miniature pig ("pig") must obtain a license for the
miniature pig within 30 days of entry of any miniature pig into the city. The
owner must pay a license fee in an amount established by resolution of the City
Council. To obtain a license the owner must also present, to the satisfaction
of the license clerk, the following:
      (1)   Proof that the pig is spayed or neutered; except those miniature
pigs that are certified in writing by a licensed veterinarian as not being
suitable subjects for sterilizing due to health or age reasons.
      (2)   The address of the real property where the pig will be kept; a
description of the physical location where the pig will be kept. No miniature
pig may be kept on property with a multifamily housing unit or complex.
      (3)   Written permission from the owner of such land or dwelling unit in
which a miniature pig is kept or maintained.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.407 MINIATURE GOATS.
   (A)   No person will keep, harbor, or maintain upon any premises in the city
more than two miniature goats, each of which is over the age of four weeks, and
only if that person has a valid license or permit from the city.
      (1)   No miniature goat may be kept on property with a multifamily
housing unit or complex or on a property of less than 6,000 square feet.
      (2)   No breeding of miniature goats is permitted in the city.
      (3)   The owner or keeper of any miniature goat must maintain proper hoof
care for the animal.
   (B)   Every owner of a miniature goat ("goat") must obtain a valid license
from the city for each goat within 30 days of acquiring the goat. To obtain a
license the owner must present, to the satisfaction of the license clerk, the
following:
      (1)   Certification by a licensed veterinarian that the goat has current
vaccinations and, if male, is neutered; except those miniature goats that are
certified in writing by a licensed veterinarian as not being suitable subjects
for sterilizing due to health or age reasons.
      (2)   Written permission from the owner of such land or dwelling unit in
which a miniature goat is kept or maintained.
      (3)   The address of the real property where the goat will be kept; proof
the property is 6,000 square feet or greater and a description of the physical
location where the goat will be kept. No miniature goat may be kept on property
with a multifamily housing unit or complex.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.408 PERMITS FOR PET DEALERS, GROOMING SALONS, AND PET SHOPS.
   (A)   Any person operating a pet shop or grooming salon, boarding facility
or pet day care or operating as a dealer in domestic animals, including birds,
fish, and reptiles, or offering for commercial sale any domestic animal
("permittee"), is required to obtain a permit ("permit") from the Animal
Control Officer no later than January 31 of each year.
   (B)   An Animal Control Officer will inspect any such facility prior to
permit issuance. The permit must be renewed each year thereafter on the
anniversary of issuance, subject to the approval of the Animal Control Officer.
   (C)   The amount of the fee to obtain an initial permit and to renew any
permit will be established by resolution of the City Council.
   (D)   Any permittee will maintain records as specified by the city on an
application form that has been approved by the city for permit issuance.
   (E)   Any Animal Control Officer or public health officer will be allowed to
inspect any facility at which the permittee is engaging in activities requiring
a permit during regular hours of operation without prior notice to the
permittee.
   (F)   Any permit must be conspicuously displayed in an area within public
view of any place where the permittee is engaging in activities requiring a
permit.
   (G)   Applications to obtain and renew permits may be denied by the Animal
Control Officer if any Animal Control Officer determines an applicant or
permittee has demonstrated fraudulent practices, inhumane treatment of animals,
or violation of local, state, or federal laws.
   (H)   An applicant may appeal any denial for a permit or renewal to the City
Manager or the City Manager's designee.
   (I)   A permit may be revoked after investigation by the Animal Control
Officer and hearing in accordance with §§
91.801 et seq.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.409 DOG FANCIER'S LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person who seeks to own or keep four or more dogs within the city
("licensee") must first apply for a dog fancier's license ("license") and pay
an annual license fee in an amount prescribed by resolution of the City
Council. No person who has been denied a license may keep more than three dogs
on any property for any reason.
   (B)   Any license fee must be paid prior to obtaining a fourth dog and
thereafter on or before the first day of July of every year. If a license fee
is not paid on or before the 31st day of July, the licensee will be required to
pay an additional late fee as prescribed by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   If a license fee is not paid by August 31st, an Animal Control Officer
may give the licensee 30 days to remove any excess animals from its property or
bring their license status into compliance.
   (D)   Any Animal Control Officer or peace officer will be authorized to
seize any excess animals at the end of the 30-day period. The animals will be
subject to regular impound procedures, and the licensee may claim the animals
if it pays the required impound fees and shows proof it has paid all
outstanding license fees.
   (E)   An Animal Control Officer may at any time Monday through Friday during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. enter onto the premises of any licensee to
inspect the premises. The purpose of such inspection will be to ensure that the
licensee's premises are being maintained in a sanitary and proper condition,
and that the premises have not been permitted to become a nuisance or detriment
to the community. Nothing in this section may be construed to supersede the
Fourth Amendment or state law regarding search and seizure.
   (F)   If the Animal Control Officer finds that the licensee's premises are
not maintained in a sanitary and proper manner, the Animal Control Officer may
revoke the license for the premises. Once the license has been revoked, the
licensee will have 30 days to remove any excess animals from the premises or
resolve the issue.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.410 CAT FANCIER'S LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person who seeks to own or keep four or more cats within the city
("licensee") must first apply for a cat fancier's license ("license") and pay
an annual license fee in an amount prescribed by resolution of the City
Council. No person who has been denied a license may keep more than three cats
on any property for any reason.
   (B)   If a license fee is not paid by August 31st, an Animal Control Officer
may give the licensee 30 days to remove any excess animals from its property or
bring their license status into compliance.
   (C)   Any Animal Control Officer or peace officer will be authorized to
seize any excess animals at the end of the 30-day period. The animals will be
subject to regular impound procedures, and the licensee may claim the animals
if it pays the required impound fees and shows proof it has paid all
outstanding license fees.
   (D)   An Animal Control Officer may at any time Monday through Friday during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. enter onto the premises of any licensee to
inspect the premises. The purpose of such inspection will be to ensure that the
licensee's premises are being maintained in a sanitary and proper condition,
and that the premises have not been permitted to become a nuisance or detriment
to the community. Nothing in this section may be construed to supersede the
Fourth Amendment or state law regarding search and seizure.
   (E)   If the Animal Control Officer finds that the licensee's premises are
not maintained in a sanitary and proper manner, the Animal Control Officer may
revoke the license for the premises. Once the license has been revoked, the
licensee will have 30 days to remove any excess animals from the premises or
resolve the issue.
   (F)   Any license fee must be paid prior to obtaining a fourth cat and
thereafter on or before the first day of July of every year. If a license fee
is not paid on or before the 31st day of July, the licensee will be required to
pay an additional late fee as prescribed by resolution of the City Council.
   (G)   If a license fee is not paid by August 31st, an Animal Control Officer
may give the licensee 30 days to remove any excess animals from its property or
bring their license status into compliance.
   (H)   Any Animal Control Officer or peace officer will be authorized to
seize any excess animals at the end of the 30-day period. The animals will be
subject to regular impound procedures, and the licensee may claim the animals
if it pays the required impound fees and shows proof it has paid all
outstanding license fees.
   (I)   An Animal Control Officer may at any time Monday through Friday during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. enter onto the premises of any licensee to
inspect the premises. The purpose of such inspection will be to ensure that the
licensee's premises are being maintained in a sanitary and proper condition,
and that the premises have not been permitted to become a nuisance or detriment
to the community. Nothing in this section may be construed to supersede the
Fourth Amendment or state law regarding search and seizure.
   (J)   If the Animal Control Officer finds that the licensee's premises are
not maintained in a sanitary and proper manner, the Animal Control Officer may
revoke the license for the premises. Once the license has been revoked, the
licensee will have 30 days to remove any excess animals from the premises or
resolve the issue.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.411 EXOTIC ANIMAL FANCIER'S LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person who seeks to own or keep eleven or more exotic animals
within the city ("licensee") must first apply for an exotic animal fancier's
license ("license") and pay an annual license fee in an amount prescribed by
resolution of the City Council. No person who has been denied a license may
keep more than ten exotic animals on any property for any reason.
   (B)   Any license fee must be paid prior to obtaining an eleventh exotic
animal and thereafter on or before the first day of July of every year. If a
license fee is not paid on or before the 31st day of July, the licensee will be
required to pay an additional late fee as prescribed by resolution of the City
Council.
   (C)   If a license fee is not paid by August 31st, an Animal Control Officer
may give the licensee 30 days to remove any excess animals from its property or
bring their license status into compliance.
   (D)   Any Animal Control Officer or peace officer will be authorized to
seize any excess animals at the end of the 30-day period. The animals will be
subject to regular impound procedures, and the licensee may claim the animals
if it pays the required impound fees and shows proof it has paid all
outstanding license fees.
   (E)   An Animal Control Officer may at any time Monday through Friday during
the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. enter onto the premises of any licensee to
inspect the premises. The purpose of such inspection will be to ensure that the
licensee's premises are being maintained in a sanitary and proper condition,
and that the premises have not been permitted to become a nuisance or detriment
to the community. Nothing in this section may be construed to supersede the
Fourth Amendment or state law regarding search and seizure.
   (F)   If the Animal Control Officer finds that the licensee's premises are
not maintained in a sanitary and proper manner, the Animal Control Officer may
revoke the license for the premises. Once the license has been revoked, the
licensee will have 30 days to remove any excess animals from the premises or
resolve the issue.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.412 REGISTRATION RECORDS.
   (A)   Each registration required by this chapter will state the name and
current residence address of the person to whom it is issued, the nature of the
registration, the amount paid, the date issued, and the date the registration
expires.
   (B)   In the case of a dog registration, the registration will also contain
a description of the dog, the number of the metal tag accompanying the
registration certificate, and the date of rabies vaccination.
   (C)   In the case of a dog fancier's and cat fancier's registration, the
registration will also state the maximum number of dogs that may be kept under
the authority of the registration.
   (D)   The city will keep a record of the name and address of each person to
whom a registration certificate or certificate and tag are issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the date of issuance, the number of the metal
tag, and a description of the animal or fancier's license for which it is
issued.
   (E)   All moneys received for registrations or licenses under the provisions
of this chapter will be paid to the city treasury and credited to the general
fund.
   (F)   Every dog owner will be required to provide proof of licensing upon
the request of an Animal Control Officer or any other law enforcement officer.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
DAIRIES
§ 91.501 MAINTENANCE.
   The provisions of this subchapter will not be retroactive so as to apply to
dairies in actual operation on January 1, 1960. No extensions or additions will
be permitted to be made to any such dairies except such alterations or repairs
as may be required to be made therein to fulfill any requirements of the Animal
Control Officer, and in such event such alterations or repairs may be made only
upon the express permission of the Planning Commission of the city, issued upon
written approval of the Animal Control Officer, stating the necessity therefor;
and provided, further, no enlargement of any existing dairy will be permitted
by adding to the number of animals kept upon any premises in the city in
connection with such use without the approval of the Planning Commission and
the Animal Control Officer.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.502 ABANDONMENT.
   Any cessation of operations of existing dairies, coupled with a change in
the use of the premises for other purposes, will be construed to be an
abandonment of the premises for such original purpose.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGES
§ 91.601 OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No person may operate a horse-drawn carriage in any manner that
impedes or blocks the normal or reasonable movement of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic unless such operation is necessary for safe operation or in compliance
with law.
   (B)   Whenever a horse-drawn carriage is not available for hire, that horse-
drawn carriage must be stored at a place and in a manner as approved by the
city.
   (C)   There should be no operation along any street that is configured so as
to force motor vehicles to cross a centerline or make any other unsafe maneuver
in order to get around a slow-moving carriage.
   (D)   Horse-and-carriage standing areas (while awaiting a fare) must be in a
location that does not impede free flow of motor vehicles and/or access to
designated parking stalls as approved by the city as a part of the permit
application process.
   (E)   An Animal Control Officer may at any time during the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday enter onto the premises of any stable
keeping carriage horses to inspect the stable's premises after first giving the
business owner 24 hours written notice. The purpose of such inspection will be
to ensure that the stable's premises are being maintained in a sanitary and
proper condition and that the stable has not been permitted to become a
nuisance or detriment to the community.
   (F)   The driver of a carriage will not stop such vehicle upon any public
street for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers other than at a
designated horse-drawn carriage stand, other than in the case of an emergency,
or by special permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
   (G)   The City Manager is authorized to establish set hours of operation for
horse-drawn carriages if in the determination of the City Manager such hours
are reasonably necessary for the preservation of health, safety or property.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.602 CARE.
   In addition to any other rules related to animal care and ownership under
this chapter, all horses used for the purpose of drawing a carriage must:
   (A)   Be in good health; an Animal Control Officer or Law Enforcement
Officer may require that the driver provide a written statement from a licensed
veterinarian stating that the horse is fit to work.
   (B)   Be acclimatized to the conditions (i.e., sights, sounds, movement,
etc.) inherent in the intended job.
   (C)   Be properly shod.
   (D)   Be properly cleaned, with no offensive odors or caked dirt or mud.
   (E)   Be worked no more than six days per week.
   (F)   Be kept in an approved location while not at work.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.603 CARRIAGES.
   (A)   Carriages must be kept in good working order and maintained in a clean
and attractive manner.
   (B)   All carriages will have no less than one and one-fourth inch spoked
wheels with a rubber covering thick enough to protect the streets from damage
and to keep noise to a minimum.
   (C)   Warning taillights must be mounted at the rear of the carriage and be
operated in a flashing mode continuously while the carriage is in traffic and
conform to all applicable requirements of the California Vehicle Code.
   (D)   All carriages must be fitted with reflected decals on both shafts of
the carriage at the shoulder of the horse.
   (E)   All carriages must have the rated seating capacity posted on the
vehicle.
   (F)   Carriages may not ferry more people than the carriage was designed to
hold.
   (G)   No one other than the driver, a company employee or apprentice may sit
in the driver's seat.
   (H)   All carriages must be equipped with a horn or warning device in good
working order and capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions
from a distance of not less than 40 feet, but may not emit an unreasonably loud
or harsh sound.
   (I)   Carriages/animals must be able to immediately remove any and all horse
droppings from the streets or public rights-of-way, or to prevent such
droppings on the streets and public rights-of-way.
   (J)   Carriages may not travel at a speed faster than a slow trot.
   (K)   Each carriage must be equipped with hydraulic brakes capable of
stopping the carriage and adjusted so as to provide equal braking to each wheel
without locking.
   (L)   It is unlawful for any person to molest, distract or interfere with
any horse, driver, or carriage. (Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.604 OPERATORS AND DRIVERS.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years may drive a horse-drawn carriage.
   (B)   No person may operate a horse-drawn carriage while under the influence
of alcoholic beverages or drugs.
   (C)   Every person operating a horse-drawn carriage will be subject to all
applicable laws, rules, and regulations of this code and the California Vehicle
Code.
   (D)   Each driver must demonstrate their ability to drive and care for the
horse and equipment.
   (E)   Each driver must have his or her valid driver's license in their
possession while operating a carriage.
   (F)   Drivers are prohibited from smoking, wearing headphones, or using
cellphones while the carriage is in motion for optimum safety and control of
the horse and carriage.
   (G)   No driver may abandon their carriage, permit another to drive the
carriage, except an apprentice, or permit any passenger to ride on the driver's
seat.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
RABIES CONTROL
§ 91.701 RABIES VACCINE FOR DOGS AND CATS.
   It is unlawful for any person to own or harbor any dog or cat over the age
of three months that has not been vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian, except those dogs and cats that are certified in writing by a
licensed veterinarian as not being suitable subjects for vaccination due to
health or age reasons. The written certification must be renewed at least once
a year.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.702 REPORTING ANIMAL BITES.
   Any person 18 years of age or older must report being bitten by any animal
to the local law enforcement agency. Any guardian or parent of a person under
the age of 18 ("minor") must report to the Animal Control Officer if the minor
is bitten by any animal. Any person 18 years of age or older who owns an animal
will be required to report to the Animal Control Officer if the animal has
bitten any human being.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.703 SUSPICION OF RABIES.
   (A)   Whenever the owner or person having the custody or possession of any
animal observes or learns that such animal has shown symptoms of rabies, or has
acted in a manner that would lead a reasonable person to suspect that it might
have rabies, that owner or person having the custody or possession of such
animal must immediately notify an Animal Control Officer or Health Officer or
his representative and must permit the Animal Control Officer or Health Officer
to make an inspection or examination of such animal.
   (B)   Whenever it appears to an Animal Control Officer or Health Officer
that there is reason to believe that any dog or other animal has rabies, or has
been exposed to rabies, the Animal Control Officer or Health Officer may
quarantine such animal until it can be established to the satisfaction of the
Animal Control Officer or Health Officer that such animal either does not have
rabies, or that the owner is capable of quarantining the animal on the owner's
property.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.704 QUARANTINE OF ANIMALS ON OWNER’S PROPERTY.
   (A)   Isolation of a biting animal may be allowed on the owner's property
when the owner can provide proof that the animal has been vaccinated against
rabies, and in the judgment of an Animal Control Officer or their designee
adequate facilities are provided to ensure adequate confinement and the owner
is able and willing to satisfy the requirements of this subchapter. The Animal
Control Officer may revoke this determination at any time during the quarantine
period.
   (B)   When, in the judgment of an Animal Control Officer or Health Officer,
adequate facilities for confinement do not exist or the owner is unable or
unwilling to properly supervise confinement of the animal, confinement must
occur at an approved veterinary hospital or kennel, at the expense of the
owner.
   (C)   In cases where the owner does not desire to quarantine the biting
animal, the owner may authorize euthanasia of the biting animal for the purpose
of laboratory examination for rabies using the fluorescent rabies antibody
(FRA) test in the health department laboratory at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.705 DISPOSITION OF RABID ANIMALS.
   If it appears to any Animal Control Officer or any official of the Board of
Health ("Health Officer"), upon examination, that an animal has rabies, the
Animal Control Officer or Health Officer may, after a quarantine period as
provided in this chapter, kill the animal forthwith.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS, VICIOUS, AND NUISANCE ANIMALS
§ 91.801 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   If an Animal Control Officer or other law enforcement officer
("officer") has investigated and determined that there exists probable cause to
believe that an animal is potentially dangerous, vicious or a nuisance, the
Animal Control Officer, or his or her designee, may petition the Chief of
Police, or his or her designee, for a hearing for the purpose of determining
whether or not the animal in question should be declared a potentially
dangerous, vicious, or a nuisance animal.
   (B)   Whenever possible, any complaint received from a member of the public
that serves as the evidentiary basis for the officer to find probable cause
must be sworn to and verified by the complainant and attached to the petition.
   (C)   The Animal Control Officer will notify the owner or keeper of the
animal that a hearing will be held by the hearing officer at which time he or
she may present evidence as to why the animal should not be declared a
potentially dangerous, vicious, or nuisance animal. This evidence may be
offered in either written or oral form by the owner of the animal or any
interested citizen, including Animal Control Officers, humane officers, or
peace officers, and be sworn to under penalty of perjury.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.802 SEIZURE AND IMMEDIATE IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   If upon investigation it is determined by an Animal Control Officer or
other law enforcement officer ("officer") that probable cause exists to believe
the animal in question poses an immediate threat to public safety or safety to
the animal, the officer may seize and impound the animal pending the hearing or
determination provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of the animal is liable to the city for the costs
and expenses of keeping the animal if the animal is later determined to be a
public nuisance, potentially dangerous or vicious animal.
   (C)   If public safety is adequately assured, the officer may permit the
animal to be confined at the owner's expense in an approved kennel or
veterinary facility or on the owner's premises.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.803 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   No animal may be declared a potentially dangerous, vicious, or
nuisance animal if any injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the
time the injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or
other tort upon premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal, or was
teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
   (B)   No animal may be declared a potentially dangerous, vicious, or
nuisance animal if the animal was protecting or defending a person within the
immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault.
   (C)   No animal may be declared a potentially dangerous, vicious, or
nuisance animal if any injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal that
at the time the injury or damage was sustained was teasing, tormenting, abusing
or assaulting the animal.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.804 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERSHIP OF A POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS
ANIMAL.
   (A)   All animals that have been determined by the Hearing Officer to be
potentially dangerous or vicious must be properly licensed and vaccinated. The
status of the animal will be included in the licensing records either after the
owner has agreed to the designation or the Hearing Officer has determined the
designation applies to the animal. An additional fee of twice the applicable
license fee will be charged for maintaining this additional information in the
records.
   (B)   A potentially dangerous or vicious animal must be kept indoors or in
an enclosure while on the owner's property. A potentially dangerous animal may
be off the owner's property only if it is restrained by a substantial leash no
longer than four feet in length or within an enclosed vehicle.
   (C)   The owner of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal must notify the
Animal Control Officer, in writing, within two working days if the animal dies,
is sold, transferred, or permanently removed from the city. If the animal is
sold or transferred the owner must provide the name, number, and address of the
new owner.
   (D)   Owners of potentially dangerous or vicious animals must notify in
writing any person to whom the animal is sold that the animal is potentially
dangerous or vicious.
   (E)   The owner or keeper of a vicious animal will have 30 days from the
date of the determination to provide the Animal Control Officer with proof from
a licensed veterinarian of the animal's sterilization and microchipping or a
signed letter from a licensed veterinarian describing the reason why altering
or microchipping is not possible.
   (F)   The Hearing Officer may impose any additional conditions upon the
ownership of a potentially dangerous or vicious animal that protects public
health, safety, or welfare.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.805 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERSHIP OF A VICIOUS ANIMAL.
   (A)   The owner of a vicious animal must be at least 18 years of age or
older.
   (B)   The owner of a vicious animal must provide proof to the Animal Control
Officer that the owner has procured liability insurance in the amount of at
least $100,000 covering any damage or injury that may be caused by the vicious
animal during the 12-month period for which the license is sought. Liability
insurance must be maintained so long as the owner keeps the vicious animal
within city limits.
   (C)   The owner or keeper must, at his or her own expense, and within two
working days of receipt of notice of determination that the dog is vicious,
provide the Animal Control Officer with two current color photographs of the
animal that show the animal in a standing position.
   (D)   All animals determined to be vicious must be confined inside the
owner's residence or in an enclosure. It is unlawful for any owner or keeper to
maintain a vicious animal upon any property that does not have an enclosure.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any vicious animals to be on public property
without written permission from the Animal Control Officer with the exception
of transporting the animal to seek out veterinary treatment due to a medical
emergency.
   (F)   In any case where a vicious animal is lawfully outside the enclosure,
except in cases where it is inside the dwelling of the owner or keeper, the
animal must be securely muzzled and/or restrained, with a lead sufficient to
restrain the animal no more than four feet in length, and the animal must be
under the direct control and supervision of its owner or keeper.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.806 REQUIREMENTS FOR OWNERSHIP OF A PUBLIC NUISANCE ANIMAL.
   (A)   The Hearing Officer may impose any reasonable conditions upon the
ownership of the dog that will correct the circumstances that create the
nuisance.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of an animal determined to be a public nuisance
will have 30 days from the date of the determination to provide the Animal
Control Officer with proof from a veterinarian of the animal's sterilization
and microchipping.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.807 PROCEDURE FOR DESTRUCTION OF VICIOUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   An animal determined to be vicious may be humanely destroyed by any
Animal Control Officer or peace officer when any of the following occur:
      (1)   After proceedings conducted under §§
91.1001 et seq., it is determined that the release of the animal would create a
significant threat to the public health, safety, or welfare.
      (2)   An owner of an animal that has previously been determined to be a
vicious animal violates the provisions of this subchapter relating to the
keeping of vicious animals.
      (3)   An animal that has previously been determined to be a vicious
animal, when unprovoked, attacks, wounds, bites, or otherwise injures or kills
any person.
   (B)   An animal may not be destroyed pursuant to divisions (A)(2) and (3)
hereof without a hearing pursuant to §§
91.1001 et seq.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.808 REMOVAL FROM LIST.
   (A)   If there are no additional instances of the behavior described in the
definitions of potentially dangerous animal and public nuisance animal as
defined in this chapter, within a 36-month period from the date of designation
as a potentially dangerous or public nuisance, the animal will be removed from
the list of potentially dangerous or public nuisance animals.
   (B)   The animal may be removed from the list of potentially dangerous or
public nuisance animals prior to the expiration of the 36-month period if the
owner or keeper of the animal demonstrates to the Animal Control Officer that
changes in circumstances or measures taken by the owner or keeper, such as
training of the animal, have mitigated the risk to the public safety.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.809 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violations relating to potentially dangerous animals will result
in a minimum fine of $500; the maximum fine will be set by the Fee Schedule as
amended from time to time.
   (B)   Any violations relating to vicious animals will result in a minimum
fine of $1,000; the maximum fine will be set by the Fee Schedule as amended
from time to time.
   (C)   Any violation relating to nuisance animals will be an infraction,
punishable as set forth in §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
IRRESPONSIBLE OWNER
§ 91.901 DETERMINATION.
   Any owner or keeper of an animal will be determined an irresponsible owner
("irresponsible owner") when any of the following occurs:
   (A)   The owner is administratively cited for violations of this chapter on
three separate occasions within a 36-month period.
   (B)   The owner's animal(s) are impounded for being off its owner's property
in violation of any state or local law prohibiting the running at large of
animals on three separate occasions within a 36-month period.
   (C)   The owner's animal harasses or intimidates persons on public property
or private property that is not owned or controlled by its owner or keeper.
   (D)   The owner's animal is found at large while in estrus, on two separate
occasions within a 36-month period.
   (E)   When unprovoked, the owner's animal has bitten or caused less than
severe injury to another animal off its owner's property, on two separate
occasions within the prior 36-month period.
   (F)   When unprovoked, the owner's animal has caused severe injury or death
to another animal off its owner's property.
   (G)   Two or more of the owner's animals have been declared a public
nuisance, potentially dangerous or vicious in a 36-month period.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.902 PENALTY.
   An owner meeting the criteria of an irresponsible owner is subject to the
following penalties:
   (A)   A first offense will result in a fine of $500; the maximum fine will
be set by the Fee Schedule as amended from time to time.
   (B)   A second offense will result in a fine of $1,000; the maximum fine
will be set by the Fee Schedule as amended from time to time.
   (C)   A third offense will result in a fine of $1,500, and the irresponsible
owner being unable to obtain any city license or permit to own, harbor, or
maintain any animal within the city for a period of five years; the maximum
fine will be set by the Fee Schedule as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
HEARINGS
§ 91.1001   PURPOSE.
   This subchapter contains the requirements for all hearings called for in
this chapter.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1002 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   The owner, licensee, or permittee will be served with notice of the
hearing and a copy of the petition, either personally or by first-class mail
with return receipt requested.
   (B)   The hearing will be held promptly within no less than five working
days nor more than ten working days after service of notice upon the owner,
licensee, or permittee.
   (C)   The hearing will be open to the public.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer may admit into evidence all relevant evidence,
including incident reports and the affidavits of witnesses, limit the scope of
discovery, and may shorten the time to produce records or witnesses.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1003 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION.
   After the hearing the Hearing Officer will notify the owner, licensee, or
permittee in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally
or by first-class mail, postage prepaid. If the Hearing Officer finds against
the owner, licensee, or permittee, the owner, licensee, or permittee must
comply with the provisions of this chapter in accordance with a time schedule
established by the Hearing Officer, but in no case more than 30 days after the
date of the determination or 35 days if notice of the determination is mailed.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1004 APPEAL.
   If any owner, licensee, or permittee disagrees with the determination of the
hearing officer they may appeal the decision to the Humboldt County Superior
Court under Cal. Food & Agric. Code, § 31622.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
§ 91.1101 ANIMALS AS PRIZES, PROMOTIONS, AND NOVELTIES.
   Subject to the exception that organizations with a current Section 501(c)(3)
tax status may apply to the city for a one-time permit, no person may sell,
exchange, raffle, auction, give away, or offer to sell, exchange, raffle,
auction, or give away any animal as a prize, an inducement to enter a place of
amusement or a business establishment, or an inducement to participate in a
charitable fund-raising event.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1102 SALE OF ANIMALS.
   No person may sell, exchange, barter, give away, or offer to sell, exchange,
barter, or give away any animal from any public property or from any property
to which the public has access that does not have a valid certificate of
occupancy or business license allowing the sale of animals on the property.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1103 ANIMAL WASTE: KEEPING; RECEPTACLES; CLEANING.
   (A)   Animal waste cannot be kept within 35 feet of any window or door of
any inhabited structure or within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, or
place where food products are kept, stored, manufactured, or served to the
public.
   (B)   Every person owning or occupying premises where any manure from any
horse, pony, mule, cow, or other animal accumulates must provide for the
removal of the manure daily.
   (C)   Manure accumulated on any premises must be removed daily.
Alternatively, boxes, bins, or receptacles of a design and construction
acceptable to the Animal Control Officer must be provided by the owner or
occupant of the premises, and these boxes, bins, or receptacles must be used
only for the purpose of containing the accumulation of manure and be kept
tightly closed at all times except when manure is placed or removed.
   (D)   This section does not apply to manure that is spread as fertilizer
over or around cultivated plants, vines, vegetables, lawns, bushes, shrubs, or
trees or to manure kept by any nursery for commercial fertilizer purposes
unless that manure creates a nuisance, either from fly breeding or excessive,
obnoxious odors.
   (E)   Acceptable boxes, bins, or receptacles will be constructed of brick,
stone, concrete, metal, or wood lined with metal or other sound materials and
be proofed against by flies.
   (F)   The contents of these boxes, bins, or receptacles must be removed at
least once a week.
   (G)   This section does not apply to manure kept on the premise of a
properly permitted and licensed zoo, so long as the zoo maintains sanitary
conditions that do not become a public nuisance or health hazard.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1104 BURIAL OF DECEASED ANIMALS.
   Any person with a deceased animal on their premises, or the owner or
possessor of any animal dying within the city, must bury the animal so that it
is covered by at least two feet of mineral soil to grade either on their
premises or in a designated area outside the inhabited portion of the city
within 24 hours after the animal has died. Alternatively, the deceased animal
may be taken to a veterinarian for cremation within 24 hours of death. An
animal may not be buried if it is euthanized chemically. The owner or keeper
must arrange to have the remains disposed of properly at their expense.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
§ 91.1105 FEEDING WILDLIFE.
   It is unlawful to feed any wildlife within city limits either intentionally
or by allowing wildlife access to food intended for humans or domestic animals,
except in areas designated for that purpose. This section does not apply to
bird feeders.
(Ord. 914-C.S., passed 4-20-21)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Adoption of California Fire Code
   
92.02   California Fire code amendments
   
92.03   Enforcement by Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
92.04   Limits of districts for storage of explosives and blasting agents
   
92.05   Limits of districts for storage of flammable and combustible liquids
and liquefied petroleum gas
   
92.06   Appeals
   
92.07   New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits
   
92.08   Fireworks prohibition
   
92.081   Definitions
   
92.082   Prohibitions and exceptions
   
92.083   Violation
Restrictions on Butane Sales
   
92.10   Regulation of the sale, purchase, and possession of butane
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE.
   Those certain documents including their appendices, supplements, and errata,
as adopted by the City of Eureka in the Eureka Municipal Code Title 15, §§
150.015 through
150.029, copies of which are on file in the respective designated offices as
referenced in §§
150.015 through
150.029, are adopted as amended, deleted, and/or added to as the Fire and Life
Safety Code of the city for regulation and providing minimum standards for the
nationally recognized good practices for safeguarding to a reasonable degree of
life and property from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances,
material, and devices and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the
use or occupancy of buildings or premises in the city; providing penalties for
the violation of such codes; and each and all of the regulations, provisions,
penalties, conditions and terms of the aforementioned codes, published by said
organizations, and amended by the state, on file in the office of the city are
hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as amended, deleted and/or
added to as if fully set out in this section.
(‘63 Code, § 3-3.01) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-89; Am. Ord. 497-C.S., passed
7-20-89; Am. Ord. 516-C.S., passed 7-19-90; Am. Ord. 604-C.S., passed 1-16-96;
Am. Ord. 666-C.S., passed 3-4-03; Am. Ord. 720-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord.
763-C.S., passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 853-C.S.,
passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 891-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 941-C.S., passed
12-6-22)
§ 92.02 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE AMENDMENTS.
   The 2022 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, Based on the 2021
International Fire Code is hereby amended as follows:
   (A)   Whenever they appear in the California Fire Code, unless otherwise
provided, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section:
      (1)   Wherever the word "jurisdiction" is used in the California Fire
Code, it shall mean the Humboldt Bay Fire Joint Powers Authority.
      (2)   Wherever the term "department counsel" is used in the California
Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the Humboldt Bay Fire
Joint Powers Authority.
      (3)   Wherever the words "Chief of the Fire Prevention Bureau" are used
in the California Fire Code, they shall be held to mean the "Fire Chief of the
Humboldt Bay Fire Joint Powers Authority or his/her designee."
   (B)   Chapter 1 - Scope and Administration, the following sections are added
to the Fire Code:
      (1)   Section 101 - General. Entire section is adopted.
      (2)   Section 102 - Applicability. Entire section is adopted.
      (3)   Section 103 - Code Compliance Agency. Entire section is adopted.
      (4)   Section 104 - Duties & Powers of the Fire Code Official. Section is
adopted with the following amendment:
         (a)   Section 104.7.2 Cost Recovery: Fire suppression, investigation,
rescue, or emergency medical costs are recoverable in accordance with Health
and Safety Code Sections 13009 and 13009.1 as amended. Additionally, any person
who negligently, intentionally or in violation of the law causes an emergency
response, including but not limited to, a traffic accident, spill of toxic or
flammable fluids or chemicals is liable for the costs of securing such
emergency, including those costs pursuant to Government Code Section 53150, et
seq, as amended. Any expense incurred by Humboldt Bay Fire for securing such
emergency shall constitute a debt of such person and shall be collectable by
the Humboldt Bay Fire Joint Powers Authority as in the case of an obligation
under contract, express or implied.
      (5)   Section 107 - Fees. Entire section is adopted
      (6)   Section 108 - Inspections. Entire section is adopted.
      (7)   Section 109 - Maintenance. Entire section is adopted.
      (8)   Section 110 - Service Utilities. Entire section is adopted.
      (9)   Section 112 - Violations. Entire section is adopted.
      (10)   Section 113- Stop work order. Section is adopted with the
following amendment:
         a.   Section 113.4 is amended to read: Failure to Comply-any person
who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order,
except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or
unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of $150.00
      (11)   Section 114 - Unsafe Buildings. Entire section is adopted.
   (C)   Chapter 3- General Precautions Against Fire, is added to the Fire
Code, and the entire chapter is adopted with the following amendments.
      a.   Section 308.1.6 Open Flames Devices, Permit required.
      b.   Section 308.2 Open Flames, Permit required.
   (D)   Chapter 5 - Fire Service Features. Entire chapter is adopted as
amended by the California OSFM with the following additional local amendments:
      a.   Section 503.2.9 is added to read: Application of Humboldt County
Fire Safe Ordinance #1952. Minimum specifications of the Humboldt County Fire
Safe Ordinance #1952 may be required In lieu of Section 503.2 as approved by
the Fire Code Official.
      b.   Section 505.1.1 is added to read: For other than one- and two-
family dwellings and individual mobile homes, address numbers shall be a
minimum of six (6) inches in height and minimum 3/8-inch stroke width. Where
buildings are set back from the street, larger numbers may be required.
         Exception: Existing legible identification.
      c.   Section 505.1.2 is added to read: In multi-tenant buildings,
individual tenant spaces shall be identified with characters a minimum of two
(2) inches in height located on the entry door or on the wall at the strike-
side of the entry door.
         Exception: Existing legible identification.
      d.   Section 506.1.3 is added to read: Approved key boxes shall be
installed in new buildings equipped with fire alarm systems, fire sprinkler
systems, elevators, and/or as required by
         506.1. Key boxes shall be installed in existing buildings where new
fire alarm systems, fire sprinkler systems, and/or elevators are installed, or
as required by 506.1.
      e.   Section 506.1.4 is added to read: Motorized gates providing access
to facilities or property shall be provided with an approved gate key switch or
other approved means of emergency operation. The switch shall be installed so
it will open the gate and the gate will remain in the open position until re-
set by the Joint Powers Authority.
      f.   Section 507.2.2 is amended to read: Water tanks for private fire
protection shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 22, Humboldt County Fire
Safe Ordinance #1952, and shall be no less than 2500 gallons in capacity
outside the hydrant service areas and when required by county modified limited
density owner-built rural dwelling regulations (ordinance #1644).
   (E)   Chapter 8 - Interior Finish, Decorative Materials, and Furnishings.
Section 807 Decorative Vegetation in New and Existing Buildings is adopted with
the following amendment:
      a.   Title 19 3.08 allowing Christmas trees provided they are non-
flammable or treated.
   (F)   Chapter 9- Fire Protection Systems. Entire chapter is adopted as
amended by the California OSFM with the addition of the following section:
      a.   Section 903.4.4 is added to read: In addition to the requirements of
903.4, valves on connections to water supplies, sectional control and isolation
valves, and other valves in supply pipes to sprinklers and other fixed water-
based fire suppression systems shall be locked in the correct position with the
exception of R-3 occupancies which shall be installed per the California
Residential Code.
   (G)   Chapter 12- Energy Systems. Section is adopted with the following
amendments:
      a.   Sections 1205.2.4 and sections 1205.3.4 (Locations of DC conductors)
are amended to read: Conduit, wiring systems and raceways for photovoltaic
circuits shall be located within enclosed spaces in a building. DC wiring shall
be installed in in metallic conduit or raceways when located within enclosed
spaces in a building. Conduit located in attics shall be installed away from
the ridge area and shall be attached to the bottom of load bearing members and/
or installed directly below the array or mounted to the top of ceiling joists
to minimize the potential for cutting of conduits and conductors during
ventilation operations.
         Exception: When approved the by fire code official, exterior ran
conduit, wiring systems and raceways for photovoltaic circuits shall be located
as close as possible to the ridge or hip or valley as directly as possible to
an outside wall to reduce trip hazards and maximize ventilation opportunities.
Conduit runs between sub arrays and to DC combiner boxes shall be installed in
a manner that minimizes the total amount of conduit on the roof by taking the
shortest path on the roof to the DC combiner box. The DC combiner boxes shall
be located such that conduit runs are minimized in the pathways between arrays.
   (H)   Chapter 26 - Fumigation and Thermal Insecticidal Fogging. Entire
chapter is adopted.
   (I)   Appendix B- Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings. Appendix adopted as
amended by California OSFM.
   (J)   Appendix C- Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution. Appendix adopted
as amended by California OSFM.
(Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 604-C.S., passed 1-16-96; Am. Ord.
666-C.S., passed 3-4-03; Am. Ord. 720-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 763-C.S.,
passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 853-C.S., passed 1-
17-17; Am. Ord. 891-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 941-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 92.03 ENFORCEMENT BY BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   The 2022 California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, based on the 2021
International Fire Code, shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention in
the Fire Department of the city which is hereby established and which shall be
operated under the supervision of the Chief of the Fire Department.
   (B)   The Chief (or Fire Marshal) in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall be appointed by the Chief of the Fire Department on the basis of
examination to determine his qualifications.
   (C)   The Chief (or Fire Marshal) in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall be appointed by the Chief of Humboldt Bay Fire based on a Joint
Authorities process to determine his/her qualifications. The Chief of Humboldt
Bay Fire may detail such members of the Fire Department as Inspectors as shall
from time to time be necessary. The Fire Marshal of Humboldt Bay Fire shall
recommend to the Fire Chief and Humboldt Bay Fire Board of Directors the
employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall
be selected through a Joint Authorities process to determine his/her
qualifications. Humboldt Bay Fire shall determine the qualifications of said
inspectors.
(‘63 Code, § 3-3.04) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 720-C.S., passed
1-15-08; Am. Ord. 763-C.S., passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed 12-3-13;
Am. Ord. 853-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 891-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord.
941-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 92.04 LIMITS OF DISTRICTS FOR STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   The limits referred to in Section 5601.1 of said 2022 California Fire Code,
Title 24, Part 9, as referenced to the California Code of Regulations, Title
19, Division 1, Chapter 10, in which a permit is required for the storage of
explosives and blasting agents, such storage is prohibited within the
boundaries of the city.
(‘63 Code, § 3-3.07) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 720-C.S., passed
1-15-08; Am. Ord. 763-C.S., passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed 12-3-13;
Am. Ord. 853-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 891-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord.
941-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 92.05 LIMITS OF DISTRICTS FOR STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS
AND LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS.
   (A)   The geographic limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of said 2022
California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, in which the storage of flammable or
combustible liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited,
and the limits referred to in Section 5706.5.1.1 of said Code in which
construction of new bulk plants for the storage of flammable or combustible
liquids is prohibited, and the geographic limits referred to in Section 6104.2
of said Code, in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, are
hereby established as all zone districts except the “MG” General Industrial
District as said district is defined and established by the zoning regulations
of the city set forth in Chapter 155 of this Code.
   (B)   The geographic limits referred to in Section 5706.2.4.4 of said 2022
California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, in which the storage of Class I and II
flammable and combustible liquids in above-ground tanks at farms and
construction sites are prohibited, are hereby established as the boundaries of
the city.
   (C)   The geographic limits referred to in Section 5806.2 of said 2022
California Fire Code, Title 24, Part 9, in which the storage of flammable
cryogenic fluids in stationary containers is prohibited, is hereby established
as the boundaries of the city.
(‘63 Code, § 3-3.08) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 720-C.S., passed
1-15-08; Am. Ord. 763-C.S., passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed 12-3-13;
Am. Ord. 853-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord.
891-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 941-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 92.06 APPEALS.
   Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a
permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Chief to the Board of Appeals of the city created by Eureka Municipal
Code §
150.029.
(‘63 Code, § 3-3.09) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 720-C.S., passed
1-15-08; Am. Ord. 763-C.S., passed 1-18-11; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed 12-3-13;
Am. Ord. 853-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 891-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord.
941-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 92.07 NEW MATERIALS, PROCESSES OR OCCUPANCIES WHICH MAY REQUIRE PERMITS.
   The Chief, the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and the Building
Official shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving
affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or
occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated
in said Code.
(‘63 Code, § 3-3.10) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81; Am. Ord. 800-C.S., passed
12-3-13; Am. Ord. 853-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 891-C.S., passed 12-3-19;
Am. Ord. 941-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 92.08 FIREWORKS PROHIBITION.
   Fireworks are prohibited on Woodley Island and in Old Town.
(Ord. 667-C.S., passed 5-20-03; Am. Ord. 686-C.S., passed 3-1-05)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.081 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   FIREWORKS. A device containing chemical elements and chemical compounds and
designed to produce a visible, audible, mechanical, or thermal effect by
combustion, deflagration, explosion, or detonation. For the purpose of this
chapter FIREWORKS does not include:
      (1)   Toy caps which do not contain more than 25/100 of a grain of
explosive compound per cap;
      (2)   Highway flares, railroad fuses, ship distress signals, smoke
candles and other emergency signals when used during emergency events;
      (3)   Educational rockets and toy propellant device type engines used in
such rockets when such rockets are of non-metallic construction and utilize
replaceable engines or model cartridges containing less than two ounces of
propellant and when such engines or model cartridges are designed to be ignited
by electrical means;
      (4)   Fireworks which are used in testing or research by a licensed
explosive laboratory.
   PERMIT. A non-transferable permission granted by the authority having
jurisdiction to a licensee for the purpose of establishing and maintaining a
place where fireworks are manufactured, constructed, produced, packaged,
transported, stored, sold, exchanged or used.
   PUBLIC FIREWORKS DISPLAY. Any display of fireworks conducted by a qualified
pyrotechnic operator compliant with state laws and permits and conducted only
after the approval by the Fire Department and compliance with any conditions
imposed by the permit and Fire Department.
   SAFE AND SANE FIREWORKS. Fireworks listed and labeled by the office of the
State Fire Marshal as "Safe And Sane" and not defined as dangerous or exempt
fireworks.
(Ord. 667-C.S., passed 5-20-03)
§ 92.082 PROHIBITIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Prohibitions. No person shall store, sell, use, discharge, ignite, or
set off any fireworks on Woodley Island or within Woodley Island Marina, or in
the Old Town area of the city. For purposes of this chapter, the OLD TOWN AREA
is defined as the area north of Fourth Street to the Bay, west of M Street and
east of Commercial Street, inclusive.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Permission may be obtained by special permit issued by the Fire
Chief, or designee, for public fireworks display or for certain religious
purposes.
      (2)   This section does not prohibit the storage of small quantities of
legal, safe and sane fireworks in an occupancy within the prohibited areas for
personal use outside of the prohibited areas.
(Ord. 667-C.S., passed 5-20-03; Am. Ord. 686-C.S., passed 3-1-05)
Penalty, see § 92.99
§ 92.083 VIOLATION.
   Failure to comply with §
92.082 is an infraction. Failure to comply with an order and notice as provided
in §
92.99 may be charged either as an infraction or as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 667-C.S., passed 5-20-03)
RESTRICTIONS ON BUTANE SALES
§ 92.10 REGULATION OF THE SALE, PURCHASE, AND POSSESSION OF BUTANE.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   The northern region of our state has experienced a recent increase
in explosions caused from the manufacture of honey oil (also known as hash oil)
in clandestine labs using refined butane of 5x and higher. These incidents have
caused considerable property damage, personal injury and even incidents of
death to those participating in the manufacturing process, and to innocent
bystanders.
      (2)   That the use of refined butane 5x or higher is done to dissolve the
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) resin, which concentrates into a liquid/oil form as
a result of the butane's stripping process. The stripping of the THC through
use of refined butane of 5x or higher causes flammable butane vapors to
accumulate low to the ground and remain exposed to ignition sources. Studies
suggest that 99.5% of the extracted THC Butane mixture will volatilize into the
immediate area and remain in a form that is odorless and latent to the human
eye and only detected through a combustible gas instrument.
      (3)   A honey lab using 5x refine butane and higher presents a serious
hazard for first responders as the gas has no odor and can only be detected by
a combustible gas instrument. Such conditions present a grave risk of loss
where devices typically deployed by first responders are capable of igniting
the gas resulting in an explosion.
      (4)   That the resale of refined butane 5x and higher occurs at levels
that are only relevant to the manufacture of honey oil. That such sales and
possession of butane should be regulated to prevent the use of butane in the
manufacture of honey oil where such activity presents grave dangers and adverse
health risks to the occupants of the City of Eureka and the first responders
therein.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions
apply:
      BUTANE. Iso-butane, n-butane, and butane of power 5x or greater.
      CANISTER. A single butane canister of a storage quantity of 300 ml (10.6
ounces).
      CODE. The Eureka Municipal Code.
      COUNT. The number of canisters of refined butane.
      CUSTOMER. Any person who is sold or acquires during a transaction
products from any retail store.
      DAY. Calendar day.
      PACKAGE. Butane offered for sale at quantities of two or more.
      PERSON. A corporation, co-partnership, or association as well as a
natural person.
      RETAILER or RESELLER. Any business, company, corporation, person,
employee or associate selling products to any customer within the City of
Eureka. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale transaction.
      SELL. To furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender,
distribute or supply, whether for monetary gain or other consideration.
      TANK. A cylinder designed to hold compressed gas of a quantity greater
than 600 ml.
      TRANSACTION. A purchase, sale, trade, loan, pledge, investment, gift,
transfer, transmission, delivery, deposit, withdrawal, payment, exchange of
currency, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any monetary instrument, or
an electronic, magnetic or manual transfer between accounts or any other
acquisition or disposition of property by whatever means effected.
      VENDOR. Any person who is engaged in the wholesale or retail/resale sale
of "refined butane," as that term is defined herein.
      WHOLESALER. Any business, company, corporation, or person whose business
is the selling of goods in gross to retailers for the purposes of resale.
   (C)   Unlawful sale, purchase, and handling of butane.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any retailer, reseller or person who is not a
wholesaler to sell to a customer any number of butane canisters or tanks that
exceed a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml of butane during a single
transaction.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person that is not a vendor (wholesale or
retailer/reseller) to have in their possession, custody or control any number
of butane canisters or tanks that exceed a combined total storage quantity of
600 ml of butane at any one time.
      (3)   It is unlawful for any customer of retailer/reseller to purchase or
acquire per calendar month any number of butane canisters or tanks that exceed
a combined total storage quantity of 600 ml of butane, whether sold
individually or by the package.
   (D)   Tracking of butane sale and records retention. Every vendor shall do
all of the following:
      (1)   Store refined butane, or cause it to be stored, in a manner that
makes it inaccessible, without employee assistance, to the public in the
regular course of business pending legal sale or disposition;
      (2)   Limit the quantity of refined butane that may be purchased by a
person within a calendar month to no more than 600 ml;
      (3)   Sell refined butane only to persons 18 years of age or older;
      (4)   Require any person who wishes to purchase refined butane to present
a valid driver's license or other form of government-issued identification
bearing the prospective purchaser's photograph, date of birth, and current
residence address; and
      (5)   Record the following information in connection with each sale of
butane and maintain on the premises of the vendor for a period of not less than
two years from the sale of sale:
         (a)   The full name and residence address of the purchaser, as
obtained from identification described in division (D)(4);
         (b)   The date and time of the sale;
         (c)   The brand and amount of refined butane sold;
         (d)   The type of sale, i.e., retail or wholesale;
         (e)   If a wholesale sale, the purchaser's seller's permit number as
reflected on the resale certificate, if a resale certificate is taken from the
purchaser pursuant to Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 6091; and
         (f)   The full name of the person who processed the sale.
      (6)   The vendor shall provide the record of sales information as
described in division (5) above upon request of the City of Eureka or its
authorized representative or agent.
      (7)   Exception: §
92.10(D)(2) shall not apply to wholesalers selling to persons who are licensed
pursuant to §
92.10(F)(2).
   (E)   Enforcement and penalty.
      (1)   Each act in violation of this Code is a violation of §
10.99 of the Eureka Municipal Code and shall constitute a separate offense. A
violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction,
chargeable at the City Attorney's discretion.
      (2)   Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required
for proof of an offense defined by this chapter, except where expressly
required by this chapter.
      (3)   Any immediately dangerous condition as defined in §
150.152 may be summarily abated in accordance with §
150.153. Actions taken to abate the immediately dangerous conditions may
include, but are not limited to, repair or removal of the condition creating
the danger and/or the restriction from use of occupancy of the property on
which the dangerous condition exists, or any other abatement action determined
by the Chief Building Official to be necessary. In the event use or occupancy
is restricted, the owner, operator or manager shall discontinue said use
immediately.
      (4)   If, in attempting to obtain compliance with division (3) above, the
Chief Building Official is denied entry to the property by its owner, operator,
or manager, the Chief Building Official may, pursuant to California Code of
Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50 through 1822.60, seek an inspection and abatement
warrant from the Superior Court.
      (5)   Costs for any abatement performed by, or on behalf of the city,
including the cost of police and fire services provided, relocation of
occupants of the property, and any other administrative costs, shall be
recoverable by the city by the methods given in §§
150.183 through
150.190.
      (6)   In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to
abate a nuisance in which the city elects, at the initiation of the action or
proceeding, to seek recovery of its attorneys' fees, the prevailing party in
the action or proceeding shall recover its attorneys' fees incurred in the
action or proceeding. In no action, administrative proceeding or special
proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the
amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or
proceeding. "Prevailing party" shall not include a party who complies with a
notice of violation issued by the city or an order in any action,
administrative proceeding or special proceeding. Attorney fees shall include
fees for the services of the City Attorney or her or his assistant and
deputies, calculated based on the effective hourly rate of such attorney (ref.
Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5).
   (F)   Exemptions.
      (1)   A person possessing a valid C-20, C-36 and/or C-38 Contractors
License issued by the California Department of Consumer Affairs, Contractors
State License Board shall not be in violation of this Code for possession or
purchasing a quantity of butane greater than the maximum amounts allowed under
divisions (C)(1), (2) or (3) where all of the following are satisfied:
         (a)   The C-20, C-36 and/or C-38 Contractors License, or a readable
copy thereof, is carried on the person during all times that the butane is
possessed by the contractor;
         (b)   The butane is used for the purpose of performing qualified tasks
under the contractor's license held by the person carrying the butane;
         (c)   That the person's license is in good standing with the
California State Contractors License Board; and
         (d)   The person, or company to which he or she is employed and
performing the contracting tasks under the C-20, C-36 and/or C-38 Contractors
License, possesses a valid business license.
      (2)   A person possessing a valid volatile manufacturing license issued
by both the State of California and the City of Eureka.
   (G)   Cumulative remedy. Nothing herein is intended to limit the city from
pursuing any other remedy available at law or in equity against any person or
entity maintaining, committing, or causing a public nuisance or any other
violation of the Code or state or federal law.
(Ord. 849-C.S., passed 11-1-16; Am. Ord. 872-C.S., passed 4-17-18)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Code
hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no
appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as
affirmed or modified by the city or by a court of competent jurisdiction,
within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation
and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a
fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more than six months or
by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any
violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects
within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
('63 Code, § 3-3.11) (Ord. 350-C.S., passed 10-6-81)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Recreation and Parks Commission
   
93.02   Camping permitted only in specifically designated areas
   
93.03   House trailers; auto and trailer camps
   
93.04   Euthanasia of zoo animals
   
93.05   Ball playing in streets restricted
Municipal Golf Course
   
93.25   Establishment
   
93.26   Rules and regulations
   
93.27   Control and maintenance
Parks and Playground
   
93.50   Closing hours
   
93.51   Damaging or interfering with property
   
93.52   Molesting birds and animals
   
93.53   Zoo animals
   
93.54   Animals prohibited
   
93.55   Baseball playing
   
93.56   Vending
   
93.57   Intoxicating beverages
   
93.58   Depositing garbage
Skate Board Park
   
93.70   Purpose
   
93.71   Definitions
   
93.72   Helmet, elbow pads and knee pads required
   
93.73   Posting of signs at skate park
   
93.74   Regulations of use and rules of conduct
 
   
93.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Open Space, Parks, and Recreation Commission, see §§
33.045 and
33.046
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 RECREATION AND PARKS COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Recreation and Parks Commission is hereby created and shall
consist of nine members.
('63 Code, § 11-4.01)
   (B)   The Recreation and Parks Commission shall have the following powers
and duties:
      (1)   To serve in an advisory capacity to the Council, the City Manager,
and the Director of Public Works in all matters pertaining to public
recreation, public parks, squares, and grounds;
      (2)   To make recommendations to the Council, the City Manager, and the
Director of Public Works with respect to the provisions of the annual budget
for recreation and park purposes;
      (3)   To accept and reject offers of donations of money, personal
property, and real estate to be used for recreation and park purposes, subject
to approval by the Council;
      (4)   To prepare and recommend to the Council, the City Manager, and the
Director of Public Works a comprehensive municipal recreation and park program
for the inhabitants of the city, to promote and stimulate public interest
therein, and to solicit to the fullest possible extent the cooperation of
school authorities and other public and private agencies interested therein;
      (5)   To establish schedules of charges for services rendered by the
Department of Public Works, subject to approval by the Council;
      (6)   To prepare and recommend for adoption by the Council rules and
regulations for the use and improvement of public parks and recreation areas,
squares, and grounds in the city, including playgrounds, concessions, and
recreational facilities and programs installed and maintained therein;
      (7)   To prepare and recommend to the Council, the City Manager, and the
Director of Public Works policies for the acquisition, development, and
improvement of parks and recreation areas; and,
      (8)   To perform such other duties relating to recreation and park
matters as may be prescribed by the Council.
('63 Code, § 11-4.02)
(Ord. 2874, passed 7-18-61; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 93.02 CAMPING PERMITTED ONLY IN SPECIFICALLY DESIGNATED AREAS.
   (A)   Statement of purposes. The City Council finds that:
      (1)   The streets, parks, public buildings and grounds, and other public
areas in the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and
the public at large. Public property within the city is not specifically
designed for the purposes of camping or overnight sleeping activities and so
does not have the facilities necessary to protect the property from overuse and
unsanitary conditions potentially injurious to public health. The use of public
property for camping purposes interferes with the rights of others to use the
areas for the purposes for which they were intended, such as transportation,
municipal operations, recreation, and open space.
      (2)   There is no specific site or sites that should be designated for
camping because it is the experience of the city and other municipalities that
sites where camping is continuous or camping populations are numerous become
public health, environmental degradation, and policing problems.
      (3)   Camping activities may constitute a public health and safety hazard
when conducted without the proper security and sanitary facilities and
precautions. The necessity to clean up, repair or remediate public property
that has been used for unlawful camping may result in substantial costs to the
public.
      (4)   This section must be interpreted not to criminalize any person
based on their status as a homeless individual. To that end, whenever an issue
of interpretation arises, this section must be interpreted in a manner
consistent with the holding in Martin v. City of Boise (9th Cir. 2019) 920 F.3d
584.
      (5)   The law enforcement response to a violation of this section should
prioritize the city's restorative justice and diversion programs in preference
to citations for infractions when offenders are willing and able to participate
in those programs.
   (B)   Definitions.  For purposes of this section, the following definitions
apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      ACCOMMODATION. A place that is protected from the elements and offers
sleeping and restroom facilities and that does not require a person to forego
the exercise of any State or Federal Constitutional right in order to stay
there.
      AVAILABLE. Obtainable by the specific person taking into account that
person's characteristics and circumstances.
      TO CAMP or CAMPING. To place, pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live
temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia.
      CAMP FACILITIES. Tents, huts, lean-tos, vehicles, vehicle camping outfits
or temporary shelters, cook stoves or fire pits, however constructed.
      CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, mattresses,
sleeping bags, hammocks, camp stoves or cooking implements or similar
materials.
      INVOLUNTARY CAMPING. Camping by a person at such time as there is no
accommodation accepting homeless persons within the city that is available to
that same person.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned or leased by any public entity or
agency, whether federal, state or local.
      PROHIBITED PLACE. Each of the following places:
         (a)   The Sequoia Park Zoo;
         (b)   The Eureka Municipal Golf Course;
         (c)   All city parks;
         (d)   The area 75 feet from the centerline of any officially-
designated recreational or multi-use trail on city property;
         (e)   The Downtown/Old Town Business District as defined in Appendix A
to Ord. 913-C.S.;
         (f)   The Northern Gateway Business District A, as defined in Appendix
B to Ord. 913-C.S.;
         (g)   The Waterfront Business District, as defined in Appendix C to
Ord. 913-C.S.;
         (h)   The Henderson Center Business District, as defined in Appendix D
to Ord. 913-C.S.;
      PROHIBITED TIME OF DAY. The time between 30 minutes after sunrise and 30
minutes before sunset. EXCEPTION: Subject to the Prohibited Place and Private
Property restrictions, and the restrictions of §§
130.11 and
130.13 of this code, a person who is involuntarily camping lawfully may remain
in place through the course of the day when the weather is actively, measurably
raining or snowing or the temperature is below 40 degrees Fahrenheit as of 30
minutes after sunrise.
      VOLUNTARY CAMPING. Camping for which no city permit has been issued, on
any public property within the city, at such time as there is an accommodation
available to the person that that person refuses to avail him/her or their self
of for any reason that is unrelated to the person's exercise of a First
Amendment or other state or federal constitutional right.
   (C)   Unlawful camping.
      (1)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance to camp voluntarily, occupy
camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in, on or under any public property,
except as permitted by an exception approved expressly or by policy adopted by
the City Council.
       (2)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance, whether voluntarily or
involuntarily, to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in, on
or under any public property in a prohibited place or during the prohibited
time of day.
      (3)   It is unlawful and a public nuisance, whether voluntarily or
involuntarily, to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia on
public or private property in a manner that meets the definition of
“obstructive conduct” found in §
130.11 or obstructs rights-of-way under §
130.13 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
   (D)   Involuntary camping - when and where lawful. Involuntary camping on
public property is lawful when and where it is not otherwise unlawful under
division (C), above.
   (E)   Camping on private property. Camping on private property is lawful if
the owner of 50% or more of the fee interest in the property is present at all
times the camping is occurring, and if the camping is occurring accessory to an
existing permitted residential use on the property, and the property is zoned
for residential use only. Notwithstanding the foregoing exemption, if the
camping is creating or maintaining a nuisance as defined in this Code or is
without the express written consent of an owner of 50% or more of the fee
interest in the property, then it is unlawful. On lands not described above in
respect to permitted use and zoning, unless the land is specifically zoned and
approved for camping, all other camping on private property is unlawful and a
nuisance.
   (F)   Penalty. A violation of this section is an infraction and is subject
to the following penalties:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $25.00 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $35.00 for a second violation of this section
within one year of a prior violation:
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $50.00 for each additional violation of this
section within one year of two prior violations.
   (G)   Severability. If any provision, subdivision, sentence, clause or
phrase of this section as now constituted or later amended, or its application
to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise
unenforceable, that holding will not affect other provisions that can be given
effect without the invalid provision or application. The Council declares that
it would have adopted this section and each provision, subdivision, sentence,
clause, or phrase hereof independent of the fact that any provision,
subdivision, sentence, clause, or phrase may later be declared invalid,
unconstitutional or unenforceable.
(‘63 Code, § 5-2.01) (Ord. 573-C.S., passed 8-4-94; Am. Ord. 598-C.S., passed
12-19-95; Am. Ord. 913-C.S., passed 2-16-21; Am. Ord. 918-C.S., passed 8-17-21)
)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.03 HOUSE TRAILERS; AUTO AND TRAILER CAMPS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use a house trailer, trailer,
semi-trailer, truck, or other movable structure for habitation within the city
except in a duly established licensed auto camp.
('63 Code, § 5-2.04)
   (B)   The Health Officer is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the
regulations and laws of the health and safety regulations and laws of the state
and the regulations and laws of the city regarding the construction,
conduction, and regulation of auto and/or trailer camps in the city.
('63 Code, § 5-2.05)
(Ord. 2419, passed 3-16-48)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.04 EUTHANASIA OF ZOO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No healthy Sequoia Park Zoo animal shall be euthanized without
approval of the Zoo Advisory Board and prior public notice. As used herein
“healthy” animal shall mean one free of disease or debility as judged by
competent veterinary authority and “zoo animal” shall mean an animal who has
come into ownership of the Sequoia Park Zoo through authorized means and is
used for public display.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) herein shall preclude appropriate disposal of
animals judged sick and diseased or debilitated or injured by competent
veterinary authority or the emergency destruction of an animal to protect human
life.
('63 Code, § 11-8.101)
   (C)   Willful violation of this section by any city employee shall be
grounds for dismissal from employment from the city.
('63 Code, § 11-8.103)
(Ord. 367-C.S., passed 8-17-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.05 BALL PLAYING IN STREETS RESTRICTED.
   Every person who shall play ball, or engage in throwing, pitching, or
catching a ball, on any street or alley in the city after being requested by
any police officer to forbear or discontinue the same shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 11-5.01) (Ord. 215, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSE
§ 93.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The parcel of land conveyed to the city by Fred H. Lundblade and Patricia N.
Lundblade, his wife, and C. Robert Barnum and Patricia B. Barnum, his wife, for
use as a municipal golf course shall be known as the “Lundblade-Barnum Eureka
Municipal Golf Course.” It shall be developed, used, and maintained for the
benefit of the public generally subject, however, to the restrictions and
limitations contained in this chapter and such further rules and regulations as
the Council may by resolution adopt.
('63 Code, § 11-2.01) (Ord. 2880, passed 9-5-61)
§ 93.26 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts upon the
Lundblade-Barnum Eureka Municipal Golf Course:
   (A)   To trespass upon the course;
   (B)   To play golf on the course, or any part thereof, without first
obtaining a permit in proper form so to do. A separate permit shall be required
for each player for each and every round of golf played over the course, a
round of golf being a continuous play over nine or 18 holes in their sequence,
unless the player has a monthly or yearly ticket; to fail or refuse to show
such golf permit to any employee of the city connected with the course when
requested so to do; to cut in on or double back over any portion of the course;
or to play on or attempt to play with or by authority of a permit other than
the one regularly issued for the round then being played;
   (C)   Wilfully or maliciously to injure the turf of the course or in any way
destroy or injure property thereon or remove property or equipment from the
premises without permission of the keeper or professional in charge thereof;
   (D)   To drive or park any vehicle on or over any part of the land
comprising the course except at the designated parking areas;
   (E)   To take possession of golf balls other than those belonging to
themselves upon or from the course or the lands and streets adjacent thereto,
or to sell or offer to sell thereon golf balls or equipment, food, drinks, or
other commodities except as may be provided by the rules and regulations which
may be adopted by the Council; or,
   (F)   To deposit rubbish, garbage, cut grass, or other foreign matter upon
the course, or any part thereof.
('63 Code, § 11-2.02) (Ord. 2880, passed 9-5-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.27 CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE.
   The Council is hereby authorized from time to time by resolution:
   (A)   To control, regulate, and manage the Lundblade-Barnum Eureka Municipal
Golf Course in all particulars not inconsistent with this chapter;
   (B)   To specify the conditions under which the same may be used or played
upon;
   (C)   To establish the fees to be paid for the use thereof and provide for
their collection and payment into the city treasury;
   (D)   To specify the compensation to be paid the professional or keeper and
other employees thereof, to provide for the employment of such employees and to
enter into contracts therefor, and to require bonds for all employees handling
any money;
   (E)   To provide for the construction and maintenance of a clubhouse and for
the sale thereat by concession, or otherwise, of golf equipment and
refreshments;
   (F)   To provide for practice greens and practice fairways and for
exhibition matches and tournaments; and,
   (G)   To provide for the control, regulation, maintenance, and upkeep of the
course in every other manner and to every extent of the premises.
('63 Code, § 11-2.03) (Ord. 2880, passed 9-5-61)
PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
§ 93.50 CLOSING HOURS.
   The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to designate the closing
hours for any park, playground, or other facility, or portion thereof, under
the management of the Public Works Department of the city. Whenever closing
hours are so designated, appropriate signs shall be placed and maintained
giving notice thereof. No person shall enter or be present in a park,
playground, or other facility, or portion thereof, designated closed during
closing hours, except authorized city employees or persons designated by the
Director of Public Works on official city business.
('63 Code, § 11-6.05) (Ord. 132-C.S., passed 10-4-69; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
§ 93.51 DAMAGING OR INTERFERING WITH PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, break, mutilate, or
destroy any of the trees, shrubs, bushes, buildings, benches, or seats in any
city park or playground.
('63 Code, § 11-6.01)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to uproot, take, or carry away any
maidenhair, or other fern, or any bushes or shrubs from any city park or
playground without permission from the Council.
('63 Code, § 11-6.02)
(Ord. 2740, passed 2-18-58)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.52 MOLESTING BIRDS AND ANIMALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set spring or other traps or to
catch, shoot with air pistols or other weapons, disturb, or molest in any
manner any birds or animals in any city park or playground.
('63 Code, § 11-6.03) (Ord. 2740, passed 2-18-58)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.53 ZOO ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized city
personnel, to feed, offer to, or toss any object at any animal exhibited at
Sequoia Park Zoo;
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into, or attempt to enter
into, any animal enclosure or habitat at the Zoo, without written authorization
by the Zoo staff;
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to tease, injure or frighten any
of the animals, (including birds, reptiles or fish) belonging to the Zoo; and
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to follow all rules of the
Zoo, or any direction or instruction given by Zoo staff.
(‘63 Code, § 11-6.10) (Ord. 332-C.S., passed 2-3-81; Am. Ord. 827-C.S., passed
12-1-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.54 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any dog, horse, or other
domestic animal to enter, be, or remain upon any city park or recreation area,
including the streets and roads traversing such park or recreation area, except
in such areas as may be specifically designated and posted by the Director of
Public Works.
('63 Code, § 11-6.07) (Ord. 273-C.S., passed 6-16-77; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.55 BASEBALL PLAYING.
   It shall be unlawful to throw or hit or knock any baseball with a ball bat
or any other instrument or engage in or play the game of baseball in any other
manner on any city park or playground without first obtaining written
permission to do so from the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public
Works is hereby authorized and empowered to specify the conditions under which
the game of baseball may be engaged in or played at any city park or
playground. For the purposes of this section, the term “baseball” shall mean
any ball having a circumference of less than 11€ inches or a weight of less
than six ounces and which is commonly used in the game known as baseball.
('63 Code, § 11-6.04) (Ord. 109-C.S., passed 9-6-68; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.56 VENDING.
   (A)   No person shall solicit, sell, hawk, or vend any goods, wares,
merchandise, liquids, or edibles for human consumption at any park or
recreational facility, owned by the city except as follows:
      (1)   Regularly-licensed concessionaires of the city;
      (2)   Persons or organizations who have secured permits therefor from the
Director of Public Works, upon such terms and conditions as he may prescribe
and subject to the approval of the City Manager;
      (3)   Sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk vendors, and roaming sidewalk
vendors who have secured permits from the Department of Finance, upon the terms
set forth in Title XI,
Chapter 118 of the Eureka Code of Ordinances; or
         (a)   Sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk vendors, and roaming
sidewalk vendors who vend food in or at any park or recreational facility owned
by the city must do so in accordance with the terms set forth in Title XI,
Chapter 118 of the Eureka Code of Ordinances.
         (b)   Sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk vendors, and roaming
sidewalk vendors who violate this section are subject to the penalties
described in §
118.99.
   (B)   Any person or group selling goods for profit at any park or
recreational facility shall pay a fee to the city equal to 10% of the gross
revenue of such enterprise. Notwithstanding the above, non-profit service
organizations will not be subject to said fee.
   For the purpose of this section, non-profit organizations are defined as
those organizations whose primary purpose is to provide a charitable or
philanthropic service available to the public, including those organizations
which may not have official non-profit status. The waiver of fees shall not
apply to organizations that may have non- profit status that promote
specialized interests, and shall not apply to organizations that do not provide
services to the citizens of the city.
(‘63 Code, § 11-6.06) (Ord. 150-C.S., passed 9-4-70; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82; Am. Ord. 421-C.S., passed 2-1-85; Am. Ord. 882-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.57 INTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   (A)   No person shall drink or possess upon his person an open container of
any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage on any park or playground.
(‘63 Code, § 11-6.08)
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject
to the provisions of §
10.99 and may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of
the City Attorney.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, it shall not be unlawful to drink
beer and wine on any park or playground during such time as a permit to sell
beer or wine, issued by the Director of Public Works pursuant to §
93.56, is in effect on any such park or playground.
(‘63 Code, § 11-6.09)
(Ord. 275-C.S., passed 5-17-77; Am. Ord. 307-C.S., passed 3-6-79; Am. Ord. 363-
C.S., passed 5-18-82; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82; Am. Ord. 380-C.S.,
passed 5-15-83; Am. Ord. 785-C.S., passed 7-17-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 93.58 DEPOSITING GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport garbage or trash to any
city park or playground and deposit such garbage or trash in any city park or
playground.
('63 Code, § 11-6.11) (Ord. 332-C.S., passed 2-3-81)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SKATE BOARD PARK
§ 93.70 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to comply with Cal. Health & Safety Code,
§ 115800 that requires skate board operations to adopt an ordinance requiring
persons riding skateboards, in-line skates, and other self-propelled wheeled
apparatus at the facility to wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads.
(Ord. 745-C.S., passed 11-17-09)
§ 93.71 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SKATEBOARD. A mechanism with wheels that are fastened to a platform commonly
constructed to accommodate a standing person. SKATEBOARDS are normally
propelled by the operator pushing off the ground with one foot, or by the force
of gravity.
   SKATES. Any footwear device which may be attached to the foot or footwear,
which may be used to aid the wearer in moving or propulsion, including in-line
skates, roller blades and roller skates.
(Ord. 745-C.S., passed 11-17-09)
§ 93.72 HELMET, ELBOW PADS AND KNEE PADS REQUIRED.
   It is prohibited for any person to ride skateboards, in-line skates, or
other similar devices in the skate park unless that person is wearing a helmet,
elbow pads and knee pads.
(Ord. 745-C.S., passed 11-17-09) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.73 POSTING OF SIGNS AT SKATE PARK.
   Signs shall be posted at the skate park giving notice that any person riding
a skateboard, in-line skates, or similar devices, must wear a helmet, elbow
pads and knee pads, and that any person failing to do so will be subject to
citation and prohibition of use of the facilities for one year. Signs shall
also be posted setting rules for use of the skate park as set from time to time
by resolution, and violation thereof will be subject to citation.
(Ord. 745-C.S., passed 11-17-09) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.74 REGULATIONS OF USE AND RULES OF CONDUCT.
   Any person using the skate park shall comply with the following rules and
regulations:
   (A)   The hours of use of the skate park shall be established by City
Council and shall be posted at the skate park. Use of the park at any time
outside the hours posted is prohibited.
   (B)   While skating or skateboarding, the participant may only use those
areas designated for skateboarding or related skating activities.
   (C)   While using the facility, the participant must use personal safety
equipment comprised of at least head, knee and elbow protection.
   (D)   No food or drink is allowed in the designated skate area.
   (E)   No moveable obstacles or materials (i.e., ramps/jumps) are allowed in
the park.
   (F)   Bicycling is prohibited within the skate area.
   (G)   Stunt, trick or luge skateboarding is limited to persons 12 years of
age or older.
   (H)   Placing of graffiti anywhere in or on the park is prohibited and the
park will be closed until the graffiti is removed and/or repaired. In addition
to other penalties provided herein, any person putting graffiti on any part of
the skate park shall pay for the cost of removal and damages thereof. Parents
or guardians are also liable for such costs. (Cal. Health & Safety Code, § 1714
(b))
   (I)   Personal conduct and behavior. The following are prohibited in the
park area at all times:
      (1)   Possession or use of drugs or alcohol or being under the influence;
      (2)   Fighting or other violence;
      (3)   Possession or use of firearms, knives, or other weapons of any
kind;
      (4)   Smoking or use of tobacco products;
      (5)   No amplified music or other excessive noise;
      (6)   No excessive profanity.
   (J)   Everyone shall treat others with respect and courtesy.
(Ord. 745-C.S., passed 11-17-09) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of §§
93.70 through
93.74 shall be deemed an infraction for a first offense and punishable by a
fine not exceeding $50 for a first violation. Second and subsequent offenses
within one year may be prosecuted as an infraction or misdemeanor. A second
infraction within a year may be punishable by a fine not exceeding $100, and a
third or further infraction within a year may be punishable by a fine not
exceeding $250. Additionally, any person found by a preponderance of the
evidence to have violated any provision of this chapter may lose his or her
privilege to use the skate park facility for up to one year.
   (B)   Fines under §§
93.70 through
93.74 shall be administered pursuant to the administrative citation process set
out in §§
10.35 through
10.99.
(Ord. 745-C.S., passed 11-17-09)
CHAPTER 94: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Noise
   
94.01   Purpose
   
94.02   Loud noises unlawful
   
94.03   Loud noises regulated
Weeds, Rubbish and Debris
   
94.15   Definitions
   
94.16   Weeds and rubbish declared a public nuisance
   
94.17   Removal of weeds and rubbish
   
94.18   Notice to destroy or remove weeds or rubbish; removal by city
   
94.19   Account and report of costs
   
94.20   Notice of report and hearing
   
94.21   Hearing and confirmation
   
94.22   Assessment lien
   
94.23   Payment to Director of Finance
   
94.24   Refunds
   
94.25   Fire Code violations
Air Pollution
   
94.35   Air pollution regulated
Hazardous Substances
   
94.45   Underground storage of hazardous substances
Syringe Exchange Programs and Safe Disposal of Sharps
   
94.50   Purpose and intent
   
94.51   Title
   
94.52   Definitions
   
94.53   Regulation of Syringe Exchange Programs (SEPs)
   
94.54   Disposal of sharps
   
94.55   Enforcement
NOISE
§ 94.01 PURPOSE.
   The provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this subchapter are
in pursuance of and for the purposes of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity and the peace and
quiet of the city and its inhabitants.
('63 Code, § 4-5.01) (Ord. 2928, passed 12-18-62)
§ 94.02 LOUD NOISES UNLAWFUL.
   It is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any
person to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud,
unnecessary, or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs,
injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, safety, or peace and quiet
of any neighborhood or interferes with any person in the reasonable and
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
('63 Code, § 4-5.02) (Ord. 2928, passed 12-18-62)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.03 LOUD NOISES REGULATED.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noises in violation of the provisions of this chapter, but such
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   Loudspeakers. The using and operating or permitting to be played,
used, or operated, of any musical instrument or electrical or mechanical device
for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the building or structure in which it is located; and,
   (B)   Loudspeakers for advertising. The using and operating, or permitting
to be played, used, or operated, of any musical instrument or electrical or
mechanical device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon
the public streets for the purpose of advertising any business or enterprise
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
('63 Code, § 4-5.03) (Ord. 2928, passed 12-18-62)
Penalty, see § 10.99
WEEDS, RUBBISH AND DEBRIS
§ 94.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RUBBISH. Waste matter, litter, trash, refuse, debris, dirt, dry grass, dead
trees, tin cans, paper, and waste material of every kind, or other insanitary
substance, object, or condition which is, or when dry may become, a fire
hazard, or which is or may become a menace to health, safety, or welfare, or
which is offensive to the senses.
   STREET. Public streets, alleys, parkways, driveways, sidewalks, and areas
between sidewalks and curbs.
   WEEDS.
      (1)   Weeds which, when mature, bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature;
      (2)   Any brush or weeds which attain such large growth as to become,
when dry, a fire menace to adjacent improved property;
      (3)   Weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous;
      (4)   Poison oak and poison ivy when the conditions are such as to
constitute a menace to the public health; and,
      (5)   Dry grass, stubble, brush, litter, or other flammable material
which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard.
('63 Code, § 4-13.01) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.16 WEEDS AND RUBBISH DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The Council does hereby declare that all weeds growing upon private property
or streets in the city and all rubbish on private property or streets in the
city are public nuisances.
('63 Code, § 4-13.02) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.17 REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND RUBBISH.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying, renting, managing, or
controlling any real property in the city to cause or permit any weeds, or to
place, cause, or permit any rubbish, to be or remain on any real property in
the city or on portions of streets adjoining such real property to the center
line of such streets. It shall be the duty of every such person to remove or
destroy such weeds and/or rubbish. Destruction by burning within the city shall
be unlawful unless the written permission of the Chief of the Fire Department
is first obtained.
('63 Code, § 4-14.03) (Ord, 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.18 NOTICE TO DESTROY OR REMOVE WEEDS OR RUBBISH; REMOVAL BY CITY.
   (A)   In the event the person or persons owning, occupying, renting,
managing, or controlling any real property in the city shall fail to remove
therefrom and from the portions of streets adjoining such property all weeds
and rubbish in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, it shall be the
duty of the Fire Chief or his/her authorized representative to notify such
person or persons to remove the same. Such notice shall be in writing and shall
be deposited in the United States Post Office at Eureka, California, with
postage thereon prepaid and addressed to such owner at his last known place of
address as shown on the assessment roll of the city or of the county, and if no
such address is there shown or is known, the to general delivery, Eureka. If
such real property is occupied and the mailing address thereof is different
from that of the owner as shown on said assessment roll, then an additional
copy shall be similarly mailed to the occupant of such property at the mailing
address thereof. Such notice shall contain a description of such property,
which description may be the number of the lot and block and the name of the
map, tract, or subdivision in which such real property lies, or may be the
street and number thereof, or may be any other description by which the
property may be reasonably and readily identified. One or more lots or blocks
of land may be described in one and the same statement or notice.
('63 Code, § 4-13.04)
   (B)   In the event the person or persons owning, occupying, renting,
managing, or controlling real property in the city shall fail to remove or
destroy weeds or rubbish in accordance with the notice given pursuant to the
provisions of division (A) above within 15 days after the mailing of such
notice, it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief to mail a second notice to the
offending person or persons and notify the Director of Public Works of the
violation. In the event the condition has not been abated within 15 days after
such notification, it shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works and his
deputies, assistants, employees, contracting agents, or other representatives,
including, without limitation, members of the Fire Department of the city, to
destroy or remove such weeds or rubbish, and they, and each of them, are hereby
expressly authorized to enter upon private property for such purpose, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder, or refuse to allow them
to enter upon private property for such purpose and to destroy or remove weeds
or rubbish in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person
owning, occupying, renting, managing, leasing, or controlling real property in
the city shall have the right to destroy or remove weeds or rubbish, or have
the same destroyed or removed at his own expense, at any time prior to the
arrival of the Director of Public Works or his authorized representatives for
such purpose.
('63 Code, § 4-13.05)
(Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed 5-8-93)
§ 94.19 ACCOUNT AND REPORT OF COSTS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep an account of the costs to the city to destroy or
remove weeds, rubbish, or dirt, as provided in §
94.18(B) of this chapter, for each separate lot or parcel of land and the
portions of streets adjoining the same and shall embody such account in a
report and assessment list to the Council, which report shall be filed with the
City Clerk and a copy thereof with the Director of Finance. Such report shall
refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficient
reasonably to identify the same, together with the expense proposed to be
assessed against it.
('63 Code, § 4-13.06) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.20 NOTICE OF REPORT AND HEARING.
   The City Clerk shall post a copy of such report and assessment list on or
near the door of the Council chamber in the city hall, together with the notice
of the filing thereof and of the time and place when and where it will be
submitted to the Council for hearing and confirmation. The posting shall be for
at least five days prior to the submission of the report to the Council. The
Fire Chief shall mail to the persons, and in the manner prescribed in §
94.18(A) of this chapter, a notice substantially in the following form:
   ASSESSMENT FOR DESTRUCTION OR REMOVAL OF WEEDS AND RUBBISH AND NOTICE OF
HEARING THEREON
      NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that, pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 94 of the Eureka Municipal Code, the Director of Public Works has
destroyed or removed weeds or rubbish from the real property owned, occupied,
rented, managed, or controlled by you and from the portions of streets, alleys,
and sidewalks adjoining the same, which real property is described as follows:
      (Here insert description of real property sufficient for reasonable and
ready identification)
   The cost of said destruction or removal proposed to be assessed against said
property is $           .
   NOTICE IS FURTHER HEREBY GIVEN that on               the           day of
            , 19     at the hour of                .m. in the Council Chamber,
Second Floor, City Hall, Eureka, California, the report of the Fire Chief on
the cost of destruction or removal of weeds or rubbish and the assessment list
thereof will be presented to the City Council for consideration, correction,
and confirmation and that at said time and place any and all persons interested
in or having any objections to said report or list of proposed assessments, or
to any matter or thing contained therein, may appear and be heard. The failure
to make any objection to said report and list shall be deemed a waiver of the
same.
      Upon confirmation of said assessment by the City Council, the amount
thereof will be payable. In the event the same is not paid on or before the 1st
day of August following the aforesaid hearing, said assessment will be added to
the tax bill for said property and thereafter shall become a lien on said
property.
   Dated:            , 19    
                                                
   Fire Chief
('63 Code, § 4-13.07) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-893)
§ 94.21 HEARING AND CONFIRMATION.
   At the time and place fixed for receiving and considering the report, the
Council shall hear the same, together with any protests or objections which may
be raised by any interested person. Upon such hearing, the Council shall make
such corrections or modifications in any proposed assessment which it may deem
to be excessive or otherwise incorrect, after which such assessments shall be
confirmed by motion or resolution of the Council, and the amount thereof shall
constitute a lien on property assessed until paid. The confirmation of the
assessment by the Council shall be final and conclusive.
('63 Code, § 4-13.08) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.22 ASSESSMENT LIEN.
   (A)   Assessment to be added to tax bill. After confirmation of the
assessment, a copy shall be given to the County Assessor and Director of
Finance, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax
bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes.
('63 Code, § 4-13.09)
   (B)   Filing assessment list with county. If the County Assessor and County
Tax Collector assess property and collect taxes for the city, a certified copy
of the assessment report shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before
August 10. The description of the parcels reported shall be those used for the
same parcels on the County Assessor's map books for the current year. The
County Auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll opposite the
parcel of land.
('63 Code, § 4-13.10)
   (C)   Collection: delinquency. The amount of the assessment shall be
collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. If
delinquent, the amount shall be subject to the same penalties and procedure of
foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. If the county
assesses and collects taxes for the city, the laws relating to the levy,
collection, and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to such special
assessment taxes.
('63 Code, § 4-13.11)
   (D)   Priority of assessment lien. The lien of the assessment made pursuant
to this chapter shall have the priority of the taxes with which it is
collected.
('63 Code, § 4-13.12)
(Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed 5-8-93)
§ 94.23 PAYMENT TO DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   The Director of Finance may receive the amount due on the abatement cost and
issue receipts at any time after the confirmation of the assessment report and
until ten days before a copy is given to the County Assessor or, where a copy
is filed with the County Auditor, until August 5th following the confirmation
of the report.
('63 Code, § 4-13.13) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.24 REFUNDS.
   The Council may order refunded all or part of a tax paid pursuant to this
chapter if it finds that all or part of the tax has been erroneously levied. A
tax or part of a tax shall not be refunded unless a claim is filed with the
City Clerk on or before November 1 after the tax became due and payable. The
claim shall be verified by the person who paid the tax, or by his guardian,
executor, or administrator.
('63 Code, § 4-13.14) (Ord. 66-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 554-C.S., passed
5-8-93)
§ 94.25 FIRE CODE VIOLATIONS.
   Nothing within this chapter shall prohibit or reduce the authority of the
Fire Chief with the enforcement of the Fire Code relating to conditions as
described in §
94.17 of this code.
('63 Code, § 4-13.15) (Ord. 554-C.S., passed 5-8-93)
AIR POLLUTION
§ 94.35 AIR POLLUTION REGULATED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation, or any officer
thereof, to own or use any smokestack, chimney, flue, or stovepipe in the city
which imperils or endangers any surrounding property by fire or which annoys
the residents in the neighborhood with smoke, soot, cinders, or sparks.
   (B)   Every such person who fails or refuses to alter, abate, or improve
such smokestack, chimney, flue, or stovepipe so that the same will not endanger
surrounding property or annoy residents in the neighborhood with soot, smoke,
sparks, or cinders, after being requested so to do by the Fire Chief or any
member of the Police Department, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 4-2.01) (Ord. 208, passed - - )
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES
§ 94.45 UNDERGROUND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES.
   Chapter 4 of Division 8 of Title III of the Humboldt County Code, adopted by
Ordinance No. 1625, which Chapter 4, prescribes regulations relating to
underground storage of hazardous substances, is hereby adopted by reference as
the Underground Storage of Hazardous Substances Code of the city.
('63 Code, § 5-8.01) (Ord. 430-C.S., passed 7-4-85)
SYRINGE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS AND SAFE DISPOSAL OF SHARPS
§ 94.50 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare of
the public and of the use of the environment by providing regulation of SEPs
and for the safe disposal of sharps.
(Ord. 871-C.S., passed 3-20-18)
§ 94.51 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the "City of Eureka Regulation of Syringe
Exchange Programs and Safe Disposal of Sharps Ordinance"
(Ord. 871-C.S., passed 3-20-18)
§ 94.52 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms have the meanings given
below.
   CITY. The City of Eureka, California.
   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Eureka.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Eureka and/or his or her
designee.
   COUNTY. The County of Humboldt, California.
   DRUG:
      (1)   Mean:
         (a)   Articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia,
the official National Formulary, the official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the
United States, or any supplement to any of them;
         (b)   Articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other animals;
         (c)   Articles, other than food, intended to affect the structure or
any function of the body of humans or other animals; and
         (d)   Articles intended for use as a component of any article
specified in divisions (a), (b), or (c) of this definition.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, DRUGS does not include or
mean medical devices, their component parts or accessories.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, sole proprietorship, corporation, limited
liability company, general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
partnership, association, cooperative, or other entity of any kind or nature,
however organized.
   PROVIDER. Any person that sells or otherwise furnishes drugs or sharps to
consumers at a medical or veterinary office, clinic, hospital or approved
needle-exchange program located in the city.
   SHARPS. One or more hypodermic needles, pen needles, intravenous needles,
lancets and other devices used to penetrate the skin for drawing blood, or for
the delivery of medications or drugs.
   SHARPS CONTAINER. A rigid puncture-resistant container used in patient care
or research activities meeting the standards of and receiving approval from the
United States Food and Drug Administration as a medical device used for the
collection of discarded medical needles or other sharps.
   SYRINGE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS (SEPS). A program operating within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Eureka that provides sterile syringes,
collects used ones, or acts as a point of access to health education and care
for people who inject drugs.
(Ord. 871-C.S., passed 3-20-18)
§ 94.53 REGULATION OF SYRINGE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS (SEPs).
   Syringe Exchange Programs shall operate in conformance with Cal. Health and
Safety Code §§ 121349 through 121349.3 as part of a network of comprehensive
services to combat the spread of HIV and blood-borne hepatitis infection among
injection drug users.
   (A)   A provider interested in administering a clean needle and syringe
exchange program in the city shall notify the City Manager prior to beginning
the program and shall comply with any program rules and regulations established
by the city for administration of the program.
   (B)   A provider shall report to the City Manager, on a quarterly basis,
statistics that include but need not be limited to:
      (1)   Number of needles distributed;
      (2)   Number of needles returned/collected;
      (3)   The location of the returned/collected needles;
      (4)   The number of referrals made for other services; and
      (5)   The number of law enforcement incidents related to the SEP.
   (C)   SEPs must demonstrate a plan and implementation for injection drug
users to seek treatment for substance abuse; and provide referral for substance
abuse treatment and other preventative health care services to participants in
the program.
   (D)   SEPs are required to organize and participate in clean-ups of used
needles on a weekly basis and to report the results of such efforts quarterly.
   (E)   SEPs shall issue identification cards for employees and volunteer
workers for the program.
   (F)   SEPs are not allowed to operate within 1,000 feet of a City Park and
elementary and/or secondary school meeting all of the requirements of the
compulsory education laws of the state or a licensed day care center, except
for mobile outreach workers.
   (G)   SEPs are required to insure that sharps are disposed of at the
organizational level in conformance with OSHA standards. SEPs shall contract
with a licensed bio-waste hauling company for disposal of sharps.
   (H)   SEPs shall implement and maintain syringe collection and disposal
procedures that:
      (1)   Encourage program participants to return used syringes to the
program, and/or to dispose of them properly;
      (2)   Collect sharps waste in such a way to minimize direct handling by
program staff, volunteers and clients.
(Ord. 871-C.S., passed 3-20-18)
§ 94.54 DISPOSAL OF SHARPS.
   (A)   Home-generated sharps as well as sharps generated from individual and
group clean-ups shall be transported to a California Department of Health and
Human Services approved collection center or consolidation point in sharps
containers meeting the minimum standards of the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration. Loose disposal of sharps waste in trash or recycling containers
is prohibited.
   (B)   No provider shall dispose of their sharps in the city or county owned
or provided kiosks or sharps containers.
(Ord. 871-C.S., passed 3-20-18)
§ 94.55 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any person or provider found to be in violation of this chapter shall be
subject to its remedies including any other available remedy such as
administrative and civil fines and criminal prosecution pursuant to § 10.99 and
may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 871-C.S., passed 3-20-18)
CHAPTER 95: MUNICIPAL AIRPORT
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Title
   
95.02   Applicability
   
95.03   Responsibilities
   
95.04   Definitions
Rules and Regulations
   
95.15   Based aircraft
   
95.16   Commercial activity
   
95.17   Aircraft storage and parking
   
95.18   Hours of operation
   
95.19   Unattended aircraft
   
95.20   Maintenance
   
95.21   Equipment requirements
   
95.22   Accidents
   
95.23   Noise
   
95.24   Restricted areas
   
95.25   Animals
   
95.26   Access to runways
   
95.27   Starting engines; taxiing
   
95.28   Dumping refuse
   
95.29   Firearms
   
95.30   Traffic pattern
   
95.31   Take-offs and landings
   
95.32   Aircraft fueling and defueling
   
95.33   Vehicle operations
   
95.34   Fire hazards
   
95.35   Fuel sales
   
95.36   Illegal activities
   
95.37   Airport closure
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be referred to as the “Eureka Municipal Airport Rules and
Regulations.”
('63 Code, § 11-7.01) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
§ 95.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter applies equally to every user of the Eureka Municipal Airport.
('63 Code, § 11-7.02) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
§ 95.03 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Management. It shall be the responsibility of the Manager of Eureka
Municipal Airport to fairly and impartially administer the Eureka Municipal
Airport Rules and Regulations.
   (B)   Users. It shall be the responsibility of every user of the Airport,
pilot or other, to become familiar with the Eureka Municipal Airport rules and
regulations and to obey those rules and regulations. A copy will be maintained
current to reflect any amendments and is available at the City' Clerks Office,
City Hall. Additional copies will be provided by the Airport Manager to any
user of the Airport who requests such copy.
('63 Code, § 11-7.03) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
§ 95.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CARRIER. Any person who undertakes directly, by lease, or other
arrangement, to engage in air transportation of persons or things. They
operate, in various categories, under authority or certification by the U.S.
Civil Aeronautics Board and/or the California Public Utilities Commission.
Categories include certificated route air carriers, trunk carriers, flag
carriers, local service carriers, all-cargo carriers, helicopter carriers,
commercial air operators, air taxi operators and charter air carriers.
   AIRCRAFT. A device that is used, or intended to be used, for flight in the
air. It includes airplanes, helicopters and gliders, and lighter than air
devices such as blimps or balloons, but does not include hang gliders.
   AIRPORT. The Eureka Municipal Airport, its buildings and facilities, all
lands owned by the city contiguous to the airport, including airspace above
such land and the designated approaches thereto. Also “Airport” may be referred
to as the Eureka Airport.
   AIR TRAFFIC. Aircraft operating in the air or on an airport surface,
exclusive of loading ramps or parking areas.
   AIR TRAFFIC CLEARANCE. An authorization issued by Air Traffic Control
personnel for an aircraft to proceed under specified traffic conditions within
controlled airspace.
   AUTOROTATION. A rotorcraft flight condition in which the lifting rotor is
driven entirely by action of the air when the rotorcraft (helicopter) is in
motion.
   BALLOON. A lighter than air aircraft which is not engine driven.
   CEILING. The height above the earth's surface of the lowest layer of clouds
or obscuring phenomena, that is reported as “broken,” “overcast,” or
“obscuration,” and is not classified “thin” or “partial.”
   CITY. The City of Eureka.
   COMMERCIAL OPERATOR. Any person who, for compensation or hire, engages in
the carriage of persons, property, or mail in air commerce, or engages in other
aerial activity such as flight instruction, aerial photography, fire fighting,
agricultural aviation activities, traffic surveillance.
   COMMERCIAL USE. Use of the airport for revenue producing commercial
activities.
   FIXED BASE OPERATOR. Any person who rents, leases, or owns facilities
located on the airport, who by virtue of his specific type of aviation (or
aviation related) activity, requires the occupancy of a site with contiguous
aircraft apron and direct access to the aircraft operation area, and who
engages in a business activity providing aviation sales or services, including,
but not limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Selling and/or servicing new and used aircraft and component parts;
      (2)   Aircraft maintenance and repairs;
      (3)   Sales and/or repair of avionics;
      (4)   Aviation training (including ground or flight instructions;
      (5)   Aerial photography;
      (6)   Air ambulance service;
      (7)   Aircraft agricultural operations (cropdusting, spraying, or the
application of seed, fertilizers, pesticides, defoliants, and the like); and,
      (8)   Aircraft rental, charter, leasing.
   FLIGHT VISIBILITY. The average forward horizontal distance from the cockpit
of an aircraft in flight, at which prominent, unlighted objects may be seen and
identified by day, and prominent lighted objects may be seen and identified by
night.
   GROUND VISIBILITY. Prevailing horizontal visibility near the earth's
surface.
   HELICOPTER. A rotor driven aircraft (rotorcraft) that, for its horizontal
motion, depends primarily on its engine-driven rotors.
   IFR. Instrument flight rules covering meteorological conditions below the
minimums for flight under visual (VFR) conditions.
   MAINTENANCE. Inspection, overhaul, repair, preservation, and the replacement
of parts, but excludes preventive maintenance.
   MAXIMUM GROSS LANDING WEIGHT. The maximum landing weight stipulated for a
particular aircraft by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
   NIGHT. The time between the end of evening civil twilight and the beginning
of morning civil twilight as published in the American Air Almanac, converted
to local time.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity, and includes a trustee,
receiver, assignee, or similar representative of any of them.
   TRAFFIC PATTERN. The traffic flow that is prescribed for aircraft landing
at, or taking off from the airport.
   WORD CONSTRUCTION. The following construction applies throughout this
chapter:
      (1)   Words importing the singular include the plural;
      (2)   Words importing plural include the singular; and,
      (3)   Words importing the masculine gender include the feminine.
   VFR. Visual flight rules covering meteorological conditions, above those
requiring flight under IFR conditions.
('63 Code, § 11-7.04) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 95.15 BASED AIRCRAFT.
   Any person desiring to store or base his aircraft at the airport shall
register his aircraft at the airport office prior to beginning such storage or
operations, and at any time that a change in ownership occurs. The use of the
airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on
the part of the user to obey all of the rules and regulations herein provided.
The airport office is located in city hall, 531 “K” Street, Eureka, California.
('63 Code, § 11-7.05) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.16 COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY.
   No person shall utilize the airport for any revenue producing commercial
activities without first obtaining a permit from the Airport Manager for such
activities and paying the fees and charges established from such use. The
Airport Manager shall establish, and maintain available for examination upon
request, a schedule of fees and charges for the use of the airport and its
facilities. Any aircraft owner who fails to pay any fee duly charged for
aircraft owned or controlled by him shall have such aircraft subject to
impounding until the fees are paid, along with any impound fees, or until the
aircraft is sold for charges. Fees shall be adopted by resolution of the City
Council from time to time.
('63 Code, § 11-7.06) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.17 AIRCRAFT STORAGE AND PARKING.
   Aircraft shall only be stored or parked at places designated by the Airport
Manager and such storage or parking shall be at the sole risk of the owner or
operator of the aircraft, and without any responsibility of the airport, the
city, or any of its officers or employees, for any loss of, or damage to the
aircraft while so stored or parked. The owner or operator of the aircraft shall
be responsible for the tying down and securing of his aircraft. He shall
likewise be responsible for any liability arising from or caused by his
aircraft or his activities. Transient aircraft shall be parked in the area
designated by the Airport Manager.
('63 Code, § 11-7.07) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.18 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The airport shall be closed to vehicle traffic at all times subject to any
restrictions imposed by the Airport Manager due to inclement weather, the
condition of the landing area, the presentation of special events, construction
or repair activities, or similar causes. Those persons who own aircraft based
at the airport will be issued a key to the hanger area gate. All others will be
issued keys depending upon the approval of the scheduled special event.
('63 Code, § 11-7.08) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.19 UNATTENDED AIRCRAFT.
   No aircraft shall be left unattended on the airport unless properly secured
or within a hanger. Owners of aircraft left so unattended shall be liable for
damage to other aircraft or property resulting from the failure to adequately
secure or tie down the aircraft.
('63 Code, § 11-7.09) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.20 MAINTENANCE.
   Unless otherwise authorized by the Airport Manager, no aircraft or vehicle
maintenance (other than required to remove damaged aircraft from the runway(s)
or taxiway(s), or replacing a flat tire) shall be performed on the airport
except in areas specifically designated by the Airport Manager for that
purpose.
('63 Code, § 11-7.10) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.21 EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   No aircraft equipped with a tail-skid shall operate on any paved surface of
the airport.
('63 Code, § 11-7.11) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.22 ACCIDENTS.
   Every person involved in, or witnessing an aircraft accident on the Airport
shall report promptly the details of such accident to the Airport Manager, to
the FAA, and to local law enforcement personnel, as required by law. In
addition, the pilot or aircraft owner shall report fully to the California
Division of Aeronautics the details on any accident in which there is death or
injury, or in which damage to the property of others exceeds $400. The owner
and/or pilot of any aircraft which is damaged in an accident, or wrecked, shall
be responsible for the prompt removal of the aircraft as directed by the
Airport Manager. Where the pilot or owner is unable to arrange for removal of
such disabled or wrecked aircraft, the Airport Manager shall have the authority
to move, or arrange the removal of, the aircraft when released (if applicable)
by the FAA or the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB). No liability
shall be incurred by the Airport Manager or others for damage aggravated by, or
resulting from, such removal.
('63 Code, § 11-7.12) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
§ 95.23 NOISE.
   No person shall operate any aircraft in flight or on the ground in such a
manner as to cause unnecessary noise as determined by applicable federal or
state or local laws and regulations.
('63 Code, § 11-7.13) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.24 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No person shall enter any restricted area which is posted or closed to the
public except persons duly authorized by the Airport Manager; or law
enforcement or firefighting personnel.
('63 Code, § 11-7.14) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.25 ANIMALS.
   No person shall willfully and knowingly permit any animal owned, possessed,
or harbored by him to enter the airport unless the animal is leashed or
restricted in such manner as to be under control, or is in a shipping
container, or is otherwise under physical restraint. Nor shall he permit such
animal except a “seeing-eye” dog, to enter any airport building.
('63 Code, § 11-7.15) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.26 ACCESS TO RUNWAYS.
   No person shall enter upon any runway, or runway enclosure, of the airport,
except in an aircraft, without the express consent of the Airport Manager or
his designated representative.
('63 Code, § 11-7.16) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.27 STARTING ENGINES; TAXIING.
   (A)   No person shall start any aircraft engine on the airport:
      (1)   Unless a competent operator is at the controls; and,
      (2)   Unless the aircraft is equipped with adequate brakes fully applied
or the wheels are securely blocked with blocks or chocks that can be removed
safely; and/or,
      (3)   When the aircraft is in such a position that the propeller
slipstream or jet blast can cause damage to, or interfere with the operation
of, other aircraft, vehicles, mobile equipment, hangars, shops, other
buildings, or can cause injury to passengers, spectators, or other personnel.
('63 Code, § 11-7.17)
   (B)   No person shall taxi any aircraft into, out of, or within any hangar
or other building on or adjacent to the airport. Nor shall any person move any
aircraft under its own power on the airport unless he is in full control of
such aircraft, and has assured himself that there is no danger of collision
with other aircraft, vehicles, equipment, buildings, or other obstacles.
Aircraft shall be taxied at a safe speed, not to exceed 15 miles per hour.
('63 Code, § 11-7.18)
(Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.28 DUMPING REFUSE.
   No person shall place, deposit, or dump any garbage, cans, bottles, papers,
ashes, sewage, carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash, rubbish, debris, or
any other refuse in any location on the airport except in containers plainly
marked for such purposes which are to be provided by the aircraft owner or
special event group. These persons are responsible for their own garbage
disposal at an approved disposal site.
('63 Code, § 11-7.19) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.29 FIREARMS.
   No person shall shoot any projectile from a firearm or other device, into,
on, or across any portion of the airport, nor have in his possession, or under
his control, any firearm which is not unloaded and securely wrapped and boxed
for shipment, or explosive or explosive device; provided, however, that this
section does not apply to peace officers or military personnel who are acting
in the performance of their duties as such.
('63 Code, § 11-7.20) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.30 TRAFFIC PATTERN.
   Except where the Airport Manager has delegated authority for air traffic
control to FAA Air Traffic Control personnel, every aircraft before landing and
after takeoff shall be flown in accordance with all applicable federal and
state rules and regulations.
('63 Code, § 11-7.21) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.31 TAKE-OFFS AND LANDINGS.
   (A)   No aeronautical activity shall be conducted at the airport (or within
the airport traffic area) except in conformance with current Federal Air
Regulations, state law and regulations, and this chapter.
   (B)   All initial takeoffs shall commence at the end of the runway (unless
cleared by the Airport Manager, or by ATC if authorized by the Airport
Manager).
   (C)   Touch-and-go landings shall be permitted only after the pilot has
received approval from the Airport Manager or from FAA ATC if delegated by the
Airport Manager to approve touch-and-go landings.
   (D)   The following aircraft are restricted from operating at the airport
except in emergency situations (examples only):
      (1)   Single-engine aircraft having 500 or more horsepower.
      (2)   Jet-powered aircraft, because of minimum runway length, noise,
environmental constraints, and the like.
      (3)   Jet-powered aircraft must have prior approval of the Airport
Manager to land at the airport.
      (4)   No hot air balloons or hang gliders may operate at the Airport.
   (E)   Aircraft operations shall be permitted at the airport during daylight
hours except in bona fide emergency conditions.
('63 Code, § 11-7.22) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.32 AIRCRAFT FUELING AND DEFUELING.
   (A)   No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the aircraft engine is
running or while the aircraft is in a hangar or other enclosed space.
   (B)   No smoking shall be permitted within 50 feet of the aircraft or fuel
truck while the aircraft is being fueled or defueled.
   (C)   During fuel handling, no passenger shall be permitted in or on the
aircraft unless a cabin attendant is stationed at or near the cabin door.
   (D)   All hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in fueling or defueling
activities shall be equipped properly with a grounding device to prevent
possible static ignition of volatile liquids. Such grounding devices shall be
used during all fueling and defueling activities.
   (E)   During fuel handling activities, no person shall operate any radio
transmitter or receiver, nor switch electrical appliances on or off in such
aircraft, or in the immediate vicinity 50 feet thereof.
   (F)   Every person engaged in aircraft fuel handling shall exercise due care
to prevent the overflow or spilling of fuel.
   (G)   During fuel handling, no person shall use any material or device which
is likely to cause a static spark, within 50 feet of such aircraft or fuel
truck.
   (H)   Where there has been a fuel spill or leak, no person shall start the
engine of any aircraft in close proximity until the spill or leak has been
washed away. In event of such spills or leaks, the Airport Manager shall be
notified.
   (I)   Fuel hoses and draining or defueling equipment shall be maintained in
a safe, sound, and nonleaking condition.
('63 Code, § 11-7.23) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.33 VEHICLE OPERATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall travel on any portion of the airport except upon the
roads, walks, or places provided for the particular class of traffic, not
occupy the roads or walks in such manner as to hinder or obstruct their proper
use.
   (B)   Motor vehicle traffic shall yield the right-of-way to aircraft.
   (C)   Every vehicle operating within, in, or on the runways, taxiways, ramps
or aircraft parking or tiedown areas shall be painted, marked, or lighted as
directed by the Airport Manager, and/or shall display an orange and white,
checkered flag not less than three feet square.
   (D)   Any accident, involving a motor vehicle, which results in a fatality
or injury, or in property damage shall be reported by the driver to the Airport
Manager.
   (E)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport in excess of
20 miles per hour, except emergency vehicles responding to an emergency
situation. On passenger loading ramps, in aircraft parking lots and in areas
immediately adjacent to hangars, speed shall not exceed ten miles per hour. The
speed limit on the airport access road from highway or street shall be 25 miles
per hour.
   (F)   Vehicles shall not be parked on the airport other than in the manner
and locations indicated by posted traffic signs and markings.
   (G)   Vehicles that are to be left unattended may be parked only in
designated airport vehicle parking lots.
   (H)   Vehicles parked other than specified in (F) and (G), above may be
moved by airport personnel, and in such event a towing charge will be levied
prior to releasing the vehicle from impound. No liability for damages sustained
by such vehicles during said movement will be assumed by the city or any of its
officers or employees.
   (I)   Motor vehicles shall not be driven on or across runways or other
portions of aircraft operating areas without clearance from the Airport Manager
or from ATC to do so. Except where adequate control may be maintained by light
signals, two-way radio communications shall be required between the ATC tower
and such vehicles. Exceptions may be granted during maintenance activities as
long as two-way communications control is maintained with at least one vehicle
controlling the activity.
   (J)   Motor vehicles shall not be driven or parked upon, or within 50 feet
of aircraft parking areas, ramp areas, or aprons without express approval of
the Airport Manager. Exceptions airport maintenance or emergency vehicles, or
fuel or service vehicles.
   (K)   No person may operate a motor vehicle or aircraft in or on any portion
of the airport while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs.
('63 Code, § 11-7.24) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.34 FIRE HAZARDS.
   (A)   No person shall light or smoke any cigarette, cigar, pipe, or similar
object in the following airport areas:
      (1)   Within any hanger or fuel handling or storage areas;
      (2)   Within or upon any aircraft parking area or ramp;
      (3)   Inside any aircraft, whether or not such aircraft are parked or
stored, or within 50 feet thereof;
      (4)   Within 50 feet of any “No Smoking” sign posted.
   (B)   No person may use flammable liquids, solvents, or substances to clean
any aircraft, engine, part, or accessory thereof, within any hangar or building
except a building specifically designed for that purpose and approved in
writing by the Airport Manager. Such approval shall only be granted when the
Airport Manager approves the ventilation provisions, fire-proofing, and fire-
extinguishing equipment.
   (C)   No person shall light or use any open flame for any purpose in any
hangar or other building on the airport without the prior written consent of
the Airport Manager.
   (D)   No person shall operate any electric or gas welding or cutting
equipment anywhere on the airport without prior written approval of the Airport
Manager and the Fairhaven Fire Department whose telephone number is 707-443-
9042.
   (E)   No person shall clean or degrease any aircraft or part thereof except
at or in a maintenance station properly equipped for such purposes, or in a
space designated or authorized by the Airport Manager.
   (F)   No person shall store or stock any material or substance, or permit
such activities in or on the airport in such a manner, or of such nature, as to
constitute a fire hazard. No person shall keep, store, or discard any flammable
liquid, gas, signal flare, or other flammable material in any hangar, shop,
building, room, enclosure, or other place on the airport except in areas
specially designated by the Airport Manager for such purpose.
   (G)   Lessees of hangars, shops, or other airport areas shall provide
suitable metal receptacles with hinged lids for the storage of oily waste,
rags, and other similar rubbish. All such materials shall be removed by the
lessee at frequent intervals.
   (H)   Every lessee shall maintain his leased area clean and reasonably free
of oil, grease, waste, other flammable materials and weeds.
   (I)   Lessees shall provide, and maintain in proper working order, adequate
and readily accessible fire extinguishers. Each such extinguisher shall bear a
suitable tag which indicates the most recent date of inspection or servicing.
Extinguishers shall be approved by the Fairhaven Fire Marshall if they meet the
requirements of the Fire Marshall.
('63 Code, § 11-7.25) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.35 FUEL SALES.
   No person shall deliver aviation fuels or lubricants to, or dispense such
fuel from, at, or upon the airport without a permit from the Airport Manager.
For the right, privilege and concession of making deliveries of all types of
aviation fuels and lubricants, and other fuels, to any persons or location at
or upon the airport, other than to a central fuel service stand provided by the
airport, or to a bulk storage plant of an oil company on the airport, an
approval must be obtained from the Airport Manager. No fuel shall be stored
anywhere on the airport except in underground tanks, or other tanks as may be
approved by the Airport Manager.
('63 Code, § 11-7.26) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.36 ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Take or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments, or tools
pertaining thereto, which are owned, controlled, or operated by any other
person, while such aircraft, parts, instruments, or tools are stored or
otherwise left on the airport, or within its hangars, buildings, or facilities,
without the written consent of the owner/operator thereof, except upon
satisfactory evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the Airport
Manager, or authorized by him or so ordered by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (B)   Land, takeoff, taxi, or otherwise operate any aircraft on, at, or
from, the airport when he knows such aircraft is not operating properly, or is
equipped with any part of safety device which is defective or unsafe.
Deviations from this restriction shall only be permitted by specific
authorization from the Airport Manager or his designated representative. Nor
shall any aircraft be operated on or at the airport, or on any runway thereof,
when the airport or runway has been closed to traffic by the Airport Manager or
other legal authority, and such closure has been indicated by the placement of
an “X” at each end of the closed runway.
   (C)   Operate any aircraft (or vehicle) on, at, or in the vicinity (three
statute miles) of the airport in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of
persons of property, whether his own or that of others.
   (D)   Engage in the performance of any aerobatics, stunt, maneuver not
necessary to a normal takeoff, landing, normal turn or level light of the
aircraft, over or within one mile of the exterior boundaries of the airport.
   (E)   Engage in the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or services at or
upon the airport without first having secured from the Airport Manager a permit
therefor, and paying any required fees for such permit.
('63 Code, § 11-7.27) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.37 AIRPORT CLOSURE.
   The Airport Manager is hereby directed and authorized to close the airport,
or portions thereof, or suspend operations related to the landing, takeoff, or
taxiing of aircraft during any period in which he determines that such
operations, or their continuance, would be hazardous. Causes for such closure
could include, but would not be limited to, adverse weather conditions, runway
maintenance or repairs, runway obstacles, fire, aircraft or other accident. Any
such closure shall be effective only during such time as there is placed at
each end of each runway so closed, a letter “X”, the arms of which are at least
20 feet long and two feet wide, and so colored as to contrast with the
background or other surface. The Airport Manager shall immediately notify the
Arcata Airport Flight Service Station or local FAA facility, and issue a Notice
to Airmen (NOTAM), advising of the closure. Flight Service Station phone number
is 707-839-1545.
('63 Code, § 11-7.28) (Ord. 312-C.S., passed 6-5-79)
CHAPTER 96: PARADES AND ASSEMBLIES
Section
   
96.01   Purpose
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Permits and exemptions
   
96.04   General provisions, rules and regulations
   
96.05   Liability provisions
   
96.06   Waiver and additional requirements
   
96.07   Grounds for denial of application for a special event permit
   
96.08   Cancellation of permit for violation
   
96.09   Enforcement and penalty
   
96.10   Cumulative remedy
§ 96.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a process for permitting
events such as special events, parades, meetings, block parties, assemblies,
concerts, or other public assemblies conducted on any public way or public
property, excluding those conducted in a permanent building constructed for
that purpose.
   (B)   The city, as part of the process of permitting these events, needs to
ensure orderly and safe use of public spaces by all members of the public,
preserve public spaces in an intact and attractive condition, to regulate
competing uses of public spaces, and to ensure the safe, convenient, and
orderly flow of vehicle and foot traffic on the public ways.
(Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the words and phrases used in this chapter
are defined as follows:
   ASSEMBLY. A group of people gathered together in one place for a common
purpose.
   BLOCK PARTY. A festive gathering on a residential street requiring a closure
of a street, or a portion thereof, to vehicular traffic, and use of the street
for the festivity including barbecues, picnics, music or games.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or his/her designee.
   CONCERT. A public performance of dance, music or celebration.
   EVENT. A planned public or social occasion.
   FESTIVAL. A period or program of festive activities, cultural events, or
entertainment.
   MEETING. An assembly of people, for discussion or entertainment by chance or
arrangement.
   PARADE. A march, procession, or walk consisting of persons, animals or
vehicles, or combination thereof, on any street, sidewalk or other city-owned
land and improvements which obstructs, delays, or interferes with the normal
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws
or controls.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. A gathering that is open to all persons.
   PUBLIC FACILITY. Any facility, including, but not limited to, buildings,
property, recreation areas, and roads, which are owned, leased, or otherwise
operated, or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE. A social space that is generally open and accessible to
people. Roads (including the pavement), public squares, parks and beaches are
typically considered public space.
   PUBLIC WAY. A street, alley, or other parcel of land open to the outside air
and leading to a public street. A public way is deeded or otherwise permanently
appropriated for public use.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Shall mean but, it not limited to, an assembly, public
assembly, meeting, festival, concert, street fair, arts and craft show, parade,
carnival, block party, derby, athletic event, and any other event which occurs
on a city street, sidewalk or other city owned land and improvements which
obstructs, delays or interferes with the normal flow of pedestrian or vehicular
traffic, or does not comply with traffic laws and controls.
   STREET CLOSURE. The blockage of any public thoroughfare such as streets,
sidewalks and alleys.
(Ord. 673-C.S., passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.03 PERMITS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Permit required. Any person desiring to sponsor a special event shall
first obtain a special event permit by applying for such permit to the City
Manager if the occasion is likely to or actually does meet any of the following
criteria:   
      (1)   Include 25 or more people moving as a group or gathering together
on a public way;
      (2)   Include 25 or more people in a public space that is not a public
way;
      (3)   Require a street closure;
      (4)   Significantly impede, obstruct, impair, or interfere with the free
use of a public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other public way;
      (5)   The use of equipment in a public space consisting of but not
limited to: chairs, podium, sound equipment, tables, displays, or other
obstacles placed in the right-of-way.
      (6)   These criteria shall apply to special events not regulated by local
ordinance which is held on any city street, alley, or other public easement, on
public property, or any place other than a permanent building or enclosure
constructed for the purpose of conducting such activities.
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to: funeral
processions; students of schools going to and from classes or on walking field
trips to designated areas under the supervision of proper school authorities;
activities clearly identified as being otherwise constitutionally protected;
rental or reservation of public facilities; or, to any governmental agency
operating within the scope of its functions.
      (2)   This chapter shall also not apply to a parade, on a public
sidewalk, path, or trail, if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   If the total group consists of 25 or fewer participants:
            1.   The group complies with traffic regulations;
            2.   All participants assemble, march, or walk in groups of less
than 20, two abreast, (to create spacing between groups) and give way to others
they encounter on the public way;
            3.   The group does not obstruct traffic flow;
            4.   The group obeys all traffic regulations;
            5.   The group obeys all park regulations;
         (b)   If the group consists of between 26 and 1,000 participants all
of above requirements must be met plus:
            1.   The start times of the groups must be staggered to create
spacing; and
            2.   The start and finish locations are on private property.
(Ord. 673-C.S., passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 96.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS; RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The city shall also provide for issuance of permits for the conduct of
special events provided it is determined the applicant's program and plans
adequately provide for the following:
      (1)   The health and safety of all persons;
      (2)   Avoidance of undue disruption of persons within the affected
area;   
      (3)   The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;
      (4)   A general statement of the charter, nature or type of event to be
held;
      (5)   The name address, telephone number, and email of the person or
persons in charge of the event;
      (6)   The number of persons, spectators, and participants expected to be
involved and/or attend the event;
      (7)   Adequate permanent or temporary sanitary facilities;
      (8)   The location and availability of parking areas to serve the
anticipated number of participants;
      (9)   Access of emergency vehicles is maintained;
      (10)   All applicable permits must be obtained from county and state
agencies if food or beverages are to be served;
      (11)   Adequate coordinated and identifiable security with emphasis on
control of alcoholic beverages and prevention of illegal drug consumption.
   (B)   Rules. The city is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules
and regulations, subject to approval by the Council as a formal policy,
governing the form, time and location of special event activity set forth
within the city.
   (C)   Processing of application. Before issuing a permit for a special
event, the City Manager shall cause a review to be made by each appropriate
department regarding the application and shall have the findings set forth in
writing and attached to the permit.
   (D)   Fees. Any fees required will be reflected in the annual City Fee
Schedule adopted by resolution. Facility rental fees shall apply.
   (E)   Reimbursement for personnel. Unless otherwise specified by the City
Council, all costs of services determined by the city to be necessary and
provided by the city, including but not necessarily limited to the assignment
of police, fire, and public works personnel, necessitated by the event shall be
borne by the applicant.
(Ord. 673-C.S., passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.05    LIABILITY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of
insurance and endorsement will be required naming the City of Eureka as an
additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal
injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The City of Eureka, its
officers, employees and volunteers shall be named as "additional insureds" by
endorsement of the policy. The policy shall not be subject to cancellation or
modification until after ten days written notice to the City of Eureka. An
original copy of the certificate and endorsements will remain on file with the
city.
   (B)   Worker's Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all
applicable federal and state requirements for Worker's Compensation Insurance
for all persons operating under a permit and shall execute a waiver of its
subrogation rights against the city.
   (C)   Hold harmless agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless
agreement as provide by the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this
ordinance.
   (D)   Faithful performance bond. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the
site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance
bond or cash deposit (amount to be determined by the City Manager) at the time
application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site
by the City of Eureka the bond may be returned to the applicant if the site is
clean and has been restored to its previous condition.
(Ord. 673-C.S., passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.06 WAIVER AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Manager is authorized to waive any requirement of this chapter
deemed to be unnecessary or inappropriate and may also impose additional
requirements deemed to be necessary to carry out the purpose of the City
Council as provided in the chapter. If a permit is denied by the City Manager,
the applicant shall be advised of his right to appeal such action to the City
Council. The City Council shall review the denial of any permit under this
chapter de novo.
(Ord. 673-C.S., passed 11-18-03; Am. Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.07 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATION FOR A SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Information contained in the application, or supplemental information
requested from the applicant, is found to be false in any material detail;
   (B)   The applicant fails to complete the application form after having been
requested to do so;
   (C)   Another special event permit application has been received prior in
time, or has already been approved, to hold another event at the same time and
place requested by the applicant, or so close in time and place as to cause
undue traffic congestion, or city resources are unable to meet the needs for
both events;
   (D)   The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the event site or route;
   (E)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at the site of the
event, or the assembly and disbanding areas around an event, will prevent
proper police, fire or ambulance services to area contiguous to the event.
(Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.08 CANCELLATION OF PERMIT FOR VIOLATION.
   If an applicant violates any provision of this chapter or a permit issued
pursuant thereto, the City of Eureka may cancel the permit.
(Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.09 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   Violation of the terms and conditions of any special event permit is a
violation of § 10.99 of the Eureka Municipal Code and each violation shall
constitute a separate offense. A violation of this section is punishable as a
misdemeanor or infraction, chargeable at the City Attorney's discretion.
(Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
§ 96.10 CUMULATIVE REMEDY.
   Nothing herein is intended to limit the city from pursuing any other remedy
available at law or in equity against any person or entity maintaining,
committing, or causing a violation of this chapter or any other violation of
the code or state or federal law.
(Ord. 860-C.S., passed 9-19-17)
CHAPTER 97: SMOKING
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Prohibition of smoking in enclosed and unenclosed areas
   
97.03   Reasonable smoking distance required
   
97.04   Disclosure of nonsmoking units by landlord
   
97.05   Smoking and smoke generally
   
97.06   Other requirements and prohibitions
   
97.07   Penalties and enforcement
   
97.08   Statutory construction and severability
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings defined in this section, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise:
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
association, or other entity formed for profit-making purposes.
   COMMON AREA. Every enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence that residents of more than one Unit of that multi-unit residence are
entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls and paths, lobbies and
courtyards, elevators and stairs, community rooms and playgrounds, gym
facilities and swimming pools, parking garages and parking lots, shared
restrooms, shared laundry rooms, shared cooking areas, and shared eating areas.
   DESIGNATED SMOKING AREA. A designated area on-site at an eligible cannabis
retail facility, where customers may smoke cannabis and cannabis products.
   DESIGNATED SMOKING ROOM. A designated room within an eligible cannabis
retail facility, where customers may smoke cannabis and cannabis products.
   DINING AREA. Any area, including streets and sidewalks, which is available
to or customarily used by the general public or an employee, and which is
designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food or drink.
   ELIGIBLE BAR. A business operating lawfully that maintains an area on the
business’s property compliant with Cal. Labor Code § 6404.5 (prohibiting
smoking in places of employment) for customers in which smoking is not
prohibited by the business; and possesses a license to serve alcoholic
beverages from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control that
prohibits individuals under the age of 21 years from entering and remaining,
such as, for example, license type 48.
   ELIGIBLE CANNABIS RETAIL FACILITY. An on-site retail facility as defined in
Chapter 158.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed or retained as an independent
contractor by any employer or nonprofit entity in consideration for direct or
indirect monetary wages or profit, or any person who volunteers his or her
services for an employer or nonprofit entity.
   EMPLOYER. Any business or nonprofit entity that retains the service of one
or more employees.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area in which outside air cannot circulate freely to all
parts of the area, and includes an area that has:
      (1)   Any type of overhead cover, whether or not that cover includes
vents or other openings, and at least three walls or other vertical boundaries
of any height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings;
or
      (2)   Four walls or other vertical boundaries that exceed six feet in
height, whether or not those boundaries include vents or other openings.
   LANDLORD. Any person who owns property let for residential use, any person
who lets residential property, and any person who manages such property, except
that LANDLORD does not include a master tenant who sublets a unit as long as
the master tenant sublets only a single unit of a multi-unit residence.
   MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCE. Property containing two or more units, except the
following specifically excluded types of housing:
      (1)   A hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth in Cal.
Civil Code § 1940(b)(2);
      (2)   A mobile home park;
      (3)   A campground;
      (4)   A single-family home;
      (5)   A single-family home with a detached or attached in-law or second
unit when permitted pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65852.1, 65852.150, 65852.2
or an ordinance of the city adopted pursuant to those sections.
   NONPROFIT ENTITY. Any entity that meets the requirements of Cal.
Corporations Code § 5003 as well as any corporation, unincorporated association
or other entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational,
political, social or similar purposes, the net proceeds of which are committed
to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private
gain. A government agency is not a nonprofit entity within the meaning of this
chapter.
   NONSMOKING AREA. Any enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit
residence in which smoking is prohibited by: (1) this chapter or other law; (2)
by binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of real
property; or (3) by designation of a person with legal control over the area.
In the case of a smoking prohibition established only by private agreement or
designation and not by this chapter or other law, it shall not be a violation
of this chapter for a person to engage in smoking or to allow smoking in that
area unless: (1) the person knows that smoking is not permitted; or (2) a
reasonable person would know that smoking is not permitted.
   PERSON. Any natural person, business, cooperative association, nonprofit
entity, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity including government agencies.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the legal or de facto control of an
employer, that an employee or the general public may have cause to enter in the
normal course of the operations, regardless of the hours of operation
including, for example, indoor and outdoor work areas, construction sites,
vehicles used in employment or for business purposes, taxis, hookah bars,
retail tobacco shops, and private residences that are used as child care or
health care facilities subject to licensing requirements.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, publicly or privately owned, which is open to the
general public regardless of any fee or age requirement.
   REASONABLE DISTANCE. A distance of 30 feet in any direction from an area in
which smoking is prohibited.
   RECREATIONAL AREA. Any area that is owned or operated by the city and open
to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age
requirement. The term RECREATIONAL AREA includes but is not limited to parks,
picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens,
hiking trails, bike paths, horseback riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and
ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks, and amusement parks.
   SERVICE AREA. Any publicly or privately-owned area, including streets and
sidewalks, that is designed to be used or is regularly used by one or more
persons to receive a service, wait to receive a service or to make a
transaction, whether or not such service or transaction includes the exchange
of money. The term SERVICE AREA includes but is not limited to information
kiosks, automatic teller machines (ATMs), ticket lines, bus stops or shelters,
mobile vendor lines or cab stands.
   SMOKE. The gases, particles, or vapors released into the air as a result of
combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual
purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human
inhalation of the by-products, except when the combusting or vaporizing
material contains no tobacco or nicotine and the purpose of inhalation is
solely olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense. The term SMOKE
includes, but is not limited to, tobacco smoke, electronic cigarette vapors,
marijuana smoke, and crack cocaine smoke.
   SMOKING. Engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as, for example:
possessing a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, an operating electronic
cigarette, a lighted cigar, or a lighted cigarette of any kind; or lighting or
igniting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, or a cigarette of any kind.
   UNENCLOSED AREA. Any area that is not an enclosed area.
   UNIT. A personal dwelling space, even where lacking cooking facilities or
private plumbing facilities, and includes any associated exclusive-use enclosed
area or unenclosed area, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck,
or patio. UNIT includes but is not limited to an apartment; a condominium; a
townhouse; a room in a long-term health care facility, assisted living
facility, or hospital; a hotel or motel room; a room in a single room occupancy
("SRO") facility; a room in a homeless shelter; a mobile home; a camper vehicle
or tent; a single-family home; and an in-law or second unit.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10; Am. Ord. 760-C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord.
884-C.S., passed 4-16-19)
§ 97.02 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN ENCLOSED AND UNENCLOSED AREAS.
   (A)   Smoking is prohibited in the enclosed areas of the following places
within the city, except in places listed in division (C) below, and except
places where smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law, in which
case those laws apply:
      (1)   Places of employment;
      (2)   Public places;
      (3)   Common areas.
   (B)   Smoking is prohibited in the unenclosed areas of the following places
within the city, except places where smoking is already prohibited by state or
federal law, in which case those laws apply:
      (1)   Recreational areas;
      (2)   Service areas;
      (3)   Dining areas;
      (4)   Places of employment;
      (5)   Common areas, provided that a person with legal control over a
common area may designate a portion of the unenclosed area of the common area
as a designated smoking area if the area meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   The area must be located a reasonable distance from any
nonsmoking area. A person with legal control over a common area in which a
designated smoking area has been designated shall modify, relocate or eliminate
that designated smoking area so as to maintain compliance with the requirements
of this division as laws change, as binding agreements are created, and as
nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are established.
         (b)   The area must not include, and must be a reasonable distance
from, unenclosed areas primarily used by children and unenclosed areas with
improvements that facilitate physical activity including, for example,
playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, and school campuses;
         (c)   The area must be no more than 10% of the total unenclosed area
of the multi-unit residence for which it is designated;
         (d)   The area must have a clearly marked perimeter;
         (e)   The area must be identified by conspicuous signs;
         (f)   The area must be completely within an unenclosed area; and
         (g)   The area must not overlap with any enclosed or unenclosed area
in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other provisions of
this code, state law, or federal law;
      (6)    All exclusive-use unenclosed areas associated with a unit, such
as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio;
      (7)   On and within 100 feet of the Eureka Boardwalk, which is located
from the foot of "C" to the foot of "G" Streets, the Old Town Gazebo Plaza, and
Clark Plaza, located at the corner of 3rd and E Street; and
      (8)   Other public places, when being used for a public event, including
a farmers' market, parade, craft fair, festival, Arts Alive, or any other event
which may be attended by the general public.
      (9)   Smoking is permitted in the area of an eligible bar that is
compliant with Cal. Labor Code § 6404.5 (prohibiting smoking in places of
employment).
   (C)   Unless otherwise prohibited by law, smoking is permitted in the
following enclosed areas:
      (1)   Areas as designated by and in accordance with Cal. Labor Code §
6404.5; and
      (2)   Eligible cannabis retail facilities with a designated smoking room
or designated smoking area.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person, employer, or nonprofit
entity with legal control over any property from prohibiting smoking on any
part of such property, even if smoking is not otherwise prohibited in that
area.
   (E)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall engage in an ongoing
educational program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of
this chapter, as well as providing guidance to persons, landlords, employers,
and nonprofit entities about compliance. However, lack of such education shall
not be a defense to a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10; Am. Ord. 760-C.S., passed 12-7-10; Am. Ord.
884-C.S., passed 4-16-19) Penalty, see §
97.07
§ 97.03 REASONABLE SMOKING DISTANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Smoking in all unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a
reasonable distance from any doorway, window, opening, crack, or vent into an
enclosed area in which smoking is prohibited, except while actively passing on
the way to another destination and provided smoke does not enter any enclosed
area in which smoking is prohibited.
   (B)   Smoking in unenclosed areas shall be prohibited within a reasonable
distance from any unenclosed areas in which smoking is prohibited under §
97.02, except while actively passing on the way to another destination, and
provided smoke does not enter any unenclosed area in which smoking is
prohibited.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10) Penalty, see §
97.07
§ 97.04 DISCLOSURE OF NONSMOKING UNITS BY LANDLORD.
   A landlord of a multi-unit residence with less than 100% nonsmoking units
shall provide to every prospective tenant, prior to entering into a new lease
or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit, a diagram depicting the
location of the designated nonsmoking units in relation to all other units and
any designated smoking areas.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10) Penalty, see §
97.07
§ 97.05 SMOKING AND SMOKE GENERALLY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter are restrictive only and establish no
new rights for a person who engages in smoking. Notwithstanding (i) any
provision of this chapter or other provisions of this code, (ii) any failure by
any person to restrict smoking under this chapter, or (iii) any explicit or
implicit provision of this code that allows smoking in any place, nothing in
this code shall be interpreted to limit any person's legal rights under other
laws with regard to smoking, including, for example, rights in nuisance,
trespass, property damage, and personal injury or other legal or equitable
principles.
   (B)   For all purposes within the jurisdiction of the city, non-consensual
exposure to smoke is a nuisance, and the uninvited presence of smoke on
property is a nuisance and a trespass.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10)
§ 97.06 OTHER REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person, landlord, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly
permit smoking in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of the
person, landlord, employer or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is
prohibited by law, unless otherwise required by state or federal law.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A) of this section, a person, landlord,
employer, or nonprofit entity has not acted knowingly or intentionally in
violation of division (A) of this section if he, she, or it has taken the
following reasonable steps to prevent smoking in an area which is under the
legal or de facto control of the person, landlord, employer, or nonprofit
entity:
      (1)   Posted clear and prominent "No Smoking" or "Smokefree" signs as
required by division (E) of this section, below;
      (2)   Removed all ash receptacles, such as, for example, ash trays or ash
cans, as required by division (C) of this section, below; and
      (3)   Requested that an individual refrain from smoking who is smoking in
violation of this chapter and in an area which is under the legal or de facto
control of the person, landlord, employer or nonprofit entity.
   (C)   No person, landlord, employer, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or
intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for
example, ash trays or ash cans, within an area under the legal or de facto
control of the person, landlord, employer or nonprofit entity and in which
smoking is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a
reasonable distance required by this chapter from any area in which smoking is
prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in
violation of this division (C) shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
   (D)   No person shall dispose of used smoking or tobacco product waste
within the boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited, including
inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance required by this chapter.
   (E)   A person, landlord, employer, or nonprofit entity that has legal or de
facto control of an enclosed or unenclosed area in which smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall post a clear, conspicuous and unambiguous "No Smoking" or
"Smokefree" sign at each point of ingress to the area, and in at least one
other conspicuous point within the area. The signs shall have letters of no
less than one inch in height and shall include the international "No Smoking"
symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette
enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it). Signs posted on the
exterior of buildings to comply with this section shall include the reasonable
distance requirement set forth in §
97.03. At least one sign with Humboldt County Department of Health and Human
Services, Public Health Branch's phone number [268-2132] where complaints can
be directed must be conspicuously posted in each place in which smoking is
prohibited. For purposes of this section, the City Manager or his or her
designee shall be responsible for the posting of signs in regulated facilities
owned or leased in whole or in part by the city. Notwithstanding this
provision, the presence or absence of signs shall not be a defense to a charge
of smoking in violation of any other provision of this chapter.
   (F)   No person, landlord, employer, or nonprofit entity shall intimidate,
threaten any reprisal, or effect any reprisal, for the purpose of retaliating
against another person who seeks to attain compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Each instance of smoking in violation of this chapter shall constitute
a separate violation. For violations other than for smoking, each day of a
continuing violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10) Penalty, see §
97.07
§ 97.07 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   (B)   Each incident of smoking in violation of this chapter is an infraction
subject to a $100 fine or otherwise punishable pursuant to §
10.99 of this code. Other violations of this chapter may, in the discretion of
the City Prosecutor, be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the
interests of justice so require. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the
responsibility of the Chief of Police. In addition, any peace officer or code
enforcement official also may enforce this chapter.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter are also subject to a civil action brought
by the city, punishable by a civil fine not less than $250 and not exceeding
$1,000 per violation.
   (D)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of
any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this
chapter.
   (E)   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (F)   In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other
law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by
the City Attorney, including, but not limited to, administrative or judicial
nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings,
and suits for injunctive relief.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided, enforcement of this chapter is at the
sole discretion of the city. Nothing in this chapter shall create a right of
action in any person against the city or its agents to compel public
enforcement of this chapter against private parties.
   (H)   Any person acting for the interests of itself, its members, or the
general public may bring a civil action to enjoin a violation of this chapter
by a landlord, employer, business, or nonprofit entity or to enjoin repeat
violations of this chapter by an individual.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10)
§ 97.08 STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
   It is the intent of the City Council to supplement applicable state and
federal law and not to duplicate or contradict such law, and this chapter shall
be construed consistently with that intention. If any section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter, or its
application to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid
or unenforceable, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect the
validity or enforceability of the remaining sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this chapter, or its
application to any other person or circumstance. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, subdivision,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase hereof independently, irrespective of the
fact that any one or more other sections, subsections, subdivisions,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared invalid or
unenforceable.
(Ord. 753-C.S., passed 7-20-10)
CHAPTER 98: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Concrete mixing on streets regulated
   
98.02   Grading and paving streets having railroad tracks
   
98.03   Trimming tree limbs required
Sidewalks, Driveways and Curbs
   
98.30   Lines and grades
   
98.31   Public improvements for new buildings or structures; guarantee of
installation
   
98.32   Public improvements required for existing buildings or structures
   
98.33   Standards for improvements
   
98.34   Waivers
   
98.35   Sidewalk maintenance
Sidewalk and Curb Improvement Proceedings
   
98.45   Findings and declarations
   
98.46   Purpose
   
98.47   Inapplicability of special assessment act
   
98.48   Power of Council
   
98.49   Resolution of intention
   
98.50   Posting and mailing of notices; contents
   
98.51   Filings in office of City Clerk
   
98.52   Filing of protests
   
98.53   Hearing
   
98.54   Changing proposed work
   
98.55   Resolution ordering work to be done
   
98.56   Notice to construct; service and posting
   
98.57   Construction by Director of Public Works
Street Plantings
   
98.70   Statement of policy
   
98.701   Purpose and intent
   
98.71   Definitions
   
98.72   Street planting plan
   
98.73   Rules and regulations
   
98.731   Property owner maintenance responsibility
   
98.74   Permit required; application
   
98.75   Acts prohibited
   
98.76   Appeals
Banners
   
98.90   Definitions
   
98.91   Permits required; application
   
98.92   Permit regulations
Cross-reference:
   Riding bicycles on sidewalks, see
§ 73.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 CONCRETE MIXING ON STREETS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix any concrete or plaster on any
paved street in the city unless such mixing shall be done in a box or other
container or device which will effectively prevent the concrete or plaster from
coming into contract with the paving material on the streets.
('63 Code, § 7-3.101) (Ord. 1008, passed - - )
§ 98.02 GRADING AND PAVING STREETS HAVING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)   The Council, being of the opinion and having in its judgment decided
that the method of construction provided for in this section is necessary,
hereby declares and specifies that whenever any railroad tracks of any
description exist upon any street in the city which the Council has ordered to
be graded and paved with a wearing surface laid on a concrete or other base,
the resolution ordering such work, unless the Council shall by resolution have
declared to the contrary, shall be deemed to constitute a requirement that the
person having such railroad tracks shall improve the portions of the street
used by such tracks between the rails and for two feet on each side thereof and
between the tracks, if there are more than one, with improvements similar in
all respects to, with the same materials, under the same specifications and
superintendence, and to the like inspection and satisfaction as the rest of the
streets are graded and paved, subject to the following additions which the
Council has adjusted and determined to be necessary:
   The person having such railroad tracks shall excavate the roadbed of such
railroad tracks to a depth not less than six inches of gravel ballast, which
gravel ballast shall be thoroughly tamped or rolled to an elevation even with
the bottom of the ties, and shall place concrete between and to the full depth
of the ties used in such railroad tracks, which concrete shall be of the
mixture set forth in the specifications for such work. The concrete shall be
brought solidly under the base of the rails and elsewhere shall be brought to a
true finish.
('63 Code, § 7-3.201)
   (B)   The rails used on such railroad tracks shall be of the girder, groove,
or T rail type, not less than 4½ inches in height, and shall be securely
fastened to railroad ties, which ties shall not be less than six inches by
eight inches and eight feet long. The ties shall be made of sound wood and laid
not more than 24 inches apart, center to center. The top of the rails of the
tracks shall conform to the official grade of the street in which they are
laid. All of such work shall be done under the supervision and to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works.
('63 Code, § 7-3.202)
(Ord. 793, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 824, passed - - )
§ 98.03 TRIMMING TREE LIMBS REQUIRED.
   It shall be the duty of the owner or person in charge of the land upon or in
front of which any tree grows with boughs extending over any portion of any
street of the city to trim such tree so that there shall be a space of at least
ten feet between the lowest limb thereof and the street. If such person
neglects, after five days' notice by the Street Superintendent, to trim such
tree, he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 7-3.301) (Ord. 207, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAYS AND CURBS
§ 98.30 LINES AND GRADES.
   (A)   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRADE. The official street grade adopted by the Council and any grade
established or approved by the Director of Public Works.
   LINE. The line of any public improvement established by any official map,
plat, deed, or recorded map.
('63 Code, § 7-2.101)
   (B)   The Director of Public Works may establish and stake the lines and
grades for any public improvements required by the provisions of this chapter.
The Director of Public Works shall establish and stake the lines and grades for
any public improvements required to be constructed by the provisions of this
chapter in conjunction with single-family residential construction. A fee
schedule may be adopted by resolution of the Council establishing fees to
defray the cost of establishing and staking such lines and grades.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works may require that plans be prepared by a
registered civil engineer showing the lines and grades of the public
improvements required to be constructed by this chapter in conjunction with any
construction other than single-family residential construction. When such plans
are required, no building permit shall be issued until the plans are approved
by the Director of Public Works.
('63 Code, § 7-2.102)
(Ord. 228-C.S., passed 6-21-74; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 98.31 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS FOR NEW BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES; GUARANTEE OF
INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any person who
constructs, or causes to be constructed, any building or structure in the city
shall construct or reconstruct curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveway approaches,
pavement, and necessary drainage facilities along all street frontages
adjoining the property upon which such building or structure is constructed.
   (B)   Pavement improvements shall include:
      (1)   Half-width paving, where such improvements exist, but do not
conform to the prevailing standards of the city as determined by the Director
of Public Works.
      (2)   Paving necessary to establish safe traffic corridors where such
improvements do not exist.
      (3)   Full width alley paving (excepting R-3 and M-1 occupancies, as
defined in the Uniform Building Code).
   (C)   The improvements in this section shall not be required when such
improvements already exist to the then prevailing standards of the city, which
are in good repair and which are in such condition that they will not endanger
persons or property or interfere with the public convenience in their use.
('63 Code, § 7-2.103)
   (D)   No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or
structure and no permanent utility connections shall be made unless the public
improvements required by this subchapter shall have been constructed and such
construction finally accepted by the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative.
('63 Code, § 7-2.104)
(Ord. 228-C.S., passed 6-21-74; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82; Am. Ord.
528-C.S., passed 6-20-91)
§ 98.32 PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, any person who
enlarges or alters any building or structure, which said improvements performed
within any one year period has an aggregate value in excess of $11,000, shall
construct or reconstruct to city standards curbs, gutters, sidewalks and
driveway approaches along all street and alley frontages adjoining the property
upon which such building or structure is situated, unless such public
improvements already exist to the then prevailing standards of the city, which
are in good repair and which are in such condition that they will not endanger
persons or property or interfere with the public convenience in their use.
   (B)   No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any such
enlargement or alteration of any building or structure unless the public
improvements required by this subchapter shall have been constructed and such
construction finally accepted by the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative. If occupancy of any such enlargement or alteration of any
building or structure occurs prior to issuance of any occupancy permit by the
Building Official, said occupancy shall be referred to the City Attorney by the
Director of Public Works for abatement. Repair of buildings damaged by fire,
flood, or acts of God shall be exempt from this section unless in addition to
repair or damage, improvements or alterations valued in excess of $11,000 are
made to the structure.
('63 Code, § 7-2.105) (Ord. 228-C.S., passed 6-21-74; Am. Ord. 351-C.S., passed
10-6-81; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82; Am. Ord. 528-C.S., passed 6-20-91)
§ 98.33 STANDARDS FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   The design and construction of all public improvements required by this
subchapter shall conform with such standards as have been or may be adopted by
resolution of the Council.
('63 Code, § 7-2.107) (Ord. 228-C.S., passed 6-21-74)
§ 98.34 WAIVERS.
   (A)   The requirements of this subchapter may be waived by the Director of
Public Works in whole or in part upon the finding that the street or streets in
which the required public improvements would otherwise be constructed vary
sufficiently from adopted official grades that it would not be reasonable to
require such construction.
('63 Code, § 7-2.108)
   (B)   The Council may by resolution designate areas of the city in which the
provisions of this subchapter are inapplicable upon a finding that, due to the
nature of the existing development of the area, such public improvements would
not be feasible or consistent therewith. The Council may waive the requirements
of this subchapter in whole or in part upon a finding that the requirements are
unjust or unreasonable in a particular instance. In making such determination,
the Council shall consider the use proposed for the property and the
relationship between the cost of the required public improvements and the value
of the improved parcel.
('63 Code, § 7-2.109)
(Ord. 228-C.S., passed 6-21-74; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 98.35 SIDEWALK MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any person owning real property in the city shall repair any defective
sidewalk or gutter lying in front of or along the side of his property.
('63 Code, § 7-2.301)
   (B)   Any owner or tenant of real property in the city shall report to the
Director of Public Works in writing the fact that a defective sidewalk exists
in front of or along the side of the property owned or occupied by him.
('63 Code, § 7-2.302)
   (C)   The City Manager, through the proper departments, shall enforce this
section.
('63 Code, § 7-2.303)
   (D)   If, in consequence of any sidewalk being defective and in condition to
endanger persons passing thereon, any person, while exercising ordinary care to
avoid the danger, who suffers damage to his person or property through any
defect of a sidewalk may have recourse for damages thus suffered against the
person failing to repair such defect or the person failing to report the
defect.
('63 Code, § 7-2.304)
   (E)   In the event that the defect is caused by a tree root, the Director of
Public Works shall have power and authority to cut such root or to give
permission to cut the same.
('63 Code, § 7-2.305)
   (F)   It is not the intent of any of the provisions of this subchapter to
change the procedure concerning sidewalk repairs set forth in the Improvement
Act of 1911, but to provide alternative and supplementary procedure.
('63 Code, § 7-2.306)
(Ord. 357-C.S., passed 1-5-82; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
SIDEWALK AND CURB IMPROVEMENT PROCEEDINGS
§ 98.45 FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
   The Council finds and declares as follows:
   (A)   That the lack of improved sidewalks in the city in many instances
forces pedestrians, particularly school children, to walk in the streets and to
be subjected to the hazards of vehicular traffic;
   (B)   That the lack of sidewalks during rainy weather has caused unhealthy
conditions resulting from pedestrians walking through mud or water along
streets or dirt sidewalks;
   (C)   That the lack of improved curbs and gutters in the city permits poor
drainage and the accumulation of puddles of water and filth, impedes the
operation of street sweepers, fire trucks, and police cars, and subjects
children and pedestrians in the normal sidewalk area to accidental injury and
the hazards of vehicular traffic; and,
   (D)   That the lack of adequate improved curbs and sidewalks is dangerous to
the public health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
('63 Code, § 7-2.201) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.46 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter constitutes a separate and alternative procedure for the
construction of sidewalks and curbs in the city.
('63 Code, § 7-2.202) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.47 INAPPLICABILITY OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACT.
   The “Special Assessment, Investigation, Limitation, and Majority Protest Act
of 1931” shall not apply to proceedings taken pursuant to the provisions of
this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 7-2.203) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.48 POWER OF COUNCIL.
   The Council may, in a manner provided in this subchapter, order the
construction of a sidewalk or curb, or both, in front of that portion of any
parcel of private property abutting upon any public street or place in the
city.
('63 Code, § 7-2.204) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.49 RESOLUTION OF INTENTION.
   (A)   Before adopting any resolution ordering the construction of a sidewalk
or curb, or both, in front of that portion of any parcel of private property
abutting upon any public street or place, and if it appears that the public
convenience, necessity, health, safety, and welfare require such construction
and that proceedings should be taken therefor, a resolution of intention shall
be effective and adopted describing the work of improvement proposed to be
ordered and the private property in front of which the improvement proposed to
be ordered is to be constructed by giving its lot and block number according to
the official city or assessment map, or in such other manner as to reasonably
describe such property. The resolution shall also set a time and place when and
where any person interested, owning, or having an interest in the real property
in front of which the improvement proposed to be ordered is to be constructed
may file written objections and appear and show cause, if any they have, why
the Council should not find and determine that the public convenience,
necessity, health, safety, and welfare require the proposed improvement and why
the proposed improvement should not be carried out. The time of hearing shall
be not less than ten days nor more than 30 days from the date of the passage of
the resolution. Any number of parcels of private property may be included in
one resolution.
('63 Code, § 7-2.205)
   (B)   The City Clerk shall cause the resolution of intention to be published
once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and printed in the city,
not less than five days prior to the date of the public hearing stated in the
resolution.
('63 Code, § 7-2.206)
(Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.50 POSTING AND MAILING OF NOTICES; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Posting. After the adoption of the resolution of intention, the
Director of Public Works shall cause to be conspicuously posted on or in front
of the property in front of which a sidewalk or curb, or both, shall be
constructed notice of the passage of the resolution of intention. The Director
of Public Works shall post one notice to each separately owned parcel of
property of not over 50 feet frontage or not more than two notices to any such
parcel of 100 foot frontage or less, or notices at not more than 100 feet apart
if the frontage of such parcel is greater than ten feet. In every case all
posting shall be completed at least five days before the day set for the
hearing.
('63 Code, § 7-2.207)
   (B)   Mailing. The Director of Public Works shall give notice by mail of the
adoption of the resolution of intention. In every case all mailing shall be
fully completed at least five days before the day set for the hearing. Such
notices shall be sent by regular mail, deposited in any United States mail box,
addressed to the owner of each lot or parcel of real property as such ownership
is known to the Director of Public Works unless the Director of Public Works
has been requested by such owner, in writing, to mail the notice to another
address or addressee. Failure to mail such notice or failure of the owner of
the property to receive the same shall not be held to invalidate the
proceedings in any manner or affect the validity of any assessment levied
thereunder.
('63 Code, § 7-2.208)
   (C)   Form and contents. The notices shall be headed “Notice of Hearing -
Sidewalk and Curb Improvement Proceedings” in letters not less than one inch in
height and shall in legible characters state the fact of the passage of the
resolution of intention, its date, and, briefly, the work proposed, and refer
to the resolution of intention for further particulars. The notices shall also
contain a statement of the day, hour, and place when and where any and all
persons interested, owning, or having an interest in real property in front of
which the improvement proposed to be ordered is to be constructed may appear
before the Council and show cause why the proposed work should not be carried
out in accordance with the resolution of intention.
('63 Code, § 7-2.209)
(Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 98.51 FILINGS IN OFFICE OF CITY CLERK.
   Affidavits or declarations of publication, posting, and mailing shall be
filed in the office of the City Clerk.
('63 Code, § 7-2.210) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.52 FILING OF PROTESTS.
   At any time not later than the hour set for hearing protests and objections
to the proposed work, any owner of property liable to be assessed for the work
may make a written protest against the proposed improvements. Such protest
shall be in writing and contain a description of the property, sufficient to
identify the same, in which each signer thereof is interested and shall be
delivered to the City Clerk. No other protests or objections shall be
considered. Any objections or protests not made at the time and in the manner
provided in this article shall be deemed waived voluntarily. Proceedings
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall not be attacked after the
conclusion of the hearing upon any ground not stated in an objection or protest
filed pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 7-2.211) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.53 HEARING.
   At the time set for hearing protests, the Council shall proceed to hear and
pass upon all protests so made as required by §
98.52 of this subchapter and its decision shall be final and conclusive. The
Council may adjourn the hearings from time to time. Any such protest may be
withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the
conclusion of such protest hearing or any such adjournment thereof. If protests
are made against the proposed work, no further proceedings shall be taken for a
period of six months from the date of decision of the Council on the hearing
unless the Council, by no less than a four-fifths vote of all members thereof,
shall overrule such protests and find and determine that the public convenience
and necessity require such improvements.
('63 Code, § 7-2.212) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.54 CHANGING PROPOSED WORK.
   The Council may, at the conclusion of the hearing, by resolution, make
changes in the work proposed to be done as it shall find to be proper and
advisable and shall define and establish the work proposed to be done.
('63 Code, § 7-2.213) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66)
§ 98.55 RESOLUTION ORDERING WORK TO BE DONE.
   If no protests or objections in writing have been delivered to the City
Clerk up to the hour set for the hearing thereon, or if protests have been
found by the Council to be insufficient or have been overruled, the Council
shall immediately thereupon acquire jurisdiction to order the proposed work to
be done and may pass a resolution ordering such work and direct the Director of
Public Works to cause the same to be done in accordance with the provisions of
this code and the City Charter.
('63 Code, § 7-2.214) (Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
§ 98.56 NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT; SERVICE AND POSTING.
   (A)   Immediately after the adoption of the resolution ordering the work to
be done, the Director of Public Works shall notify the owner or person in
possession of the property described in the resolution of the adoption of the
resolution and shall give notice to construct or cause to be constructed a
sidewalk or curb, or both, in front of such property. The notice shall
particularly specify what work is required to be done, how it is to be done,
and what materials shall be used in the construction and shall further specify
that if the construction is not commenced within 15 days, or such other period,
not in excess of 60 days, as the Director of Public Works shall specify, after
notice is given and diligently and without interruption prosecuted to
completion, the Director of Public Works will cause the construction to be
done, and the cost of the same shall be a lien on the property.
('63 Code, § 7-2.215)
   (B)   The notice to construct may be given by delivering a written notice
personally to the owner, or to the person in possession of the property
described in the resolution ordering the work to be done, or by mailing a
postcard, postage prepaid, to the person in possession of such property, or to
the owner thereof at his last known address as the same appears of record on
the last equalized assessment rolls of the city, or to the name and address of
the person owning such property as shown in the records of the office of the
Director of Public Works. Immediately upon mailing the notice to construct, the
Director of Public Works shall cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less
than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on
the property.
('63 Code, § 7-2.216)
(Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 98.57 CONSTRUCTION BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   If the construction is not commenced and prosecuted to completion with
due diligence, as required by the notice to construct, the Director of Public
Works shall forthwith construct the sidewalks or curbs, or both, as specified
in the resolution ordering the work to be done.
('63 Code, § 7-2.217)
   (B)   Upon completion of the construction, the Director of Public Works
shall give notice of the costs of the construction in the manner specified in §
98.56 of this subchapter for giving the notice to construct, which notice shall
specify the day, hour, and place when and where the Council will hear and pass
upon a report by the Director of Public Works of the costs of the construction,
together with any objections or protests, if any, which may be raised by any
property owner liable to be assessed for the costs of such construction and any
other interested persons. In no case shall the hearing provided for in this
section be sooner than ten days after giving the notice.
   (C)   The costs of construction may include a proportionate share, as
determined by the Council, of the costs of improvements constructed in a place
other than in front of a parcel of property which improvements in such other
place are required for the proper functioning of the improvements in front of
the parcel.
('63 Code, § 7-2.218)
   (D)   Upon completion of the construction, the Director of Public Works
shall prepare and file with the Council a report specifying the work which has
been done, the costs of construction, including incidental expenses, a
description of the real property in front of which the work has been done, and
the assessment against each lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay
the costs thereof. Any such report may include work done in front of any number
of parcels of property, whether contiguous to each other or not.
   (E)   The term “incidental expenses” shall include administrative overhead,
the costs of printing and advertising as provided for in this subchapter, the
compensation of the person appointed by the Director of Public Works to take
charge of and superintend any of the work authorized by this subchapter, the
cost of surveys, if any, the expenses of making the assessment and of preparing
and typing the resolutions, notices, and other papers and proceedings for such
work, and any expenses incidental to the construction, completion, and
inspection of the work.
('63 Code, § 7-2.219)
   (F)   Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the Council shall hear
and pass upon the report of the Director of Public Works, together with any
objections or protests which may be raised by any of the property owners liable
to be assessed for such construction and any other interested persons.
Thereupon, the Council may make such revisions, corrections, or modifications
in the report as it may deem just after which, by motion or resolution, the
report as submitted, or as revised, corrected, or modified, shall be confirmed.
The Council may adjourn the hearings from time to time. The decision of the
Council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and
conclusive.
('63 Code, § 7-2.220)
   (G)   The costs of construction may be assessed by the Council against the
parcel of property fronting upon the sidewalks or curbs so constructed, and
such costs so assessed, if not paid within five days after confirmation by the
Council, shall constitute a special assessment against that parcel of property
and shall be a lien, which lien shall continue until the assessment, and all
interest thereon, is paid, or until it is discharged of record.
('63 Code, § 7-2.221)
   (H)   The Director of Public Works may file in the office of the County
Recorder a certificate substantially in the following form:
   CITY OF EUREKA NOTICE OF LIEN
   Sidewalk Construction
      Pursuant to the authority vested in me by §§
98.45 through
98.57 of the Eureka Municipal Code, I did on the         day of
                     , 19   , cause the sidewalk or curb to be constructed, and
the Council of the City of Eureka did, on the        day of                ,
19   , by Resolution No.      , assess the cost of such construction upon the
real property hereinafter described, and the same has not been paid, or any
part thereof, and the City of Eureka does hereby claim a lien on said real
property in the sum of                           ($ ) Dollars, and the same
shall be a lien upon said real property until the said sum, with interest at
the rate of 7% per annum, from the said           day of                    ,
19   , has been paid in full and discharged of record.
   The real property hereinbefore mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is
that certain piece or parcel of land lying and being in the City of Eureka,
County of Humboldt, State of California, and particularly described as follows:
   (Description of property)
   Said property is reportedly owned by:
   Dated: This         day of                   , 19   ,
                           
                  Director of Public Works
                  City of Eureka
('63 Code, § 7-2.222)
   (I)   From and after the date of the recording of the notice of lien, all
persons shall have been deemed to have had notice of the contents thereof. If
any such lien is not paid, the city may file and maintain an action to
foreclose such lien in the time and manner as shall be prescribed by law. No
such lien shall be extinguished until the amount thereof is paid in full or
until it is discharged of record. Notwithstanding any provisions of law
providing for the extinguishment of such liens by lapse of time, no building,
electrical, or plumbing permit shall be issued and no variance from the
provisions of the zoning regulations of the city shall be granted with respect
to any property which shall have been the subject of a lien under the
provisions of this article until the amount of any such lien shall have been
paid in full.
('63 Code, § 7-2.223)
(Ord. 67-C.S., passed 1-21-66; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
STREET PLANTINGS
§ 98.70 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is recognized that, generally, provisions for the planting of trees
and other growth in that portion of the public streets not used for vehicular
traffic promote the public interest and general welfare, but, in so doing, due
consideration must be given to pedestrian and vehicle safety and to the
possibility of interference with the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic and interference with surface, subsurface, and overhead public and
utility improvements and facilities.
   (B)   It shall be the policy of the city to foster, encourage, and authorize
the planting of trees and other growth in that portion of the public streets
and ways not used for vehicular traffic provided such planting is made in
accordance with an approved street planting plan and where it appears that such
planting will not unreasonably interfere with the rights of the public in the
adjacent public street, or unreasonably interfere with vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, or unreasonably interfere with surface, subsurface, or overhead public
and utility improvements and facilities.
('63 Code, § 7-4.01) (Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62; Am. Ord. 723-C.S., passed 3-
18-08)
§ 98.701 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The City recognizes substantial economic, environmental and aesthetic
importance of trees and plantings within the community and public streets
acknowledging that:
   (A)   Tree-lined streets help to make a city safer and more livable by:
calming and slowing traffic; making it safer for children to walk and bicycle
to school; welcoming pedestrians and bicyclists and encouraging healthful
exercise; reducing noise levels in neighborhoods; fostering community pride and
ownership, which have been shown to reduce crime; and
   (B)   Tree-lined streets contribute to a prosperous and robust local economy
by increasing residential property values; improving the attractiveness of
business districts; enticing outside businesses and industries seeking to
relocate; making the city more inviting to residents and tourists; and
   (C)   Tree-lined streets help to increase a city's tax base by making the
city more attractive to potential homeowners and businesses; and
   (D)   Tree-lined streets contribute to a healthier environment by enticing
people to live in the city closer to their jobs; thereby, saving time and
energy required for commuting by helping to slow global warming; and
   (E)   Trees must be carefully chosen and placed in order to avoid
potentially adverse effects on buildings, solar access, sidewalks and
automobiles; and
   (F)   It shall be the City's policy to utilize applicable techniques,
methods and procedures to preserve, whenever feasible, all trees and plantings
on City property; to facilitate continued planned replacement and future
planting by the City and adjacent property owners; facilitate the permit
process for new street plantings; and to establish maintenance responsibility
for all street plantings.
(Ord. 723-C.S., passed 3-18-08)
§ 98.71 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY STREET PLANTING. Any plant, tree, shrub or growth in a public street
planted and maintained by or at the behest of the city and included in the
inventory of city street planting and shown on the Street Planting map.
   MAINTENANCE or MAINTAIN. In reference to plants, trees, shrubs, or other
growth, shall mean watering, clipping, pruning, fertilizing, spraying and
treating for disease or injury, and any other similar acts which promote the
health, growth, or beauty of such plants, trees, shrubs, or other growth.
   PLANT or PLANTING. The placing or setting of any street plant material into
the ground or into any tub, raised painting box, or any other container placed
or resting on the ground within a public street.
   PROPERTY OWNER STREET PLANTING. Any plant, tree, shrub or growth in a public
street planted and maintained by the adjacent property owner and not included
in the inventory of city street planting and shown on the Street Planting map.
   PUBLIC STREET. Every way set apart for public travel in the city, including
the entire sidewalk area, pedestrian paths and walkways, and public planting
easements.
('63 Code, § 7-4.02) (Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62; Am. Ord. 723-C.S., passed 3-
18-08)
§ 98.72 STREET PLANTING PLAN.
   (A)   The Department of Public Works shall develop and establish a street
planting plan for the public streets of the city. Such plan may include a
planting program and shall include the methods of planting and the types,
varieties, locations, and spacing of plants, trees, shrubs, and other growth to
be planted on any public street or any portion thereof. Such plan shall also
include a map which shall graphically portray the street planting plan and be
subject to the approval of the Council.
('63 Code, § 7-4.03)
   (B)   The Director of the Public Works Department shall:
      (1)   Control the planting and maintenance of street plantings in
accordance with the provisions of the street planting plan and this subchapter;
      (2)   Encourage the planting and maintenance of street plantings by the
owners of property abutting upon public streets and, in this connection, advise
and consult with such owners for the purpose of developing and establishing
street planting plans and street planting programs for public streets or
portions thereof; and,
      (3)   Develop street planting programs for the city, or portions thereof,
which programs shall include the planting and maintenance of street planting
with public funds.
('63 Code, § 7-4.04)
(Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 98.73 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director of the Public Works Department is hereby authorized to issue
rules and regulations prescribing and defining the types, species, planting
methods, maintenance, and removal of street plantings, which rules and
regulations, and any amendments thereto, shall be subject to approval by the
Council. Such rules and regulations, and amendments thereto, when approved by
the Council by resolution and filed with the City Clerk, shall constitute
enforceable provisions of this chapter, and violations thereof shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of this code.
('63 Code, § 7-4.05) (Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-
19-82; Am. Ord. 723- C.S., passed 3-18-08)
§ 98.731 PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to
properly maintain street plantings, which are not defined as city street
plantings, in a safe and healthy manner, including but not limited to:
watering, clipping, pruning, fertilizing, spraying, treating for disease or
injury, and any other similar acts which promote the health, growth or beauty
of such plants, trees, shrubs or other growth.
   (B)   A property owner who fails to maintain street plantings adjoining
their property may be liable for any injury or damage suffered by a member of
the public which is caused by said failure.
   (C)   No street tree shall be removed or replaced without first obtaining
all permits required by §
98.74.
(Ord. 723-C.S., passed 3-18-08)
§ 98.74 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, maintain, or remove any
street planting in any public street without first securing a written permit to
do so from the Director of the Public Works Department; provided, however, no
permit shall be granted by the Director of the Public Works Department
authorizing the removal of any street planting without the prior approval of
the City Manager; and provided, further, the Director of Public Works, with the
approval of the City Manager, may order the removal of any street planting
found to unreasonably interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to
unreasonably interfere with surface, subsurface, or overhead public and utility
improvements and facilities, or which is hazardous to vehicular or pedestrian
traffic. The Director of the Public Works Department may revoke any permit if
it shall appear that the planting is not in accordance with the provisions of
the permit.
('63 Code, § 7-4.06)
   (B)   Any person desiring to plant, maintain, or remove any street planting
shall file a written application therefor with the Director of the Public Works
Department, which application shall set forth the reasons therefor and such
other information as the Director of the Public Works Department may require.
('63 Code, § 7-4.07)
(Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-19-82)
§ 98.75 ACTS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, or mutilate any
street planting or street planting tub, planting box, or any other similar
container in which street planting is planted, or to attach or place any rope,
wire, sign, poster, or handbill or any other thing to or on any street
planting, street planting tub, planting box, or any other similar container in
which street planting is planted, or to cause or permit any wire charged with
electricity to come in contact with any such street planting.
('63 Code, § 7-4.08) (Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62)
§ 98.76 APPEALS.
   Any person excepting to any denial, suspension, or revocation by the
Director of the Public Works Department of a permit applied for or held by him
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal to the Council in
accordance with the procedures prescribed by the provisions of §§
39.01 through
39.03 of this code.
('63 Code, § 7-4.09) (Ord. 2908, passed 4-17-62; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed 10-
19-82)
BANNERS
§ 98.90 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANNER. Any cloth or bunting attached to poles or otherwise suspended in,
the air for the purpose of calling public attention to a place or event.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the city.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, institution, or governmental agency.
   STREET. Any right-of-way or easement for street, road, alley, highway, lane,
court, or other public access purposes to which title is vested in the city.
('63 Code, § 7-5.01) (Ord. 222-C.S., passed 12-21-73; Am. Ord. 375-C.S., passed
10-19-82)
§ 98.91 PERMITS REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or install a banner
extending over, along, or across any street without first obtaining a permit
therefor, or to maintain the same without such permit or in violation of the
terms or conditions of such permit.
   (B)   Such permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Works only upon
a written application therefor. Application forms shall be furnished by the
city which shall specify the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The location, dimensions, and purpose of the proposed banner;
      (3)   A facsimile of the proposed banner, including any legend or written
matter;
      (4)   The proposed date and time when the banner is proposed to be
erected or installed and removed; and,
      (5)   Such other information as the Director of Public Works may require.
('63 Code, § 7-5.03) (Ord. 222-C.S., passed 12-21-73; Am. Ord. 432-C.S., passed
7-4-85)
§ 98.92 PERMIT REGULATIONS.
   The following regulations shall be applicable to permits issued pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Permits shall be issued only to civic organizations or public agencies
for the purpose of bringing to the attention of the public events which are of
a general public interest, such as parades, fairs and community celebrations.
No permit shall be issued to further political, or commercial events.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for a period in excess of 40 days.
   (C)   An applicant shall submit proof of public liability and property
damage insurance to the Director of Public Works in an amount not less than
$100,000 for any one person killed or injured, and $250,000 total liability for
any one accident, and an amount not less than $50,000 for property damage.
   (D)   The permittee shall remove the banner for which a permit has been
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and restore the street to its
condition prior to the erection or installation of the banner upon the
expiration of the permit. If any permittee fails to remove the banner so
erected or installed or fails to restore the street to its original condition
upon the expiration of the permit therefor, the Director of Public Works shall
have the right to perform the work and to collect from the permittee the cost
thereof.
('63 Code, § 7-5.04) (Ord. 222-C.S., passed 12-21-73; Am. Ord. 432-C.S., passed
7-4-85)
CHAPTER 99: TRAINS AND RAILROADS
Section
   
99.01   Permit required for uses within discontinued railway right-of-way
   
99.02   Acceptance of application
§ 99.01 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR USES WITHIN DISCONTINUED RAILWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of any ordinance to the contrary, no person
shall erect any building, structure, or obstruction, or establish any use on
property within any railway right-of-way where railway service has been
abandoned or discontinued within two years after such abandonment or such
discontinuance of service, or within six years after the effective date of this
chapter, whichever is later, without a permit, license or certificate of
occupancy authorized by the City Council in accordance with this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-11.01) (Ord. 505-C.S., passed 11-4-89)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 99.02 ACCEPTANCE OF APPLICATION.
   No applications for the issuance of a permit, license or certificate of
occupancy for the use of property within any railway right-of-way shall be
accepted until such application has been referred to the City Planning
Commission. The Commission shall submit to the City Council a report and
recommendation containing a finding as to whether the particular property or
portion thereof is needed as a right-of-way for transportation or the movement
of traffic and whether the size, location and accessibility is such that it can
be used without conflict with the zoning regulations. The City Council may
authorize the issuance of such permit, license or certificate of occupancy if
it finds that such proposed use conforms to the one in which the right-of-way
is classified as provided for in
Chapter 155 of the Eureka Municipal Code, that the particular right-of-way is
not needed for transportation or for the movement of traffic, and that such
proposed use would not be contrary to the public interest and would not be
hazardous to the public health, safety and general welfare.
('63 Code, § 3-11.02) (Ord. 505-C.S., passed 11-4-89)
CHAPTER 100: HARBOR REGULATIONS
Section
   
100.01   Definitions
   
100.02   [Reserved]
   
100.03   Enforcement authority; duties of Harbor Master
   
100.04   Liability of owners
   
100.05   Berthing assignment permits
   
100.06   Moorage rates
   
100.07   Receipts
   
100.08   Tampering with or boarding vessels; unauthorized persons
   
100.09   Minors in harbor
   
100.10   Use of vessels as residence
   
100.11   Refuse
   
100.12   Wharves, floats and piers
   
100.13   Dangerous or sunken vessels; obstructions; abandoned or stray vessels;
vessels in distress
   
100.14   Vessel speed
   
100.15   Solicitation, advertising and signs
   
100.16   Emergency power
   
100.17   Compliance with rules and regulations; violations
   
100.18   Berthing regulations
   
100.19   Parking and vehicle regulations
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VESSEL. Any vessel moored at the Small Boat Basin or other city-
owned dock facility in excess of 72 hours without a valid berthing assignment.
   BERTH. A place assigned by the city to tie a vessel.
   BERTH FOOT. The ideal length of vessel which can occupy a designated slip.
   BERTHING ASSIGNMENT PERMIT. Shall give the assignee the right to use of the
wharf area or berth described in the assignment for three months.
   BOAT TRAILER. Any movable cradle structure or device on wheels used for
moving boats into or out of the water or for the storage of boats thereon.
   FLOAT. Any floating platform normally used for the mooring or securing of
vessels.
   HARBOR. The Small Craft Harbor and/or any other waterfront facility or
tidelands under the management or control of the city.
   HARBOR MASTER. The Director of Community Services or a designated
representative.
   MOORING. Any weight, chain, rope, floating objects, structure or appliance
used alone or together for the purpose of holding a vessel in a particular
place and which is not carried on board such vessel as regular equipment when
underway.
   MOTORBOAT. Any vessel whose primary means of propulsion is by internal
combustion, electric or mechanical engine either inboard or outboard.
   PIER. A structure built out into the water with piles for use as a landing
place.
   SAILING CRAFT. Any vessel whose primary means of propulsion is by sail.
   SLIP. A vessel's berth along side a float.
   TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT. The right to the interim use of the wharf area or
berth described in the assignment by any vessel requesting use of the
facilities for less than three months.
   VESSELS. Includes water craft of any type or any kind by whatsoever means,
propelled, if propelled at all, every structure designed to be adapted to be or
capable of being navigated or operated on water from place to place for the
transportation of merchandise, persons or any other purposes.
   WHARF AREA. Pier, wharf, bulkhead, bulkhead wharf, quay wharf, seawall,
seawall structure, embankment, thoroughfare, and other port terminal facility
areas along side of which vessels may lie or which are suitable for and are to
be used in the loading and unloading, assembling, distribution and handling of
merchandise.
   WHARFINGER. The manager of the Small Craft Harbor.
('63 Code, § 11-1.201) (Ord. 2413, passed 2-17-48; Am. Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-
19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
§ 100.02 [RESERVED]
§ 100.03 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY; DUTIES OF HARBOR MASTER.
   The Harbor Master, the Police Department, or their designated representative
shall have authority to enforce all lawful regulations affecting the city
harbor. It shall be the duty of the Harbor Master to:
   (A)   Carry out the orders of the City Council and to enforce all
regulations and laws of the city and state laws affecting the waters in the
Eureka Harbor area.
   (B)   Assign moorings or berths to vessels within designated areas.
   (C)   Order any vessel improperly moored or berthed to change its position
to one as he shall designate and in the event his orders are not complied with
to cause such vessel to be moved and to collect the cost thereof from such
vessel or owner thereof.
   (D)   Report promptly to the proper authorities any violation of the laws of
the United States for the protection of navigation and the preservation of
navigable waters or any violation of the state or local laws or regulations.
('63 Code, § 11-1.202) (Ord. 2413, passed 2-17-48; Am. Ord. 2416, passed 3-16-
48; Am. Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
§ 100.04 LIABILITY OF OWNERS.
   (A)   Any person using the facilities within the confines of the harbor
shall assume all risk of damage or loss to his property and the city assumes no
risk on account of fire, theft, act of God or damages of any kind to vessels
within the harbor.
   (B)   Removal, relocation or storage of vessels as provided in this chapter
shall be without liability to the city or its agents.
('63 Code, § 11-1.301) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S.,
passed 3-18-81)
§ 100.05 BERTHING ASSIGNMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   No person (including the owner, master, operator or person in
possession of a vessel) shall moor a vessel at or in the facilities of this
harbor, excluding tidelands under lease, without having first secured a
berthing assignment permit or temporary assignment from the Wharfinger in the
form and manner provided therefor.
   (B)   Upon expiration of the berthing assignment permit, unless extended or
renewed, the berthing assignment permit and all rights thereunder automatically
terminate. No berthing assignment permit shall be renewed if the holder thereof
is in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or any other fully enacted
ordinance or regulation of the city. No berthing assignment permit shall be
renewed until all fees and charges due and payable shall have been paid in
full.
   (C)   A berthing assignment shall authorize the holder thereof to use the
moorage facilities for moorage purposes only and grants no further rights,
privileges or uses. Additional or varying uses shall not be allowed except as
provided in the ordinances and regulations of the city.
   (D)   Berthing assignment permits are not transferable. Sale or transfer of
a vessel covered by a berthing assignment permit transfers no rights or
privileges inhering in the berthing assignment permit nor guarantees the
issuance of a new berthing assignment permit.
   (E)   Berthing assignment permits shall be issued only with respect to a
named individual and shall be valid only in respect to that individual.
   (F)   Moorage spaces may be reassigned at the discretion of the Harbor
Master if an orderly administration of the harbor so requires. Holder of a
berthing assignment permit may apply for reassignment; however, reassignment is
not a right or privilege inherent in the berthing assignment permit.
   (G)   Vessels to which berthing assignment permits apply may be temporarily
assigned or reassigned to other berths and spaces under the control of the
Harbor Master to accommodate repairs, improvements, maintenance, construction,
emergencies or when necessary in order to permit maximum efficient public
utilization of the harbor facilities.
   (H)   Moorage space designated by a berthing assignment permit may not be
sublet.
   (I)   Any berthing assignment permit or temporary berthing assignment permit
may be revoked immediately by the Harbor Master if the holder thereof violates
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city applicable
thereto. In addition, the Harbor Master may revoke a berthing assignment permit
for a deliberate misstatement or willful failure to disclose any material fact
in an application for the permit.
   (J)   A berthing assignment permit may be canceled by the holder thereof
upon 30 days written notice to the Harbor Master.
   (K)   As a condition to the issuance of a berthing assignment permit, the
holder thereof shall at all times keep the Harbor Master informed of his
current mailing address, telephone number, legal owner's address, and insurance
company of record. The holder shall also notify the Harbor Master immediately
upon any change of ownership of the vessel to which his berthing assignment
permit applies, and shall further notify the Harbor Master immediately upon
vacating the mooring spaces assigned to the vessel. Failure to keep the Harbor
Master informed as to the holder's current mailing address, telephone number,
legal owner's address, and insurance company of record shall be grounds for
revocation of the berthing assignment permit.
   (L)   Upon notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the holder
of a berthing assignment permit that the berthing assignment permit has been
revoked pursuant to this chapter, and after the expiration of 11 days from the
date when said notice was deposited in the mail, the Harbor Master may remove
any vessel or other personal property left by the holder upon the city's
properties and dispose of the same in such fashion as the city may deem proper.
('63 Code, § 11-1.302) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S.,
passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.06 MOORAGE RATES.
   (A)   Moorage rates and charges for berthing assignment permit or temporary
berthing assignment permit shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   All moorage fees and other charges are payable within 30 days of
billing.
   (C)   Failure to pay moorage fees and other charges or failure to pay
charges within 30 days from the date billed shall be a violation of this
chapter. A late penalty charge of $25 shall be due and payable if an account
remains due and unpaid for 30 days after billing. Past due accounts, in
addition to the late penalty charge, should have interest accrued at 1.5% per
month.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver by
the city of any rights and privileges granted by this chapter nor as a waiver
of any right which the city may have against the vessel or the holder of any
berthing assignment permit therefor under this chapter.
('63 Code, § 11-1.303) (Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81; Am. Ord. 388-C.S.,
passed 9-20-83)
§ 100.07 RECEIPTS.
   The Wharfinger shall utilize, prepare and sign all receipts in accordance
with the manner as prescribed by the Director of Finance. All fees required by
this subchapter shall be deposited in the Humboldt Bay Fund of the city at
times and intervals as specified by the Director of Finance. The Wharfinger
shall be subject to further rules and regulations as may be provided by the
Council by resolution or motion.
('63 Code, § 11-1.304) (Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81; Am. Ord. 388-C.S.,
passed 9-20-83)
§ 100.08 TAMPERING WITH OR BOARDING VESSELS; UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to willfully injure, break, remove or tamper with
any part of any vessel in the harbor, any waterway or maritime facility, or to
climb into or upon any vessel without the consent of the owner unless in the
performance of official duties or to protect life and/or property.
('63 Code, § 11-1.305)
   (B)   During the hours the Small Boat Basin is secured, it shall be unlawful
for unauthorized persons to be beyond the locked gate except as a guest or
employee of a berth holder or as permitted by the Harbor Master.
('63 Code, § 11-1.306)
(Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.09 MINORS IN HARBOR.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to go, remain,
or be upon any of the gangways, floats or vessels in the Small Boat Basin
unless such person is accompanied by an adult, or unless such person has the
written permission of the owner of any vessel located at the Small Craft Harbor
to go upon such vessel, or unless such person has permission of the Wharfinger.
('63 Code, § 11-1.307) (Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.10 USE OF VESSELS AS RESIDENCE.
   No vessel moored or berthed within the harbor shall be used as a place of
residence except as expressly authorized by the Harbor Master for the purpose
of harbor security or during period of inclement weather. For the purpose of
this regulation any vessel used as an overnight accommodation in excess of two
nights in any seven-day period shall be considered a residence.
('63 Code, § 11-1.308) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S.,
passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.11 REFUSE.
   (A)   No person shall throw, discharge or deposit from any vessel or from
the shore or float or in any other manner any refuse matter of any kind
whatsoever into or upon the water of the harbor or on or upon the banks, walls,
sidewalks, or beaches or any waters within the boundaries of the harbor.
   (B)   No person shall dump or discharge oil, spirits, inflammable liquid or
contaminated bilge water into the harbor. All garbage must be deposited in
receptacles furnished by the city or removed from the harbor.
   (C)   No person on board any vessel moored in the harbor shall use the
sanitary facilities, “toilet, sinks, and the like” on board such vessel unless
it is equipped with a Marine Sanitary Device or other approved device for
sewage disposal that is in proper working order.
   (D)   No persons shall place or leave dead animals, fish, shell fish, bait,
or other petrifying matter on or along seawalls, harbor structures, floats,
piers, sidewalks, or beach areas of the harbor, or throw or deposit such
material in the waters of such area.
   (E)   Pets shall not be allowed to commit any nuisance within the harbor.
Dogs shall not be allowed on any dock or on the harbor grounds except while on
leash.
('63 Code, § 11-1.309) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S.,
passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.12 WHARVES, FLOATS AND PIERS.
   No person shall, without a berthing assignment, permit or tidelands lease
issued by the city, build, construct, erect, extend or locate within or upon or
over the waters of the harbor any float, pier, landing wharf, open pile
structure, or device or structure of whatsoever kind or nature.
('63 Code, § 11-1.310) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S.,
passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.13 DANGEROUS OR SUNKEN VESSELS; OBSTRUCTIONS; ABANDONED OR STRAY VESSELS;
VESSELS IN DISTRESS.
   (A)   Whenever a vessel is sunk, accidentally or otherwise, in the harbor,
it shall be the duty of the owner of such vessel to mark it immediately by a
buoy or beacon by day and by a lantern or light by night and to maintain such
markings until the sunken vessel or obstruction is removed. The neglect or
failure of such owner to do so shall be unlawful. The owner of such sunken
vessel shall immediately commence removal of said vessel and prosecute the
removal diligently to completion.
   (B)   Whenever the navigation of any waters within the harbor shall be
obstructed or in danger by any sunken vessel or other obstruction and the
removal thereof is not diligently persecuted as required, the vessel or
obstruction shall be subject to removal, sale or other disposition by the city
and subject to the provisions of the Cal. Harb. & Nav. Code. The owner or
owners of such vessel or property causing such obstruction or damage shall be
liable to the city of all costs incident to said removal and disposition and
shall further be liable to any person who may be damaged as proximate cause of
said sunken vessel or other obstruction. Neither the city, nor its employees,
agents or officers shall be liable for damages of any nature whatsoever arising
out of or in any way connected with the removal, sale or disposition of such
sunken vessel or other property.
   (C)   Abandoned vessels and/or other personal property shall be disposed of
in accordance with the provisions of the Cal. Harb. & Nav. Code. Notice of
intent to sell and of sale shall be given by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the holder of the berthing assignment permit as to such vessel or
personal property, and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
the county for one time, no more than ten nor less than four days prior to
sale. Proceeds of the sale shall be first applied to the costs of sale,
thereafter to the obligations owed to the city, and any balance to the holder
of the berthing assignment.
('63 Code, § 11-1.311)
   (D)   All stray or abandoned vessels not in a lawful position or control of
some person shall be immediately delivered to the possession of the Harbor
Master. The registered owner, prior to receiving possession and custody of such
property, shall pay all reasonable expenses incurred in connection therewith,
including charges for raising, keeping and storing same.
   (E)   Any vessel of any nature moored, secured or in any manner placed
within the confines of the Harbor or the shore or in the water for in excess of
72 hours without first obtaining a license permit or required permission
therefore shall be considered to have been abandoned.
   (F)   All nondocumented vessels of any nature abandoned within the confines
of the harbor, whether registered with the California Department of Motor
Vehicles, or not marked or registered in any apparent manner, shall be placed
in the protective custody of the Harbor Master and shall thereafter be subject
to a lien sale under the provision of Cal. Harb. & Nav. Code, §§ 500 through
505.
   (G)   If in the opinion of the Harbor Master a boat or vessel is in danger
of sinking due to the accumulation of water, he may pump out water from the
vessel and the cost of this emergency service shall be charged to the owner of
the vessel or berth holder.
('63 Code, § 11-1.312)
(Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.14 VESSEL SPEED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a vessel at a speed that
generates a noticeable wake within the Eureka Inner Reach. "Inner Reach" means
the waterway along the Eureka Mainland between the southern section of the
Samoa Bridge and the westernmost extension of the Eureka Public Marina to Day
marker #19.
   (B)   Additionally, it is unlawful for any person to operate a vessel at a
speed that generates a noticeable wake within the area of the Residences on
Tuluwat Island, Latitude 40 48 28.8N/Longitude 124 10 19.4W to the Eureka Inner
Reach to Latitude to 40 48' 38.86N/ 124 10'02.14W to Woodley Island.
   (C)   The map below, titled "No Wake Zone Humboldt Bay”, illustrates the
area in which this regulation is applicable
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8678.png]
 
(Ord. 924-C.S., passed 9-7-21) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.15 SOLICITATION, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.
   (A)   Solicitation of patronage within the harbor is prohibited unless
licensed by the city.
   (B)   No person shall post signs of any kind or description on piles,
gangplanks or floats within the harbor without receiving prior approval from
the Harbor Master.
('63 Code, § 11-1.314) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S.,
passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.16 EMERGENCY POWER.
   Whenever any boat is in danger of being damaged or damaging other boats of
any harbor facility, the Harbor Master shall be empowered to take such action
as is in his discretion necessary for the protection of any property of the
city or its berthing assignment permittees. The Harbor Master shall make a
charge for any such services to the boat owner and such amount shall become due
and payable in the same manner and subject to the same regulations as berthing
or rental fees.
('63 Code, § 11-1.315) (Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-1-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed
3-18-81)
§ 100.17 COMPLIANCE WITH RULES AND REGULATIONS; VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   All persons using the harbor shall comply with all the rules and
regulations, adopted by the United States of America, State of California,
local agencies, with regard to water safety requirements, operation and
maintenance of boats. The Harbor Master is authorized to enforce all said rules
and regulations and to deny the use of the facilities at said harbor for
violation of said rules and regulations.
('63 Code, § 11-1.316)
   (B)   An applicant for berth assignment agrees by his signature on the
berthing assignment permit form to comply with these rules and regulations.
   (C)   The Harbor Master shall have the right to deny the use of the harbor
and cancel the berth assignment and require removal of any boat at the owner's
expense, who, in the opinion of the Harbor Master, fails to comply with the
rules and regulations for the operation of the Eureka Small Craft Harbor and
this chapter.
('63 Code, § 11-1.317)
(Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
§ 100.18 BERTHING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Berth assignment. Berth assignments shall be made from a chronological
waiting list. A vacant berth assignment will be offered first to that person
highest on the list for that size berth assignment and then, if refused, in
sequence to those next on the list. Acceptance of a berth assignment must be
indicated within five days of notification by payment of rent and deposits, and
execution of a berthing assignment permit and indemnity agreement, and a
statement of ownership and registration. A permittee must occupy this berth
assignment with the boat owned and currently registered or documented to him
within ten days from the date of assignment. A “leave of absence” may be
granted for periods exceeding seven months which will relieve the boater from
rent obligations and entitle the permittee to the first available berthing
assignment at the end of such “leave of absence.” Leaves of absence are not
intended to facilitate substantial regular berthing at other harbors. No
permittee may transfer his berthing assignment. Should he not desire to retain
the berth assignment for his own use, it shall be available for reassignment.
No permittee shall sublet or subrent his berth assignment to another person.
The Harbor Master shall have the authority to move or relocate in the harbor
any boat berthed therein. Such changes may be required for the safety and
protection of personal property or as indicated, in order to obtain optimum
utilization of facilities available. The Harbor Master may, when deemed
necessary, permit vessels to use unoccupied moorings or berths for temporary
assignment of guest or transient vessels. No benefit shall accrue to the
permittee on account of fees collected for temporary assignments.
('63 Code, § 11-1.401)
   (B)   Safe mooring. All vessels will be required to furnish fenders or
fender material as approved by the Harbor Master. The use of tires or similar
materials for fenders is expressly prohibited.
('63 Code, § 11-1.402)
   (C)   Making fast to moored vessels. No person shall make fast to or tie any
vessel to a vessel already occupying a mooring or berth without the approval of
the master of that vessel and a berthing assignment permit from the Harbor
Master.
('63 Code, § 11-1.403)
   (D)   Obstruction of wharves, floats and piers.
      (1)   City owned piers, floats, gangways and docks shall be kept clear at
all times of any miscellaneous gear, debris, material, or other hazardous
obstructions except as permitted by tidelands lease.
      (2)   Any condition aboard or around any boat, float or gangplank caused
by the berth holder which in the opinion of the Harbor Master constitutes a
fire hazard, health menace, danger to the public safety, or aesthetic
distraction shall be corrected or removed immediately to the satisfaction of
the Harbor Master. In addition to other remedies, in the event of the refusal
or the neglect of the owner or the permittee to remedy forthwith the
aforementioned conditions when reported to him, the Harbor Master shall remove
the cause of the complaint at the sole expense of the owner and cancel the
berth assignment of such owner or permittee.
      (3)   No person shall build or place in, on or about the Harbor any
structures such as steps, walkways, gangplanks, finger floats, rubbing piles,
dock boxes, or the like, without prior written approval of the Harbor Master.
Dock wheels or telephone cleats that are permanently added to harbor docks
shall become the property of the city.
('63 Code, § 11-1.404)
   (E)   Maintenance of boat in berth.
      (1)   Boat maintenance work in berths shall be limited to that ordinarily
required to keep a vessel seaworthy and in good condition. Berth renters shall
not conduct any major reconstruction work that would tend to make a boat
unseaworthy or unsightly. No such work shall be undertaken except as may be
provided in a site authorized for such work. Berth renters performing
maintenance shall not obstruct piers and access with tools and equipment. If
berth renter uses portions of piers and floats for rigging and maintenance
work, such space must be left in a neat, clean and orderly condition.
      (2)   No spray painting or disc sanding will be permitted in the harbor
except leased tidelands without the written approval of the Harbor Master.
      (3)   Whenever it is necessary to perform work on board a vessel
involving use of welding or burning equipment, the Harbor Master shall be
advised of the nature and extent of the work, the workmen or company doing the
job, and the date and time the work will be done. The workmen or company doing
the welding or burning must furnish a current gas free certificate. This
notification shall be given prior to starting the work and wherever practical
at least one day before the work is to be performed.
('63 Code, § 11-1.405)
   (F)   Use of water and electricity. Reasonable use of municipal water and
electricity is included in the harbor service charge as adopted by resolution
of the City Council. Any excessive use of water or electricity may be subject
to individual metering and direct charge to the permittee.
('63 Code, § 11-1.406)
   (G)   Registration or documentation. All vessels required to be either U.S.
documented or registered by the state must remain currently documented or
registered to retain a berth assignment.
('63 Code, § 11-1.407)
(Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.19 PARKING AND VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Authority. The following regulations are adopted pursuant to Cal. Veh.
Code, § 21113 and shall apply to the Small Boat Basin parking area.
('63 Code, § 11-1.501)
   (B)   Obstructing traffic. No vehicle shall be parked so as to obstruct the
road, driveway, gate or other public access.
('63 Code, § 11-1.502)
   (C)   Bicycles and motorcycles. Bicycles and motorcycles and motor driven
cycles are subject to all requirements of this section and shall not be
permitted on any pier or float.
('63 Code, § 11-1.503)
   (D)   Overnight parking of vehicles. No overnight parking of vehicles of any
type shall be permitted except under the provisions of a permit issued by the
Harbor Master. The Harbor Master may issue a parking permit for vehicles listed
on the permit statement up to a maximum of two vehicles for each permittee.
('63 Code, § 11-1.504)
   (E)   Dry storage of trailers and/or trailered boats. Designated areas of
land may be used for storage of boat trailers or trailered boats as approved by
the Harbor Master, upon payment of fees as designated by resolution of the City
Council. Storage of these vehicles shall be prohibited except in areas
designated for such use by the city and after issuance of a permit by the
Harbor Master.
('63 Code, § 11-1.505)
(Ord. 311-C.S., passed 6-19-79; Am. Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
Penalty, see § 100.99
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000. Each day any
person is in violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable as
provided herein.
('63 Code, § 11-1.601) (Ord. 336-C.S., passed 3-18-81)
CHAPTER 101: FILMING
Section
   
101.01   Definitions
   
101.02   Permits
   
101.03   Rules and regulations
   
101.04   Liability provisions
   
101.05   Violations
§ 101.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the words and phrases used in this chapter
are defined as follows:
   CHARITABLE FILMS. Commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes, or
still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under
Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No
person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and
production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, or photos.
   MOTION PICTURE, TELEVISION, STILL PHOTOGRAPHY. Shall mean and include all
activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures,
television shows or programs, and commercials.
   NEWS MEDIA. The filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous,
unplanned television news broadcast by reporters, photographers or
camerapersons.
(Ord. 670-C.S., passed 7-2-03)
§ 101.02 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall use any public or private property,
facility or residence for the purpose of taking commercial motion pictures or
television pictures or commercial still photography without first applying for
and receiving a permit for the City of Eureka.
   (B)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or
affect:
      (1)   News media: reporters, photographers or camerapersons in the employ
of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot print
media, publishing or broadcasting or any other person concerning those persons,
scenes or occurrences which are in the news and of general public interest.
      (2)   Family video: personal or professional filming, videotaping of
motion pictures, and still photography solely for private-family use, including
family images that are produced by a hired professional.
      (3)   Charitable films: projects that qualify under Section 501(C)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
      (4)   Studio filming: filming activities (motion or still photography)
conducted at a studio.
      (5)   Eureka business license holders:
         (a)   Local commercials (video or still photography) produced entirely
on private property, so long as the equipment, personnel and subject connected
with the commercials do not interfere in any way with the public right-of-way
or impact neighboring private property.
         (b)   Still photographers, who are photographing in a public area, and
who do not encroach upon the public right-of-way with equipment or personnel.
(Ord. 670-C.S., passed 7-2-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 101.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Change of date. Upon the request of the applicant, the City Manager
shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for
which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied
with in respect to time and location.
   (B)   Rules. The city is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules
and regulations, subject to approval by resolution of the Council, governing
the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the city. The
city shall also provide for issuance of permits. The rules and regulations
shall be based upon the following criteria:
      (1)   The health and safety of all persons;
      (2)   Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected
area;
      (3)   The inclusive hours and dates such activity will transpire;
      (4)   A general statement of the charter or nature of the proposed
filming activity;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons in
charge of such filming activity;
      (6)   The exact number of personnel to be involved;
      (7)   Use of any animals or pyrotechnics; and
      (8)   The exact amount/type of vehicles/equipment to be involved.
   (C)   Fees. No daily filming fees are required.
   (D)   Reimbursement for personnel. The production company shall reimburse
the city for any personnel provided to the company (i.e. police, fire, public
works) for the purpose of assisting the production at established rates listed
in the City Fee Schedule.
(Ord. 670-C.S., passed 7-2-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 101.04 LIABILITY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of
insurance and additional insured endorsement will be required in an amount of
at least $1,000,000 naming the City of Eureka as a co-insured for protection
against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and
property damage. The city, its officers, employees and volunteers shall be
named as additional insureds. The insurance coverage shall be primary and shall
not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days written
notice to the city. An original copy of the certificate and endorsements will
remain on file with the city.
   (B)   Worker's compensation insurance. An applicant shall conform to all
applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance
for all persons operating under a permit.
   (C)   Hold harmless agreement. An applicant shall execute a hold harmless
agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of a permit under this
chapter.
   (D)   Faithful performance bond. To ensure clean-up and restoration of the
site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable faithful performance
bond or cash deposit (amount to be determined by the City Manager) at the time
application is submitted. Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site
by the city, the bond may be returned to the applicant if the site is clean and
has been resorted to its previous condition.
(Ord. 670-C.S., passed 7-2-03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 101.05 VIOLATIONS.
   If an applicant violates any provisions of this chapter or a permit issued
pursuant thereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the terms and
conditions of the film permit is considered a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 670-C.S., passed 7-2-03)
CHAPTER 102: BEEKEEPING
Section
   
102.001   Purpose
   
102.002   Definitions
   
102.003   Applicability
   
102.004   Standards
   
102.005   Beekeeping permit
§ 102.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow beekeeping in a manner that is
respectful of the safety of persons that may be in close proximity to the
apiary. Beekeeping can contribute to pollination, and better harvests in
gardens. By contributing to pollination, urban beekeeping is an important
complement to urban food production and to the city's Strategic Visioning Goals
of 2011.
(Ord. 784-C.S., passed 7-17-12)
§ 102.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APIARY. A place where one or more honeybee colonies are kept.
   BEEHIVE. Any structure being used to house a colony of honeybees.
   HONEYBEE COLONY. A cluster of honeybees living together as a colony
organism.
   MOVABLE-FRAME HIVE. Any hive design that allows the beekeeper to readily
remove the combs from the hive during hive inspections, in order to monitor and
manage conditions within the colony.
   SWARMING. The natural method of honeybee colonies to reproduce, resulting in
the departure of part of the bee population with a queen to create a new
honeybee colony.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the terms BEEHIVE and COLONY are used
interchangeably.
(Ord. 784-C.S., passed 7-17-12)
§ 102.003 APPLICABILITY.
   Beekeeping shall only be permitted as specifically allowed within these
regulations.
(Ord. 784-C.S., passed 7-17-12)
§ 102.004 STANDARDS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person on whose property bees are kept
to adhere to good management practices and maintain bees in a condition that
will reasonably prevent excessive swarming and overly defensive behavior.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the person on whose property the
bees are kept to provide adequate water for the bees to prevent bees from
seeking water in neighboring bird baths, ponds, swimming pools or other
community bodies of water.
   (C)   A maximum of four beehives shall be allowed per lot on a parcel of
land less than 10,000 square feet.
   (D)   An additional beehive is allowable for each additional 2,500 square
feet on a parcel of land with an area over 10,000 square feet, up to a limit of
eight beehives per parcel.
   (E)   Beehives are restricted to rear yards; or side yards where the hives
are at least 25 feet from the sidewalk, street, or alley, or separated from the
front yard by a fence at least six feet high, and in both cases are not visible
from the sidewalk, street or alley. Front, rear and side yards are further
described in the Eureka Municipal Code, §
155.006 Definitions.
   (F)   In order to ensure the appropriate height of the honeybee flight path:
      (1)   The beehive entrance shall be situated behind a solid fence or
hedge that is six feet in height running parallel to the property line of any
such neighboring property; or
      (2)   A beehive will be located a minimum of 25 feet away from the
neighboring property line.
   (G)   Colonies are only to be kept in a movable-frame hive.
(Ord. 784-C.S., passed 7-17-12)
§ 102.005 BEEKEEPING PERMIT.
   A beekeeping permit is required prior to establishment of an apiary, as
follows:
   (A)   The applicant shall submit and the Animal Control Officer shall review
plans demonstrating compliance with the standards of §
102.004. Plans shall be accompanied by a fee of $25, or as adjusted by the
city’s annually adopted Fee Schedule. Each beekeeping permit shall be issued
for a five-year period.
   (B)   The Animal Control Officer shall cause a notice to be given to all
households that reside at property that abuts the property of the proposed
apiary. Notice shall state that the beekeeping permit will be approved by the
Animal Control Officer unless an appeal is received from one of the neighbors
within 30 days of the notice. The notice shall include the property address
were the apiary is proposed to be established.
   (C)   Within 30 days of receipt of an appeal, the beekeeping permit shall be
set for hearing with the City Council. The City Council may approve the permit
if it is consistent with the standards of §
102.004; may approve with conditions of approval to ensure the health and
safety of neighbors; or deny the beekeeping permit if it does not meet the
standards or is unsafe for neighbors.
(Ord. 784-C.S., passed 7-17-12)
CHAPTER 103: PRIVATE SECURITY AND FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
103.01   Purpose
   
103.02   Definitions
   
103.03   Duties of the alarm user
   
103.04   Exemptions
   
103.05   Alarm permit
   
103.06   Permit application and issuance
   
103.07   Permit nontransferable
   
103.08   Permit revocation
   
103.09   Permit revocation; appeals
   
103.10   Permit reinstatement
   
103.11   Penalty for false alarms/failure to register
   
103.12   Alarm standards
   
103.13   Duties of monitoring company
   
103.14   Penalty for violation of permit process
   
103.15   Fees and charges
   
103.16   Enforcement and penalty
   
103.17   Posting the permit on premises
   
103.18   Confidentiality
   
103.19   Discontinuance of alarm response by Police and Fire Departments;
public nuisance
   
103.20   Disclaimer of Police and Fire Departments
   
103.21   Severability
   
103.22   Non-exclusivity
§ 103.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use and installation of alarm
devices, to promote their responsible use, and to reduce or eliminate the
incidence of false alarms. The Eureka Police Department and the Humboldt Bay
Fire Joint Powers Authority ("JPA") (of which the City of Eureka is a member
agency) respond to over 1,100 false alarms every year, often at the same
location. Before the city joined the JPA, the Eureka Fire Department also
responded to a large number of false alarms every year. This high incidence of
false alarms reduces the ability of Police and Fire to respond to valid alarms
and other emergencies, which constitutes a hazard to emergency responders and
to the general public.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSIBILITY. Any building or portion thereof that is serviced by an alarm
must be capable of being reached by the emergency responders whether by patrol
vehicle, fire apparatus, by foot, or no more than 300 feet from where the
emergency vehicle can be parked. If there is any barrier such as a wall, gate,
cliff, dog or any other material object that prevents, impedes or jeopardizes
the safety of the emergency responders so that the alarm and/or building cannot
be checked, it will be classified as "Inaccessible".
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. The administrator of the alarm is based on the nature
of the alarm. Security alarms, including; burglary, duress, intrusion, panic,
robbery/holdup alarms, or alarms resulting in Police Department response will
be administered by the Eureka Police Department. Fire and life safety alarms,
including; private fire alarm systems and private medical alarms, chemical
release alarms, carbon monoxide (CO) alarms, or alarms resulting in Fire
Department response administered by the Fire Department. The Police Chief may
assign the administrative tasks that are the responsibility of the city in this
chapter. The Humboldt Bay Fire Joint Powers Authority (or any third party under
contract with the city to provide fire protection services) may contract with
the city for the administration of this chapter, on its behalf. If, at any
time, a department, whether internal to the city, is established to provide
fire protection services, then the Fire Chief of that department may assign the
administrative tasks.
   ALARM COMPANY. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing,
moving, removing, installing or monitoring an alarm system in or on any
building, place or premises. This chapter specifically excludes retail
establishments which sell, as part of their products, components for alarm
systems; but which do not offer service, maintenance, repair, alteration,
replacement, moving or installation of systems in or on any business, place or
premises.
   ALARM PERMIT. A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter by the
Alarm Administrator.
   ALARM SITE. The location identified in the alarm permit where the alarm
system is located.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any combination of city-approved compatible alarm system
devices or equipment which is designed or intended to notify persons of an
emergency at a particular location to which Police or Fire respond. The term
ALARM SYSTEM includes any equipment which is designed to detect an emergency,
or which is designed to be activated by a person to report an emergency.
   ALARM USER. Any person owning or using an alarm system at his or her place
of residence or business, whether it be owned, leased or rented and made
available for use by his or her agents, employees, tenants, representatives, or
family.
   ARMING STATION. A device that allows control of an alarm system.
   AUDIBLE ALARM. Any alarm system which, when activated, emits a sound which
is capable of being heard outside the structure where the system is located,
even if the system is completely located within the structure.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM. Any alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded
voice message indicating the existence of an emergency situation that the alarm
system is designed to detect.
   DIRECTOR. The City Manager or his or her designee.
   DURESS ALARM. A silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of
designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user
is being forced to turn off the system and requests law enforcement response.
   ENHANCED CALL CONFIRMATION. An attempt by the alarm system monitoring
company to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user, to determine whether an
alarm event is valid before requesting law enforcement response. A second call
will be made to contact the alarm user if the first attempt fails. EXCEPT:
      (1)   As defined by ANSI/CSAA CS V 01 2016 or current version, in case of
a fire, panic robbery-in-progress alarm or verified alarm, or
      (2)   As defined by the local jurisdiction or state law.
   EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS. False alarms to be considered excessive shall be any
alarm system, either silent or audible, that emits more than two false alarms
within any 12-month fiscal year period and is therefore deemed an immediate
safety hazard, and as such, is subject to revocation by recommendation of the
Alarm Administrator.
   FALSE ALARM. The notification to the Eureka Police Department ("EPD") and
the Fire Department concerning the activation of an alarm system or alarm
device when:
      (1)   There is no evidence of a crime or other activity that warrants the
assistance of the Eureka Police Department on the premises, as indicated by the
investigation of a police officer on the scene or by the lack of a police
report filed by the property owner, and no individual who was on or near the
premises or who had viewed a video communication from the premises called for
dispatch or confirmed a need for police response; or
      (2)   There is no indication or presence of a fire on the premises that
warrants a call for assistance from or investigation by the Fire Department and
no individual who was on or near the premises or who had viewed a video
communication from the premises called for the dispatch or confirmed a need for
fire response; or
      (3)   The dispatch of police or fire personnel was cancelled by the alarm
system monitoring company, whether the alarm was cancelled before or after the
arrival of police or fire personnel at the alarm site.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. Refers to the Humboldt Bay Fire JPA or any other provider
of fire protections services for the City of Eureka.
   HOLD-UP ALARM. Activation of an alarm system or alarm device that notifies
EPD that the alarm site is being held-up.
   INTRUSION ALARM. An alarm whose purpose is to detect entry or attempted
entry into a structure or a defined area, whether interior or exterior in
nature.
   LATE APPLICATION FEE. If Police or Fire responds to the alarm activation
without having an alarm permit on file, the permit holder is subject to a late
alarm application fee for the first false alarm activation and shall be subject
to the normal false alarm assessments for the second and subsequent false
activations. (See the City of Eureka Schedule of Fees and Service Charges for
specific fee and assessment amounts.)
   MONITORING COMPANY. A person in the business of providing monitoring
services.
   PANIC ALARM. Any alarm system that is activated by the direct action of the
person who believes they are or are about to be the victim of a crime
requesting the emergency response of police officers.
   PENALTY ASSESSMENT. The civil penalty against the permit holder in the form
of a letter or bill for the misuse or false activation of any alarm.
   PERMITTEE or PERMIT HOLDER. Any person holding an alarm permit issued under
the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this subchapter, this includes
any individual or entity who has failed to obtain an alarm permit pursuant to
the requirements of this subchapter.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated
association, or other business entity.
   PRIVATE FIRE ALARM SYSTEM (PFAS). Any combination of approved compatible
alarm systems devices that are designed or intended to notify the occupant(s)
of the alarm location of a fire emergency to which the Fire Department
responds. The PFAS alarm system shall be installed in compliance with
California State Fire Marshal standards.
   PRIVATE MEDICAL LIFELINE ALARM. Any alarm system which is activated by a
person needing emergency medical/welfare assistance and/or the alarm monitoring
company requests an emergency medical response because the alarm subscriber did
not respond to a regularly scheduled "well person" check.
   RESIDENTIAL. Any premises used as dwelling units which includes apartments,
hotels, motels and lodging houses, whether or not the location is occupied.
   RESPONSE. The point in time that a police unit has been dispatched or an
engine company has moved the fire apparatus to respond to an alarm activation.
   ROBBERY/HOLD-UP. Any alarm system that is activated by the direct action of
the person being robbed or an observer of the robbery.
   SILENT ALARM. Any alarm system which, when activated, transmits an alarm
signal to a receiving center without obvious local indication of alarm
activation.
   VERIFY. An attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to
contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic
means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made to attempt to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting police or fire
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the
purpose of this subchapter, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum,
that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to
reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to
determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement
dispatch.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.03 DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Obtain an alarm permit from the City of Eureka;
      (2)   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
      (3)   Ensure that a responsible party is available, at all times, to
verify that an alarm signal is valid;
      (4)   Ensure that a responsible party responds to the alarm system's
location within 30 minutes when requested by Police or Fire in order to:
         (a)   Deactivate an alarm system;
         (b)   Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
         (c)   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
      (5)   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
   (B)   An alarm user shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be
adjusted so that an alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than ten minutes after being activated. An alarm user shall
have a licensed alarm installation company inspect the alarm system after two
false alarms in a 12-month period. The Alarm Administrator may waive a required
inspection if it determines that a false alarm(s) could not have been related
to a defect or malfunction in the alarm system or malfunction in the alarm
system. After three false alarms within a 12-month fiscal-year period, the
alarm user must have a licensed alarm installation company modify the alarm
system to be more false-alarm resistant or provide additional user training as
appropriate. The alarm user shall also be subject to penalties for such false
alarms.
   (C)   An alarm user/alarm system shall not use automatic voice dialers.
   (D)   An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of written
operating instructions for each alarm system.
   (E)   The Police Chief may require an alarm user to remove or modify a hold-
up alarm that is single action, non-recessed button, if two false hold-up
alarms have occurred.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to alarm systems affixed to automobiles, boats,
or recreational vehicles or systems which do not necessitate a response by
Police or Fire. However, in systems affixed to automobiles, boats, or
recreational vehicles, if the alarm user requests a response by Police or Fire,
that alarm system will be brought within the permit requirements of this
chapter from that time forward.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.05 ALARM PERMIT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use, install, or cause to be
installed an alarm system on any premises within the city without first
applying for and receiving an alarm permit. Alarm systems installed prior to
the effective date of this chapter shall be required to be brought within the
alarm standards set forth by this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate an alarm system
within the city under a revoked permit.
   (C)   Any person operating an alarm system within the city without an alarm
permit as required by this chapter, or under a revoked permit, shall be subject
to all applicable penalty fees. (See the City of Eureka Schedule of Fees and
Service Charges.)
   (D)   The Alarm Administrators shall develop and implement procedures for
the administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.06 PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Each application for an alarm system permit shall be made on a form
prescribed by the city which may include any information which is necessary for
effective administration of this subchapter, including the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
      (2)   Name, address, and telephone number of the business or premises
where the alarm system will operate.
      (3)   The names and telephone numbers of two or more persons who have the
ability to verify and respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes, if
activation occurs, during any hour of the day or night, and that the person(s)
have the ability to deactivate the alarm. In the event a person able to respond
to the alarm site as mentioned above cannot be located, the responsible alarm
company shall release the public safety response agency(s) from the scene.
      (4)   A description of the alarm system, its purposes, the alarm system
model number, the manufacturer's name and the name of the company performing
the installation and maintenance.
      (5)   Any dangerous or special conditions present at the alarm site.
      (6)   Schedule for regular maintenance of the alarm system.
   (B)   The Alarm Administrator shall approve and issue the permit upon
finding:
      (1)   The application contains the required information;
      (2)   The alarm system meets the standards prescribed by this chapter;
      (3)   That the applicable fees have been paid (pursuant to the city's
Schedule of Fees and Service Charges);
      (4)   That the alarm system is accessible to Police or Fire;
      (5)   The permit is issued subject to the proper maintenance and
operation of the alarm's system.
   (C)   Change of information on alarm permit. The permittee shall give
written notice to the Alarm Administrator within seven working days of any
change in the information provided on the alarm permit application.
   (D)   The permit is good for one fiscal year. It is incumbent upon the
permittee to ensure that the permit does not expire, and that the renewal
application questionnaire is completed and returned to the Alarm Administrator
in a timely fashion.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.07 PERMIT NONTRANSFERABLE.
   The permit shall not be transferable and shall terminate when there is a
change of alarm user, change of location, or upon revocation or suspension.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.08 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   An alarm permit may be revoked by recommendation of the Alarm
Administrator for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   False representations were made upon the permit application; or
      (2)   The alarm system emits excessive false alarms, deeming the system
an immediate safety hazard as prescribed by this chapter; or
      (3)   Failure to observe any of the regulations or provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Notice and effective dates. A written notice of revocation, setting
the reason for the action, shall be mailed by certified mail giving the
permittee ten working days from the mailing date to disconnect or remove the
alarm from the premises. Any person failing to disconnect the alarm system when
required by this chapter shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in §
103.14.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.09 PERMIT REVOCATION; APPEALS.
   (A)   Revocation of an alarm system permit may be appealed to the Alarm
Administrator. The permittee may submit a written statement, setting forth the
reasons why the permit should not be revoked, to the Alarm Administrator not
more than ten working days from the mailing date of the notice of revocation.
   (B)   The alarm user may continue to operate the alarm system during the
appeal process, unless the Alarm Administrator recommends the disconnection of
the alarm system.
   (C)   The decisions of the Alarm Administrator with respect to this chapter
will be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.10 PERMIT REINSTATEMENT.
   Following the revocation of the alarm permit, the permit may be reinstated
upon recommendation of the Alarm Administrator when:
   (A)   The cause for the revocation has been corrected; and
   (B)   The permittee pays a permit reinstatement fee to the city. (See the
City of Eureka Schedule of Fees and Service Charges "City Fee Schedule".)
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.11 PENALTY FOR FALSE ALARMS/FAILURE TO REGISTER.
   The sending of an alarm by an alarm system monitoring company, which results
in the dispatch of Police or Fire, shall subject the alarm user or property
owner to a false alarm fee whenever there is no evidence of a crime or other
activity that would warrant a call for Police or Fire assistance or
investigation at the premises; provided however, that no false alarm fee shall
be assessed if any individual who was on or near the premises, or who had
viewed a video communication from the premises, called for the dispatch and
confirmed a need for police or fire response.
   (A)   False alarm fees, including any penalties for failure to register,
shall be imposed per the city's Fee Schedule.
   (B)   In the event that Police or Fire were dispatched to the premises, the
alarm user or property owner shall be subject to a false alarm fee per the
city's fee schedule. Such amount represents the cost of dispatch and initial
response incurred by Fire and/or Police.
   (C)   Notice and hearing on penalty for false alarms.
      (1)   The Department shall mail by first class mail a written notice of
the false alarm fee to the permitee. The notice shall state the date and time
of the false alarm, and that the permittee is entitled to a hearing to respond
to the notice and introduce any evidence to refute or mitigate the
determination that the false alarm occurred. All false alarm fees are due and
payable within 60 days of the date that the Department mails or transmits the
notice, unless: (1) an appeal is filed pursuant to subsection (B) of this
section, in which case the fees appealed from are due and payable within ten
days after the date of the written ruling, or (2) a waiver is requested and an
alarm user class is scheduled pursuant to subsection (D) of this section.
      (2)   A permittee wanting to contest a false alarm fee shall file a
written appeal with the Alarm Administrator within 30 days after the date of
the notice. A hearing shall be held by the Alarm Administrator, or the Alarm
Administrator designee, not more than 20 days from the date the appeal is
filed. Within 20 days after the hearing, the Department shall issue a written
ruling including factual findings and the Alarm Administrator's conclusion,
with supporting reasons affirming or reversing the notice. The decision of the
Alarm Administrator shall be final.
      (3)   The Alarm Administrator may, but is not required to, delegate
authority to conduct hearings under this section to the Eureka Police
Department or the Fire Department.
      (4)   The Alarm Administrator may, with cause, at his or her discretion,
waive the first false alarm fee once within a 12 month period per alarm site. A
current Eureka alarm subscriber that moves to a new address within Eureka shall
receive a waiver for the first alarm at the subscriber's new location if the
false alarm occurs within six months of the move.
   (D)   It shall be the policy of Police and Fire to take positive action in
reducing false alarm responses through continuous evaluation and notification
of offending alarm owners/users when false alarms occur.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.12 ALARM STANDARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, install or operate any alarm
system for use within the city that does not meet the minimum standards as
prescribed as follows:
   (A)   Audible alarms.
      (1)   All audible alarm systems shall have a sign or notice posted on or
near the system, (visible from the exterior), with the name and telephone
number of the person responsible for the service and maintenance of the system.
The notice shall be conspicuously posted and readable from ground level.
      (2)   All audible alarms, including vehicle alarms, shall be equipped
with a device that will deactivate the alarm system not more than ten minutes
after activation. In addition, should an alarm fail to be silenced within the
time limits prescribed in this chapter, the Alarm Administrator shall have the
authority to hire an alarm agent to silence the alarm. All costs and expenses
incurred by the city in hiring an alarm agent to silence the alarm, costs
incurred from damage to the alarm site or vehicle as a result of silencing the
alarm, and costs incurred to obtain materials and security personnel to re-
secure the alarm site, shall be borne by the permittee or owner.
      (3)   Any alarm system that has an automatic shut-off with a re-arming
phase must be able to distinguish between an open and closed circuit; and, if
the circuit is open, will not rearm.
      (4)   No audible alarm shall be installed, maintained or activated which
emits the sound of a siren similar to those utilized on emergency vehicles or
for civil defense disaster warnings.
   (B)   Alarms.
      (1)   No alarms shall have an automatic dialing system as defined in this
chapter. This chapter does not apply to alarm devices that relay a digital
coded signal to the alarm company.
      (2)   All alarm systems shall have a standby back-up power supply which
will automatically assume operation of the alarm system should any interruption
occur in the power to the system. The transfer of power from the primary source
to the back-up source must occur in a manner that does not activate the alarm.
Back-up power supply must be capable of at least 12 hours of operation.
      (3)   All silent burglar alarm systems installed after the effective date
of this chapter shall have a pre-alert or pre-alarm unit allowing the user to
reset the system if activated in error, before the system goes into full alarm
activation. This section does not apply to banks, savings and loans and other
high-risk businesses as determined by the Alarm Administrator.
      (4)   An alarm user shall maintain at each alarm site a set of written
operating instructions for each alarm system.
      (5)   Homeowners shall test systems in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and shall have every household fire alarm system having a control
panel tested by a qualified service technician every three years.
   (C)   The Alarm Administrator reserves the right to inspect all alarm
systems after giving 48 hours advance warning to the permittee to ensure that
the alarm standards have been met.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.13 DUTIES OF MONITORING COMPANY.
   (A)   An alarm company responsible for monitoring services shall make two
attempts to contact user or users of alarm system prior to requesting law
enforcement response.
      (1)   Communicate any available information regarding specifics of the
alarm event.
      (2)   Communicate a cancellation to the law enforcement communications
center as soon as possible following a determination that response is
unnecessary.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on
any alarm/monitoring business within the city unless said person has first
registered the intention to engage in such alarm business with the city, giving
the city such information as it may require; and has displayed to the city a
current valid city business license and a permit issued by the State of
California, where state law requires such a permit or license.
   (C)   Any person engaging in, conducting, or carrying on any alarm/
monitoring business within the city shall notify each alarm owner of the permit
and false alarm process upon the request of installation of an alarm system and
verify said notification in writing has been signed by the alarm user.
Violation of said requirement shall be considered a violation of this chapter
and subject to a fine for each occurrence. (See the City of Eureka Schedule of
Fees and Service Charges.)
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.14 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF PERMIT PROCESS.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be prosecuted under the
provisions of §
10.99 and is subject to a fee as prescribed in the City of Eureka Schedule of
Fees and Service Charges.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.15 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The City Council may, from time to time, by resolution, adopt such
fees and service charges for the following items, as it deems appropriate:
      (1)   Alarm permit.
      (2)   Reinstatement fee.
      (3)   False alarm fee.
      (4)   Late application fee.
      (5)   Renewal fee.
   (B)   Any failure to pay, within 30 days of billing, any fees authorized by
this chapter shall result in a penalty assessment being added.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.16 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   The city shall enforce this chapter. Each violation shall constitute a
separate offense. A violation of any section in this chapter is punishable as a
misdemeanor or infraction, chargeable at the City Attorney's discretion
pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.17 POSTING THE PERMIT ON PREMISES.
   The alarm user's permit shall be posted on the premises where the alarm
system is located.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.18 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   Information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be
confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and
shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons
charged with the administration of this subchapter or for legitimate law
enforcement needs.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.19 DISCONTINUANCE OF ALARM RESPONSE BY POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS;
PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   (A)   Discontinuance of alarm response.
      (1)   The Police and Fire Departments reserve the right to discontinue
response to any location of a silent or audible alarm, where an alarm system
has been declared a public nuisance by an Alarm Administrator. An alarm system
may be declared a public nuisance when all of the following conditions have
been met.
         (a)   The alarm user permit has been revoked due to false alarms;
         (b)   The revoked alarm user permit has not been reinstated;
         (c)   The cause of the false alarms has not been corrected; and
         (d)   If revoked, the decision of the Alarm Administrator to revoke
the permit is not currently on appeal pursuant to §
103.09; or
      (2)   Any alarm that activates falsely more than two times per 24-hour
period and is in apparent need of repair, adjustment or correction shall be
deemed a nuisance by the Alarm Administrator. In order to minimize danger to
emergency responders and to the public during the response of any alarm, the
on-duty watch commander or fire duty chief/officer may use their discretion to
discontinue additional responses. Any such decision shall be followed up by
making the permittee or their alarm agent aware of the decision to discontinue
response if possible. The Alarm Administrator or designee shall make the
contact to relay the decision to discontinue response.
   (B)   Unavailability or refusal by alarm user. When an alarm user,
responsible alarm agent, or property owner of an unsecured alarmed premises
cannot be located or refuses the request from a police officer, fire captain,
or their representative, the Police or Fire Departments shall be under no
obligation to remain or secure the premises and the permittee's alarm permit
may be subject to suspension or revocation.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.20 DISCLAIMER OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   Passage of this chapter does not in any way constitute an agreement,
in fact or implied, that the Police or Fire Department must respond to an
activated alarm, even though an alarm user has fully complied with this
chapter.
   (B)   The Police and Fire Departments and the city shall not be liable in
any manner whatsoever for any claim, demand or suit for damages arising out of
or in any manner occasioned by connection to or use of any alarm system or
device or by reason of the Police or Fire Department's failure or inability to
respond to an alarm.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.21 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter are declared to be separate and severable.
The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section or
portion of this subchapter, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any
person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this
subchapter, or the validity of its application to other persons or
circumstances.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
§ 103.22 NON-EXCLUSIVITY.
   Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other
applicable laws.
(Ord. 921-C.S., passed 9-7-21)
CHAPTER 104: MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE
Section
   
104.01   Purpose
   
104.02   Definitions
   
104.03   Military use policy requirement
   
104.04   Use in exigent circumstances
   
104.05   Reports on the use of military equipment
   
104.06   Enforcement
   
104.07   Whistleblower protections
   
104.08   Severability
§ 104.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines for the approval,
acquisition, and reporting requirements of military equipment per Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 7070 - 7072.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. Any department, agency, bureau, and/or subordinate division of the
City of Eureka.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body that is the Eureka City Council.
   EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES. A law enforcement agency's good faith belief that an
emergency involving the danger, or imminent threat of death or serious physical
injury to any person is occurring, has occurred, or is about to occur.
   MILITARY EQUIPMENT. Includes all of the following (per Cal. Gov’t Code §
7070):
      (1)   Unmanned, remotely piloted, powered aerial or ground vehicles;
      (2)   Mine-resistant ambush-protected (MRAP) vehicles or armored
personnel carriers. However, police versions of standard consumer vehicles are
specifically excluded from this division;
      (3)   High mobility multi-purpose wheeled vehicles (HMMWV), commonly
referred to as humvees, two and one-half-ton trucks, five-ton trucks, or
wheeled vehicles that have a breaching or entry apparatus attached. However,
unarmored all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and motorized dirt bikes are specifically
excluded from this division;
      (4)   Tracked armored vehicles that provide ballistic protection to their
occupants and utilize a tracked system instead of wheels for forward motion;
      (5)   Command and control vehicles that are either built or modified to
facilitate the operational control and direction of public safety units;
      (6)   Weaponized aircraft, vessels, or vehicles of any kind;
      (7)   Battering rams, slugs, and breaching apparatuses that are explosive
in nature. However, items designed to remove a lock, such as bolt cutters, or a
handheld ram designed to be operated by one person, are specifically excluded
from this division;
      (8)   Firearms of .50 caliber or greater. However, standard issue
shotguns are specifically excluded from this division;
      (9)   Ammunition of .50 caliber or greater. However, standard issue
shotgun ammunition is specifically excluded from this division;
      (10)   Specialized firearms and ammunition of less than .50 caliber,
including assault weapons as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 30510 and 30515,
with the exception of standard issue service weapons and ammunition of less
than .50 caliber that are issued to officers, agents, or employees of a law
enforcement agency or state agency;
      (11)   Any firearm or firearm accessory that is designated to launch
explosive projectiles;
      (12)   "Flashbang" grenades and explosive breaching tools, "tear gas,"
and "pepper balls," excluding standard, service-issued handheld pepper spray;
      (13)   Taser shockwave, microwave weapons, water cannons, and the Long
Range Acoustic Device (LRAD);
      (14)   The following projectiles launch platforms and their associated
munitions: 40mm projectile launchers, "bean bag," rubber bullet, and specialty
impact munition (SIM) weapons;
      (15)   Any other equipment as determined by a governing body or a state
agency to require additional oversight; and
      (16)   Notwithstanding divisions (1) through (15) above, MILITARY
EQUIPMENT does not include general equipment not designated as prohibited or
controlled by the federal Defense Logistics Agency.
   MILITARY EQUIPMENT USE POLICY. A publicly released, written document that
includes, at a minimum, all of the following:
      (1)   A description of each type of military equipment, the quantity
sought, its capabilities, expected lifespan, and product descriptions from the
manufacturer of the military equipment;
      (2)   The purposes and authorized uses for which the law enforcement
agency or the state agency proposes to use each type of military equipment;
      (3)   The fiscal impact of each type of military equipment, including the
initial costs of obtaining the equipment and estimated annual costs of
maintaining the equipment;
      (4)   The legal and procedural rules that govern each authorized use;
      (5)   The training, including any course required by the Commissions on
Peace Officer Standards and Training, that must be completed before any
officer, agent, or employee of the law enforcement agency or the state agency
is allowed to use each specific type of military equipment to ensure the full
protection of the public's welfare, safety, civil rights, and civil liberties
and full adherence to the military equipment use policy;
      (6)   The mechanisms to ensure compliance with the military equipment use
policy, including which independent persons or entities have oversight
authority, and, if applicable, what legally enforceable sanctions are put in
place for violations of the policy; and
      (7)   For a law enforcement agency, the procedures by which members of
the public may register complaints or concern or submit questions about the use
of each specific type of military equipment, and how the law enforcement agency
will ensure that each complaint, concern, or question receives a response in a
timely manner.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. Any division, section, bureau, employee, volunteer and/or
contractor of the Eureka Police Department.
   STATE AGENCY. The law enforcement division of every state office, officer,
department, division, bureau, board, and commission or other state body or
agency, except those agencies provided for in Article IV (except Section 20
thereof) or Article VI of the California Constitution.
   TYPE. Each item that shares the same manufacturer model number.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.03 MILITARY USE POLICY REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The Eureka Police Department shall obtain approval of the City
Council, by an ordinance adopting a Military Equipment Use Policy (MEUP) at a
regular meeting of the City Council held pursuant to the Ralph M. Brown Act
(Chapter 9 (commencing with § 54950) of Part 1 of Division 2 of Title 5), as
applicable, prior to engaging in any of the following:
      (1)   Requesting military equipment made available pursuant to § 2576a of
Title 10 of the United States Code;
      (2)   Seeking funds for military equipment, including, but not limited
to, applying for a grant, soliciting or accepting private, local, state, or
federal funds, in-kind donations, or other donations or transfers;
      (3)   Acquiring military equipment either permanently or temporarily,
including by borrowing or leasing;
      (4)   Collaborating with another law enforcement agency in the deployment
or other use of military equipment within the territorial jurisdiction of the
City of Eureka;
      (5)   Using any new or existing military equipment for a purpose, in a
manner, or by a person not previously approved by the governing body pursuant
to this chapter;
      (6)   Soliciting or responding to a proposal for, or entering into an
agreement with, any other person or entity to seek funds for, apply to receive,
acquire, use, or collaborate in the use of military equipment; and
      (7)   Acquiring military equipment through any means not provided by this
section.
   (B)   In seeking to continue to use any military equipment that was acquired
prior to January 1, 2022, the Eureka Police Department shall commence a City
Council approval process in accordance with this section. If the City Council
does not approve the continuing use of military equipment, including by
adoption pursuant to a military equipment use policy submitted pursuant to this
code, within 180 days of submission of the proposed military equipment use
policy to City Council, the Eureka Police Department shall cease its use of the
military equipment until it receives the approval of City Council in accordance
with this code.
   (C)   In seeking the approval of City Council, the Eureka Police Department
shall submit a proposed military equipment use policy to City Council and make
those documents available on the Police Department's internet website at least
30 days prior to any public hearing concerning the military equipment at issue.
   (D)   The governing body shall consider a proposed military equipment use
policy as an agenda item for an open session of a regular meeting and provide
for public comment in accordance with the Bagley-Keen Open Meeting Act (Article
9 (commencing with § 11120) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2) or
the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with § 54950) of Part 1 of
Division 2 of Title 5), as applicable.
   (E)   The governing body shall only approve a military equipment use policy
pursuant to this chapter if it determines all of the following:
      (1)   The military equipment is necessary because there is no reasonable
alternative that can achieve the same objective of officer and civilian safety;
      (2)   The proposed military equipment use policy will safeguard the
public's welfare, safety, civil rights, and civil liberties;
      (3)   If in purchasing the equipment, the equipment is reasonably cost
effective compared to available alternatives that can achieve the same
objective of officer and civilian safety; and
      (4)   Prior military equipment use compiled with the military equipment
use policy that was in effect at the time, or if prior uses did not comply with
the accompanying military equipment use policy, corrective action has been
taken to remedy nonconforming uses and ensure future compliance.
   (F)   In order to facilitate public participation, any proposed or final
military equipment use policy shall be made publicly available on the internet
website of the Police Department for as long as the military equipment is
available for use.
   (G)   The City Council shall review any ordinance that it has adopted
pursuant to this chapter approving the funding, acquisition, or use of military
equipment at least annually and vote on whether to renew the ordinance at a
regular meeting held pursuant to the Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act (Article 9
(commencing with § 11120) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 3 of Title 2) or
the Ralph M. Brown Act (Chapter 9 (commencing with § 54950) of Part 1 of
Division 2 of Title 5), as applicable.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.04 USE IN EXIGENT CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department
may acquire, borrow and/or use military equipment in exigent circumstances
without following the requirements of this code.
   (B)   If the Police Department acquires, borrows, and/or uses military
equipment in exigent circumstances, in accordance with this section, it must
take all of the following actions:
      (1)   Provide written notice of that acquisition or use to the City
Council within 30 days following the commencement of such exigent circumstance,
unless such information is confidential or privileged under local, state, or
federal law;
      (2)   If it is anticipated that the use will continue beyond the exigent
circumstance, submit a proposed amended military equipment use policy to the
City Council within 90 days following the borrowing, acquisition and/or use,
and receive approval, as applicable, from the City Council; and
      (3)   Include the military equipment in the Police Department's next
annual military equipment report.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.05 REPORTS ON THE USE OF MILITARY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall submit to City Council an annual military
equipment report for each type of military equipment approved by the City
Council within one year of approval, and annually thereafter for as long as the
military equipment is available for use.
   (B)   The Police Department shall also make each annual military equipment
report required by this section publicly available on its internet website for
as long as the military equipment is available for use.
   (C)   The annual military equipment report shall, at minimum, include the
following information for the immediately preceding calendar year for each type
of military equipment:
      (1)   A summary of how the military equipment was used in the purpose of
its use;
      (2)   A summary of any complaints or concerns received concerning the
military equipment;
      (3)   The results of any internal audits, any information about
violations of the military equipment use policy, and any actions taken in
response;
      (4)   The total annual cost for each type of military equipment,
including acquisition, personnel, training, transportation, maintenance,
storage, upgrades, and other ongoing costs, and from what source funds will be
provided for the military equipment in the calendar year following submission
of the annual military equipment report;
      (5)   The quantity possessed for each type of military equipment; and
      (6)   If the law enforcement agency intends to acquire additional
military equipment in the next year, the quantities of each type of military
equipment.
   (D)   Within 30 days of submitting and publicly releasing an annual military
equipment report pursuant to this section, the Police Department shall hold at
least one well-publicized and conveniently located community engagement
meeting, at which the general public may discuss and ask questions regarding
the annual military equipment report and the law enforcement agency's funding,
acquisition, or use of military equipment.
   (E)   The City Council shall determine, based on the annual military
equipment report submitted pursuant to this section, whether each type of
military equipment identified in that report has complied with the standards
for approval set forth in this code and the military equipment use policy. If
the City Council determines that a type of military equipment identified in the
annual military equipment report has not complied with the standards for
approval, the City Council shall disapprove a renewal of the authorization for
that type of military equipment use in a manner that will resolve the lack of
compliance.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.06 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This chapter does not provide a private right of action upon any
person or entity to seek injunction relief against the city or any employee
unless that person or entity has first provided written notice to the City
Manager by serving the City Clerk, regarding the specific alleged violations of
this chapter.
   (B)   If a specific alleged violation is not remedied within 90 days of that
written notice, a person or entity may seek injunctive relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the alleged violation is substantiated and subsequently cured, a
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous manner on the city's website that
describes, to the extent permissible by law, the corrective measures taken to
address the violation.
   (D)   If it is shown that the violation is the result of arbitrary or
capricious action by the city or an employee or agent thereof in his or her
official capacity, the prevailing complainant in an action for relief may
collect from the city reasonable attorney's fees in an amount not to exceed
$15,000 if they are personally obligated to pay such fees.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.07 WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.
   All provisions of Eureka's protection of whistleblowers workplace policy,
including any updates or replacements thereto, shall apply.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
§ 104.08 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this
chapter, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions or applications of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this
chapter in each and every section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, and word
not declared invalid or unconstitutional without regard to whether any other
portion of this chapter or application thereof would be subsequently declared
invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 952-C.S., passed 1-16-24)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
         
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
         
111.   RESERVED
         
112.   AMBULANCES
         
113.   AMUSEMENTS
         
114.   CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
         
115.   FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND OUTDOOR DINING AREAS
         
116.   RESERVED
         
117.   MASSAGE PARLORS
         
118.   SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, AND SIDEWALK VENDORS
         
119.   SECOND-HAND DEALERS
         
120.   TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
         
121.   OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
         
122.   FOREIGN-TRADE ZONE
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Revenue measure
   
110.03   Effect of mistake
   
110.04   Administration of oaths
Licensing Provisions
   
110.15   License required
   
110.16   License does not permit prohibited business
   
110.17   No substitute for other revenue acts
   
110.18   Exemptions
   
110.19   Exclusions
   
110.20   License applications
   
110.21   Statements not conclusive
   
110.22   Branch establishments; joint license
   
110.23   Contents of license
   
110.24   Duration of license
   
110.25   Limitations
   
110.26   When license fee payable and delinquent
   
110.27   Quarterly licenses
   
110.28   Refunds
   
110.29   License may be withheld for evidence of truth
   
110.30   Determination of license tax in certain cases
   
110.31   Appeals
   
110.32   Additional powers of Director of Finance
   
110.33   Licenses to be conspicuously posted
   
110.34   Transfer of license; duplicate license
   
110.35   Revocation of license
   
110.36   Information confidential
   
110.37   Evidence of liability
   
110.38   Enforcement
   
110.39   License fee a debt
   
110.40   Remedies cumulative
Fees
   
110.50   Basic business license fee
   
110.51   Auction sales, auctioneers
   
110.52   Card rooms
   
110.53   Home occupation fee
   
110.54   Circuses, carnivals and similar exhibitions
   
110.55   Lecture, traveling and temporary theatrical performances
   
110.56   Bankrupt, fire and similar sales
   
110.57   Boxing and wrestling matches
   
110.58   Peddlers, solicitors, canvassers and itinerant vendors
   
110.59   Hotels, motels, apartment houses, bed and breakfast inns and rooming
houses
   
110.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Business Improvement District, see §§ 35.130 through 35.140
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Whenever
the masculine gender is used, it shall also include the feminine and neuter
genders. Whenever the singular is used, it shall also include the plural.
   AVERAGE NUMBER OF FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT EMPLOYEES. The average number of
persons to be employed weekly in the applicant's business. The AVERAGE NUMBER
OF FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT EMPLOYEES shall be determined by ascertaining the total
number of hours of service to be performed within a representative week by all
employees of the applicant and dividing the total number of hours of service
thus obtained by 40. After computing the average number of full-time equivalent
employees, fractions of numbers less than ½ shall be excluded.
   BUSINESS. All professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of
calling, carried on for profit.
   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE. For the purposes of this title, the Director of
Finance.
   EMPLOYEE. All persons engaged in the operation or conduct of any business,
except for one owner, partner, or franchisee, whether as an additional owner,
partner, professional, any member of the owner's family, agent, manager, or
solicitor, and any and all other persons employed or working in such business.
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. A place of business in the city occupied for the
particular purpose of conducting a business thereat and regularly kept open for
that purpose with a competent person in attendance for the purpose of attending
to such business.
   NEWLY ESTABLISHED BUSINESS. A business in existence and operation for less
than three months.
   PERSON. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts
business or common law trusts, societies, and individuals transacting and
carrying on any business in the city other than as an employee.
('63 Code, §§ 6-1.101 - 6-1.103) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 395-
C.S., passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed 12-21-91)
§ 110.02 REVENUE MEASURE.
   This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and
is not intended for regulation.
('63 Code, § 6-1.104) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.03 EFFECT OF MISTAKE.
   In no case shall any mistake made by the city in stating the amount of a
license tax prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what shall be
actually due from anyone carrying on a business subject to a license tax
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.301) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.04 ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the Director of Finance, his deputies, and
authorized agents are authorized to administer oaths.
('63 Code, § 6-1.302) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 110.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   There are hereby imposed upon businesses, trades, professions,
callings, and occupations license taxes as hereinafter prescribed. No person
shall transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling, or
occupation in the city without first having procured a license or without first
having paid to the city the license tax provided in this chapter.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a
license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts
with applicable statutes of the United States or the state.
('63 Code, § 6-1.105) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.16 LICENSE DOES NOT PERMIT PROHIBITED BUSINESS.
   The issuance of a license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
not entitle the license to engage in any business which for any reason is in
violation of any law or ordinance and shall not entitle the holder thereof to
carry on any business unless he has complied with all the requirements of other
provisions of this code and all other applicable laws, nor shall it entitle the
licensee to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated
in such license in the event such business or premises are situated in a zone
or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law.
('63 Code, § 6-1.106) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.17 NO SUBSTITUTE FOR OTHER REVENUE ACTS.
   Any person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any
business pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be relieved from
the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business, which
tax has been required under any other law of the city, and shall remain subject
to the regulatory provisions of such other law.
('63 Code, § 6-1.107) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.18 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or
construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage, or carry
on the following businesses or occupations:
      (1)   Any charitable institution, organization, or association organized
and conducted for charitable purposes only; any person conducting, carrying on,
or staging any concert, exhibition, lecture, dance, amusement, or entertainment
where the receipts, if any are derived therefrom, are to be used solely for
charitable or benevolent purposes and not for the private gain of any person in
whole or in part; any religious, fraternal, educational, military, state,
county, or municipal organization or association conducting, carrying on, or
staging any amusement or entertainment, concert, exhibition, lecture, dance, or
athletic event when the receipts derived are to be wholly for the benefit of
such organization and not in the whole or any part for the private gain of any
person. This exemption shall not apply to promoters employed by charitable
organizations.
      (2)   Any person engaged in interstate commerce when a license tax casts
a burden upon such interstate commerce to the extent that the city may not tax
under the provisions of the state constitution.
      (3)   Any person whose annual gross receipts from any and all businesses
are $500 or less per quarter.
      (4)   A certificate of exemption may be issued upon payment of an $8
processing fee. Nothing herein requires an exempt business to obtain such a
certificate.
('63 Code, § 6-1.108)
   (B)   Claims for exemption. Any person desiring to claim an exemption from
the payment of a license tax and to have a free license issued to him shall
make an application therefor to the Finance Department and shall furnish such
information and make such affidavits as may be required. Upon the determination
being made that the applicant is entitled to an exemption from the payment of
license taxes for any reason set forth in this chapter, the Finance Department
upon the applicant complying with the provisions of this chapter or any other
law of the city which may require a permit for the doing of the particular act
proposed to be done, shall issue a free license to such person which shall show
upon its face that the license tax is exempt.
('63 Code, § 6-1.110)
   (C)   Revocation of exemption. The Finance Department may revoke any exempt
license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon information
that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided therein. In such
revocation the procedure to be followed and right of appeal shall be as
provided in §§
110.29 and
110.30 of this subchapter for the determination of a disputed tax.
('63 Code, § 6-1.111)
(Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 392-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 110.19 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, the
provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of
the following persons:
      (1)   Any public utility which makes payments to the city under a
franchise or similar agreement.
      (2)   Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that
a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article
XIII, Section 16, Subdivision 1(a) of the State Constitution;
      (3)   Insurance companies and associations to the extent that a city may
not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Article XIII, Section
14-415 of the State Constitution; and,
      (4)   Any person whom the city is not authorized to license under any law
or the constitution of the United States or the state.
   (B)   The Finance Department may require the filing of a verified statement
from any person claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section,
which statement shall set forth all the acts upon which the exclusion is
claimed.
('63 Code, § 6-1.109) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.20 LICENSE APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Every person required to have a license pursuant to the provisions
of this chapter shall make an application for the same to the Finance
Department. Such application shall be a written statement upon a form provided
by such department and shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of
perjury or sworn to by the applicant before a person authorized to administer
oaths. The application shall set forth such information as may be necessary
properly to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the
applicant.
      (2)   Such application shall set forth the average number of full-time
equivalent employees for the applicable period as provided in §
110.01 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.112)
   (B)   First license.
      (1)   Every person making an application for license shall pay to the
Finance Department an estimate of the license tax for the business in which he
is engaged.
      (2)   If all of the provisions of this chapter are met, the license will
be issued five working days after application is made for such license pursuant
to division (A) of this section.
      (3)   The estimated license tax thus paid shall be tentative only, and
such person shall, within 30 days after the expiration of the period for which
such license was issued, furnish the Finance Department with a sworn statement
upon a form to be provided by such department, setting forth such information
as may be therein required and showing, during the period of such license, the
actual average number of full-time equivalent employees. The license tax shall
be ascertained and paid upon such applicable basis, credit being given for the
estimated license tax previously paid, and a refund to the applicant made if
the previously paid license tax was in excess of the amount deemed to be
required.
('63 Code, § 6-1.113)
   (C)   Renewal of license; application. In all cases, the applicant for the
renewal of a license shall submit to the Finance Department for its guidance in
ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant a
written statement, upon a form to be provided by such department, signed under
penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths.
Such statement shall set forth such information concerning the type of the
applicant's business, the number of full-time equivalent employees during the
preceding year, or other applicable basis as may be required by the Finance
Department to enable it to ascertain the amount of the license tax to be paid
by such applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.114)
(Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 482-C.S., passed 12-17-88)
§ 110.21 STATEMENTS NOT CONCLUSIVE.
   No statement furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed to be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall
the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action
such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder.
('63 Code, § 6-1.115) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.22 BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS; JOINT LICENSE.
   (A)   Branch establishments. Separate licenses shall be obtained for each
branch establishment or location of the business engaged in as if each such
branch establishment or location were a separate business, and each license
shall authorize the licensee to engage only in the business licensed thereby at
the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, however,
warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a
business licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be
deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments, and provided
that the first owner, partner, or franchisee is deleted from the list of full-
time equivalent employees at only one such separately treated business.
('63 Code, § 6-1.116)
   (B)   Joint license. Whenever any person is engaged in two or more separate
businesses at the same location, such person shall be required to obtain a
separate license for conducting each such business. The Director of Finance
shall issue a separate license certificate for each such separately licensed
business. The license tax to be paid shall be computed for each of such
businesses being conducted at such location, and provided that the first owner,
partner, or franchisee is deleted from the list of full-time equivalent
employees for each such separately licensed business.
('63 Code, § 6-1.117)
(Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.23 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   All licenses shall be prepared and issued by the Director of Finance upon
payment of the sum to be paid therefor, and each license so issued shall state
upon the face thereof the following information to be derived from the
application form provided by the Administration Services Department:
   (A)   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;
   (B)   The kind of business licensed thereby;
   (C)   The location of such business;
   (D)   The date of expiration of such license; and,
   (E)   Such other information as the Director of Finance may require.
('63 Code, § 6-1.118) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.24 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued for a period of more than 12 months. No license
shall be issued for any period extending beyond December 31 following the date
of issuance. All licenses issued on a quarterly basis shall expire 90 days from
issuance or on December 31, whichever occurs first.
('63 Code, § 6-1.119) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
§ 110.25 LIMITATIONS.
   No greater or lesser amount of money shall be charged or received for any
license tax than provided for in this chapter, except that no license tax shall
exceed $1,000, exclusive of penalties, and no license shall be sold or issued
for any period of time other than as provided for in this chapter, provided
that this section shall not refer to such penalties as are herein provided for.
('63 Code, § 6-1.120) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
§ 110.26 WHEN LICENSE FEE PAYABLE AND DELINQUENT.
   (A)   All license taxes due hereunder shall be paid in advance, in lawful
money of the United States, at the office of the Finance Department.
('63 Code, § 6-1.121)
   (B)   All license taxes due hereunder shall be due and payable and
delinquent as follows:
      (1)   Daily licenses shall be due on their effective date and delinquent
at 5:00 p.m. on the due date.
      (2)   Quarterly licenses shall be due on January 1, April 1, July 1, and
October 1 and delinquent at 5:00 p.m. on the 20th day of the first month in
which the quarterly license is due.
('63 Code, § 6-1.122)
   (C)   (1)   Penalties. Any person who fails to pay any license tax imposed
by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of 10% per month
or portion thereof in addition to the amount of the tax, provided that the
amount of such penalty shall in no event exceed 100% of the amount of license
tax due.
      (2)   Waiver of penalties. Any other provision of this section to the
contrary notwithstanding, if any person shall fail to pay any license tax
imposed by this chapter within the time required, the City Manager, on written
application therefor and good cause shown, may waive the penalties imposed
under this section provided any license tax imposed by this chapter is paid
within 72 hours following the time payment the license tax first became
delinquent.
('63 Code, § 6-1.123)
(Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 392-C.S., passed 12-20-83; Am. Ord.
533-C.S., passed 12-21-91)
§ 110.27 QUARTERLY LICENSES.
   (A)   Any license due hereunder may be issued on a quarterly basis provided
that the business is newly established, has ceased operation during the year,
or will be operated within the city only for a specified period of time. The
application for a quarterly license shall be a written statement upon a form
provided by the Finance Department and shall be signed by the applicant under
penalty of perjury or sworn to by the applicant before a person authorized to
administer oaths. The application shall set forth such information as may be
necessary to properly determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the
applicant.
   (B)   In the case of a newly established business, the tax shall be 25% of
the full annual tax for the quarter during which application is made, plus 25%
of the full annual tax for each subsequent quarter ending December 31, plus a
processing fee of $8.
   (C)   In the case of a business which will be operated within the city only
for a specified period of time, the tax shall be 25% of the full annual tax for
the quarter during which the application is made, plus 25% of the full annual
tax for each subsequent quarter or portion of a quarter ending with the close
of the period during which the business shall operate on December 31, whichever
comes first, plus a processing fee of $8.
('63 Code, § 6-1.124) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.28 REFUNDS.
   Refunds will be made on an amount paid as a license tax only in the cases
hereinafter provided:
   (A)   An error was made on the part of the city in the determination of the
amount of the license tax.
   (B)   A license tax was paid twice.
   (C)   A license tax was illegally collected.
   (D)   Pursuant to §
110.20(B) of this chapter, an applicant for a first license for a newly
licensed business submits an application to the Finance Department within 30
days after the expiration of the period for which a business license was issued
setting forth the actual average number of full-time equivalent employees
included within the business during the year.
   (E)   An applicant who has paid an annual business license tax submits to
the Finance Department a sworn statement, upon a form to be provided by such
department, setting forth information showing that the business has ceased
operation during the year, and requesting that the license tax be recomputed
pursuant to the provisions of §
110.27 for a business which is operated in the city for only a specified period
of time.
('63 Code, § 6-1.125) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.29 LICENSE MAY BE WITHHELD FOR EVIDENCE OF TRUTH.
   (A)   No statement required to be filed by the applicant or licensee shall
be conclusive upon the city or the Finance Department whenever it shall appear
to the satisfaction of the Finance Department that such statement does not set
forth the true facts of the business for which a license is required.
   (B)   In the event the issuance of a license is withheld pursuant to the
provisions of this section, the Finance Department shall, concurrently with the
withholding of the license, deliver a written statement to the applicant
setting forth the tax the Finance Department has concluded is applicable; in
such event, the applicant shall have the right to the issuance of a quarterly
license upon payment of the amount of the tax.
   (C)   If the applicant is dissatisfied with the determination of the Finance
Department, the applicant shall be entitled to a hearing on the amount of the
tax upon filing a written application within ten days of payment. The hearing
shall be held in the manner, time, and procedure as set forth in §
110.30 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.126) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.30 DETERMINATION OF LICENSE TAX IN CERTAIN CASES.
   (A)   If any person fails to file any required statement within the time
prescribed, or if, after demand therefor has been made by the Finance
Department, he fails to file a corrected statement within 15 days after
notification so to do, or it appears to the satisfaction of the Director of
Finance that a statement filed does not set forth the true facts of the
business for which a license is required, the Director of Finance shall
determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such
information as he may be able to obtain.
   (B)   In case such determination is made, the Department of Finance shall
give notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing
it in the United States Post Office at Eureka, California, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested, addressed to the person so assessed at the address
appearing on his last license or application. Such person may, within ten days
after the serving or mailing of such notice, make an application in writing to
the Director of Finance for a hearing before the Director of Finance on the
amount of the license tax. If such an application is made, the Director of
Finance shall give not less than five days' written notice, in the manner
prescribed herein, to the licensee to show cause, at a time and place fixed in
such notice, why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such
license. At such hearing, the licensee may appear and offer evidence why such
specified tax should not be fixed as the license tax. After such hearing, the
Director of Finance shall determine the proper tax to be charged and shall
forthwith give written notice to the licensee in the manner prescribed herein
of such determination and the amount of such tax.
   (C)   If an application by the licensee for a hearing is not made within the
time prescribed, the license tax determined by the Director of Finance shall
become final and conclusive.
('63 Code, § 6-1.127) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.31 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director of Finance with
respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license, or the amount of a
license tax, may appeal to the City Manager.
   (B)   After appeal to the City Manager, any person may appeal to the City
Council with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a license, or the
amount of a license tax, by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 15 days of the decision by the City Manager. The Council shall fix a
time and place for hearing such appeal, and the City Clerk shall give notice in
writing to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it
personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Eureka,
California, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to such person
at the address appearing on his last license or application.
('63 Code, § 6-1.128) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.32 ADDITIONAL POWERS OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon him, the Director of Finance
shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any
required sworn statement for a period not exceeding 30 days, and in such case
to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued, and shall have the
further power, with the consent of the City Manager, to compromise any claim as
to the amount of license tax due. The Director of Finance shall also have the
power to require the submission of a copy of the business license applicant's
most recent state employer's payroll tax return before issuing the license
applied for; and/or proof of tax-exempt status.
('63 Code, § 6-1.129) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 392-C.S., passed
12-20-83)
§ 110.33 LICENSES TO BE CONSPICUOUSLY POSTED.
   All licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be kept
and posted in the following manner:
   (A)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of
business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon
the premises where such business is carried on.
   (B)   Any licensee transacting and carrying on business, but not operating
at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his person
at all times while transacting and carrying on such business.
('63 Code, § 6-1.130) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.34 TRANSFER OF LICENSE; DUPLICATE LICENSE.
   (A)   Transfer of license. No license issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter shall be transferred except when a licensee transfers his business
from one location to another in the city, the license previously issued may be
amended to authorize the conduct of the business at the new location; or except
when a licensee sells or transfers a licensed business to another and a written
authorization by the original licensee is submitted to the Finance Department,
the license previously issued may be amended to authorize the conduct of the
business by the new licensee. The license transfers and amendments herein
authorized may be obtained upon an application therefor to the Finance
Department and the payment of the sum of $8.
('63 Code, § 6-1.131)
   (B)   Duplicate licenses. Duplicate licenses may be issued by the Finance
Department to replace any license previously issued, which has been lost or
destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit attesting to such fact and, at
the time of filing such affidavit, paying to the Finance Department the sum of
$8.
('63 Code, § 6-1.132)
(Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 392-C.S., passed 12-20-83)
§ 110.35 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked
by the Director of Finance upon the failure on the part of the licensee to pay
the charges imposed by this chapter or to file the application or statements
required by this chapter within six months after such charges or statements
become delinquent.
('63 Code, § 6-1.133) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.36 INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Except for information appearing on the face of each business license,
the information furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be deemed confidential in character and shall not be subject to public
inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become
known except to the persons charged with the administration of the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Unless in compliance with judicial order, or as may be required for
the proper administration of this chapter, the Finance Department, its agents
and employees, shall not divulge facts or information obtained in the
administration thereof.
('63 Code, § 6-1.134) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.37 EVIDENCE OF LIABILITY.
   In any action brought under or arising out of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or of any law imposing a license tax, the fact that a party therein
represented himself as engaged in any business or calling for the transaction
of which a license is required, or that such party exhibited a sign indicating
such business or calling, shall be conclusive evidence of the liability of such
party to pay a license tax for such business.
('63 Code, § 6-1.135) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.38 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance, his deputies,
officers, agents, and/or employees, and they and each of them are hereby
directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter, and the
Director of Public Safety shall render such assistance in the enforcement
thereof as may from time to time be required by the Director of Finance, the
City Manager, or the Council. All public safety officers are hereby appointed
inspectors of licenses and, in addition to their several duties as public
safety officers, are hereby required to examine all places of business and
persons in the city liable to pay a license to see that such licenses are paid
and displayed and shall have and exercise the power:
      (1)   To make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter; and,
      (2)   To enter free of charge, at any time, any place of business for
which a license is required by this chapter and to demand the exhibition of
such license for the current term by any person engaged or employed in the
transaction of such business, and, if such person shall then and there fail to
exhibit such license, such person shall be liable to the penalty provided for a
violation of this chapter.
   (B)   It is hereby made the duty of the public safety officers to cause
complaints to be filed against all persons violating any of the provisions of
this chapter.
   (C)   Each department of the city which issues permits for work to be done
shall require the production of a valid license prior to the issuance of such a
permit.
('63 Code, § 6-1.136) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.39 LICENSE FEE A DEBT.
   (A)   The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city, and any person
carrying on any business without first having procured a license from the city
to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the amount of the license tax and penalties imposed
on such business after constructive notice of the intent to take such action
has been published in a newspaper of general circulation. Any person carrying
on a business without first having procured a license from the city or any
person carrying on a business for which the license tax is delinquent is hereby
barred from providing goods or services to the city.
   (B)   A fee shall be charged equal to the standard “NSF” charge used by the
city's demand bank whenever a check presented to the city in payment of any
business license tax or fee calculated pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter is returned by the city's demand bank due to insufficient funds, closed
account, or any other reason.
('63 Code, § 6-1.137) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
§ 110.40 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies prescribed in this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of
one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for
the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.138) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
FEES
§ 110.50 BASIC BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business in the
city shall pay the business license tax herein listed unless engaged in a
business for which taxes are specifically detailed elsewhere in this chapter.
   (B)   The annual license tax shall be $55, plus $11.50 per annum for each
full-time equivalent employee in addition to the first owner, partner, or
franchisee, the total annual tax is in no case to exceed $1,000, exclusive of
penalties.
('63 Code, § 6-1.201) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.51 AUCTION SALES, AUCTIONEERS.
   (A)   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business of
auctioneer permanently located within the city shall pay an annual license tax
pursuant to §
110.50.
   (B)   Every person conducting an auction within the city, not as a permanent
business, shall pay a tax of $75 per day. Persons conducting such occasional
auctions may be required by the Director of Finance to post a bond with the
city and provide the city with a Certificate of Insurance naming the city to be
held harmless from any liability arising from the event.
('63 Code, § 6-1.202) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.52 CARD ROOMS.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business consisting of
maintaining a place where tables are used by the public for playing cards, and
for the use of which a fee or compensation is charged, shall pay an annual
license tax pursuant to §
110.50 of this chapter in addition to complying with all applicable provisions
listed elsewhere in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.203) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.53 HOME OCCUPATION FEE.
   (A)   The annual business license tax for a home occupation license shall be
$36 annually, or $9 on a quarterly basis.
   (B)   Any individual that applies for a home occupation license in lieu of a
regular business license shall meet all other requirements of this code of
ordinances.
   (C)   In order to qualify for a home occupation license in lieu of a regular
business license, the gross receipts of the business shall not exceed $4,000
annually, or $1,000 on a quarterly basis.
   (D)   The applicant shall not be considered eligible for a home occupation
license if it is determined that he would fall within the jurisdiction of §
110.56 of this subchapter:
      Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business consisting
of owning, operating, opening, establishing, managing or having charge of any
temporary location or place of business of any kind for the sale of any
insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged, or other similar goods, wares, or
merchandise, and every itinerant or transient merchant having a temporary place
of business, but not having any continuous or permanent place of business in
the city, who sells or offers for sale any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged,
or other goods, wares, or merchandise shall pay a license tax pursuant to §
110.50 of this subchapter; however, the provisions of §
110.27 of this chapter regarding the issuance of quarterly licenses apply.
   (E)   The applicant for a Home Occupation Fee shall sign an affidavit under
penalty of perjury indicating that he is in compliance with and will remain in
compliance with divisions (A) through (D) of this section.
   (F)   The Director of Finance may require that the applicant produce such
records as he deems necessary to substantiate any information required.
('63 Code, § 6-1.204) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 392-C.S., passed
12-20-83; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed 12-21-91)
§ 110.54 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS AND SIMILAR EXHIBITIONS.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business consisting of a
circus, carnival, or other similar exhibition shall pay a tax of $90 per day,
and for each circus or menagerie parade or procession in, over, or along any
public street or highway of the city by any person not having a license to
exhibit such circus, carnival, or other similar exhibit in the city the license
tax shall be $90 per day.
('63 Code, § 6-1.205) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
§ 110.55 LECTURE, TRAVELING AND TEMPORARY THEATRICAL PERFORMANCES.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business consisting of a
lecture, traveling or temporary theatrical performance such as comedy, spoken
drama, opera, or concert, shall pay a license tax of $30 for each day such
performances are held in any public hall, club room, assembly hall, or theater,
whether or not an admission fee is charged. No additional license to conduct or
carry on any theatrical or vaudeville performance shall be required when such
performance is conducted at any theater licensed pursuant to §
110.50 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.206) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.56 BANKRUPT, FIRE AND SIMILAR SALES.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business consisting of
owning, operating, opening, establishing, managing, or having charge of any
temporary location or place of business of any kind for the sale of any
insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged, or other similar goods, wares, or
merchandise, and every itinerant or transient merchant having a temporary place
of business, but not having any continuous or permanent place of business in
the city, who sells or offers for sale any insolvent, bankrupt, fire damaged,
or other goods, wares, or merchandise shall pay a license tax pursuant to §
110.50 of this subchapter; however, the provisions of §
110.27 of this chapter regarding the issuance of quarterly licenses apply.
('63 Code, § 6-1.207) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.57 BOXING AND WRESTLING MATCHES.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business consisting of a
place to which the public is admitted, and an admission fee is charged, and at
which any boxing or wrestling match or exhibition is conducted, presented, or
carried on shall pay a license tax pursuant to §
110.50 of this subchapter, if permanent, or pursuant to §
110.55, if daily.
('63 Code, § 6-1.208) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.58 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business or occupation
of peddler, solicitor, canvasser, or itinerant vendor shall pay a license tax
pursuant to §
110.51 of this subchapter; however, the provisions of §
110.27 of this chapter regarding quarterly licenses apply.
('63 Code, § 6-1.209) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.59 HOTELS, MOTELS, APARTMENT HOUSES, BED AND BREAKFAST INNS AND ROOMING
HOUSES.
   Every person conducting, carrying on, or managing a business of a hotel,
motel, apartment house, bed and breakfast inn, or rooming house, each with four
units or more, shall pay an annual license tax pursuant to §
110.50 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 6-1.210) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82; Am. Ord. 533-C.S., passed
12-21-91)
Penalty, see § 110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or knowingly or
intentionally misrepresenting to any officer or employee of the city any
material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a period of
not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('63 Code, § 6-1.139) (Ord. 378-C.S., passed 12-7-82)
CHAPTER 111: RESERVED
CHAPTER 112: AMBULANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Regulations supplemental to other laws
Permits and Licenses
   
112.15   Ambulance operator's permit required
   
112.16   Ambulance operator's permit application; fee
   
112.17   Ambulance operator's permit issuance; form
   
112.18   Term of ambulance operator's permit
   
112.19   Suspension and revocation of operator's permit
   
112.20   Transfer of operator's permit
   
112.21   Amendment of operator's permit
   
112.22   Public liability insurance
   
112.23   Ambulance service rates
   
112.24   Chauffeur's license
   
112.25   Driver's and attendant's permits
Operating Regulations
   
112.35   Ambulance operating regulations
   
112.36   Rules and regulations of City Manager
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE. Any privately-owned vehicle equipped or used for transporting the
wounded, injured, or sick and shall include, but is not restricted to,
emergency vehicles used for such purpose.
   AMBULANCE OPERATOR. Any natural person, firm, partnership, association,
company, corporation, or organization engaged in the business of carrying or
transporting wounded, injured, or sick persons for hire over and along public
streets.
('63 Code, § 6-2.01) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
§ 112.02 REGULATIONS SUPPLEMENTAL TO OTHER LAWS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be supplemental to the provisions of
any other pertinent laws of the city.
('63 Code, § 6-2.24) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
PERMITS AND LICENSES
§ 112.15 AMBULANCE OPERATOR'S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating
an ambulance service in the city without first securing a permit so to do from
the city according to each and every requirement of this chapter and without
complying with each and every regulation contained in this chapter pertaining
to the business of carrying or transporting wounded, injured, or sick persons
for hire; provided, however, no permit shall be required of any person who
delivers, but does not pick up, wounded, injured or sick persons in the city.
('63 Code, § 6-2.02) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61; Am. Ord. 163-C.S., passed 4-2-
71)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.16 AMBULANCE OPERATOR'S PERMIT APPLICATION; FEE.
   (A)   Application. An applicant for an ambulance operator's permit shall
file his application with the Council, which application shall be signed and
verified by the applicant, be accompanied by the fee required, and set forth
the following information:
      (1)   The name, business, and residence address of the applicant;
      (2)   The fictitious name, if any, under which such applicant does
business or proposes to do business;
      (3)   The number and type, age, condition, and patient capacity of each
ambulance proposed to be operated by the applicant, stating the make, year of
manufacture, special equipment installed or proposed to be installed in each
such ambulance, and whether such ambulances are or will be operated as
authorized emergency vehicles;
      (4)   The color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing
characteristics to be used to designate the private ambulances of the
applicant;
      (5)   The schedule of rates proposed to be charged for ambulance service;
      (6)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation and care of
wounded, injured, and sick persons;
      (7)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of
unpaid judgments against the applicant, and the nature of the transaction or
acts giving rise to such judgments; and,
      (8)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that the
public convenience and necessity require the granting of a permit, and such
other information as the Council may require.
('63 Code, § 6-2.03)
   (B)   Application hearing. Upon the filing of a fully completed application
for a permit to engage in the business of operating an ambulance, the City
Clerk shall fix a time for a public hearing thereon before the Council for the
purpose of determining whether the public convenience and necessity require the
proposed service. No permit shall be granted until the Council shall, after
investigation and hearing, declare by resolution that the public convenience
and necessity require the proposed service and that the same will promote the
convenience, safety, and welfare of the general public.
('63 Code, § 6-2.04)
   (C)   Application; notice of hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given
to all persons to whom permits for the operation of ambulances have been
theretofore issued. Due notice of the time and place of the public hearing
before the Council shall also be given to the general public by causing a
notice of such hearing to be published twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city, the first publication to be made at least ten days
before the hearing and the second publication to be made at least five days
before the hearing.
('63 Code, § 6-2.05)
   (D)   Fee. The fee which shall be submitted with the application for an
ambulance operator's permit shall be in the sum of $50 to cover administrative
and other costs incident to such application. The required application fee
shall not be returned in the event the permit applied for is refused, revoked,
or suspended as provided for in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.08)
(Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.17 AMBULANCE OPERATOR'S PERMIT ISSUANCE; FORM.
   (A)   Issuance. Upon completing its investigation and hearing, the Council
shall grant the applicant a permit if it finds:
      (1)   That the vehicles described in the application and proposed to be
used are adequate and safe for the purpose of carrying or transporting wounded,
injured, or sick persons;
      (2)   That the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other
distinguishing characteristics proposed to be used upon such ambulances are not
in conflict with and do not imitate any color scheme, insignia, name, monogram,
or other distinguishing characteristics used by any other person in such manner
as to mislead, or tend to mislead, deceive, or defraud the public;
      (3)   That further ambulance service in the city is required by the
public convenience and necessity, and that the applicant is fit, willing, and
able to perform ambulance services and to conform to the provisions of this
chapter and such rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Council. In
making such finding, the Council shall take into consideration the number of
ambulances already in operation, whether existing ambulance service is adequate
to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased ambulance service on
local traffic conditions and the character, experience, and responsibility of
the applicant.
('63 Code, § 6-2.06)
   (B)   Form. If the Council, by resolution, shall find and declare that the
public convenience and necessity require the proposed ambulance service or will
admit additional ambulance service, a permit to such effect shall be issued to
the person entitled thereto by having complied with the requirements of this
chapter and all the requirements of this chapter having been met. The Council,
in its discretion, shall determine the total number of ambulances which may be
operated under such permit. The permit, when issued, shall state the name and
address of the applicant, the number of ambulances which may be operated under
the permit, and the date of issuance thereof. No such permit authorized shall
be issued to any person who shall not have fully complied with all the
requirements of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.07)
(Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
§ 112.18 TERM OF AMBULANCE OPERATOR'S PERMIT.
   Ambulance operator's permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall continue
to be valid from the date of issuance unless the same have been changed,
suspended, or revoked for any of the causes set forth in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.09) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
§ 112.19 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF OPERATOR'S PERMIT.
   (A)   After proper notice and an opportunity of hearing given to the holder
thereof, the Council may at any time revoke, suspend, or change a permit
granted if the ambulance operator and/or driver or attendant fails to operate
an ambulance authorized pursuant to this chapter in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.10)
   (B)   All permits which shall have been suspended or revoked by the Council
shall be surrendered to the City Clerk, and the operation of all ambulances
covered by such permits shall cease, and the continued operation thereof shall
thereafter constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.11)
(Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
§ 112.20 TRANSFER OF OPERATOR'S PERMIT.
   If the ambulance operator to whom an ambulance operator's permit has been
issued desires to sell or transfer his business, the interested buyer or
transferee shall make application for an ambulance operator's permit as
required by this chapter, accompanied by an affidavit of the seller of his
intention to surrender and cancel the permit held by such ambulance operator
conditionally upon, and concurrently with, consummation of such sale and
issuance of a permit in the name of the buyer. If a buyer-applicant or
transferee-applicant for a permit meets all the standards set forth in this
chapter for the issuance of an ambulance operator's permit, the Council shall
issue a new permit to the buyer-applicant and concurrency therewith cancel the
seller's permit.
('63 Code, § 6-2.12) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
§ 112.21 AMENDMENT OF OPERATOR'S PERMIT.
   Any person holding a permit to operate one or more ambulances who desires to
change or amend such permit to substitute a different vehicle for a vehicle
operated under such permit shall do so only upon obtaining permission from the
City Manager therefor, which shall be granted only upon written application
setting forth the particulars of such proposed substitution and upon otherwise
complying with the requirements of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.13) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
§ 112.22 PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   No owner or operator shall drive or operate an ambulance, or cause the same
to be driven or operated, in the city and no permit for the operation thereof
shall be granted until there is on file with the City Clerk, and in full force
and effect at all times while such ambulance is being operated, a policy of
insurance approved by the City Attorney and the Director of Finance, insuring
the owner and operator of such ambulance (such ambulance being designated by
number and state license number) and the city, as co-insured to the extent of
any insurable interest, obligation, or risk of the city, against loss by reason
of injury or damage which may result to persons or property from the faulty or
negligent operation or defective construction or condition of such vehicle, or
from any other cause whatsoever. Such policy shall be limited to not less than
$50,000 for the injury or death of one person, and $100,000 for the injury or
death of two or more persons in the same accident, and $10,000 for injury or
destruction of property. Each policy shall contain a stipulation that any
cancellation or revocation of such policy shall be without effect unless and
until the city is notified thereof in writing 30 days prior to the cancellation
thereof. At any time such policy or insurance is canceled by the company
issuing the same, or the authority of the company to do business in the state
shall cease, the owner shall replace such policy with another policy
satisfactory to the City Attorney and the Director of Finance, and in default
thereof, the owner's permit to operate shall be revoked. The failure of any
owner to notify the City Clerk of any such cancellation or cessation shall
constitute a violation of this chapter and subject such owner to the penalty
provided for violation of this code.
('63 Code, § 6-2.14) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.23 AMBULANCE SERVICE RATES.
   No operator, driver, or attendant of any ambulance having a permit issued by
the city shall fix, charge, or collect for ambulance service a rate or tariff
more than the rate or tariff fixed in the following manner, and all operators
of ambulances shall take such action as necessary to cause rates or tariffs for
the ambulances owned or operated by them to be fixed in the following manner:
   (A)   Flat rate, zone, or special service rate schedule. All owners or
operators of ambulances shall operate on a flat rate or zone basis, or time,
mileage, or special service basis, or a combination thereof, and shall file
with the City Clerk reasonable and uniform rates or a schedule of charges. Such
rates or schedule of charges shall be reviewed and approved by the Council
before becoming effective.
   (B)   Council review. All rates or the schedule of charges established shall
remain effective and shall not be amended or varied from except with the
consent of, or by the order of, the Council, and the Council may from time to
time review such rates or schedule of charges, and may, in its discretion,
require the operator to substantiate by factual evidence and auditable records
the reasonableness and uniformity of such rates or schedule of charges, and
may, based upon its findings on the question of reasonableness and uniformity,
order changes which shall be complied with.
   (C)   Posting and filing schedule. All owners and operators shall keep
posted in a conspicuous place in the interior of each ambulance operated the
rates or schedule of charges approved as to form by the City Manager and
chargeable for the use of such ambulance.
('63 Code, § 6-2.15) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.24 CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE.
   No person shall operate an ambulance on the streets of the city, and no
ambulance operator to whom a permit has been issued shall permit it to be so
driven at any time, for hire unless the driver of such ambulance shall have
first obtained and shall have then in force a current chauffeur's license
issued by the state.
('63 Code, § 6-2.16) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.25 DRIVER'S AND ATTENDANT'S PERMITS.
   (A)   Driver's and attendant's permit. No person shall drive or serve as an
attendant of an ambulance operated under an ambulance operator's permit issued
pursuant to this chapter unless such person is the holder of a valid ambulance
driver's or attendant's permit issued to him in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-2.17)
   (B)   Application. An applicant for an ambulance driver's or ambulance
attendant's permit shall file his application with the Chief of Police, which
application shall be signed and verified by the applicant, be accompanied by
the fee required, and set forth the following information:
      (1)   A statement giving the applicant's full name, present address, and
any other residence address during the past year;
      (2)   The age, sex, marital status, weight, height, color of eyes and
hair, and whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or
misdemeanor, giving the particulars of each such conviction;
      (3)   Whether the applicant has previously been licensed as a driver,
chauffeur, or attendant and, if so, when and where, and whether his license has
ever been revoked or suspended and for what cause; and,
      (4)   Such other information as the Chief of Police may desire.
('63 Code, § 6-2.18)
   (C)   Investigation of applicant and issuance of permit. The Chief of Police
shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for an ambulance driver's or
ambulance attendant's permit and may refuse to issue such permit and may
suspend or revoke a permit theretofore granted, subject to the applicant's
right to request a personal appearance before the Council to offer evidence why
his application should not be refused, suspended, or revoked, for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   If the applicant for a driver's permit is under 21 years of age;
      (2)   If the applicant for an attendant's permit is under 18 years of
age;
      (3)   If the applicant for a driver's permit does not have in force a
current chauffeur's license issued by the state;
      (4)   If the applicant is not of good moral character;
      (5)   If the applicant is unable to speak, read, and write the English
language;
      (6)   If the applicant for a driver's permit has been convicted three or
more times of a violation of any law regulating the operation of motor
vehicles, excepting violations pertaining to stopping, starting, or parking,
within three years of the date of application;
      (7)   If the applicant is convicted, or has been convicted, of a crime
involving moral turpitude, the use or possession of narcotics, or for operating
a vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquors or reckless driving;
      (8)   If the applicant does not possess an advanced American Red Cross
First Aid Certificate or an Advanced First Aid Certificate issued by the United
States Bureau of Mines; or,
      (9)   If the applicant is unable to produce at any time, and not less
frequently than once a year, a certificate of a duly licensed physician stating
that the applicant is, in the opinion of such physician, free of communicable
disease and physical disability.
('63 Code, § 6-2.19)
   (D)   Fee; term. Applicants for driver's and attendant's permits shall pay
to the Director of Finance a fee of $2.50 for each application. A copy of the
receipt for fees paid shall be filed with the Chief of Police. Driver's and
attendant's permits shall continue to be valid from the date of issuance until
the same have been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter on any one or more of the grounds set forth.
('63 Code, § 6-2.20)
   (E)   Form. Driver's and attendant's permits shall be in the form of a card
which shall bear the signature, photograph, and fingerprints of the applicant.
Such card shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy with the fingerprints,
photograph, and signature of the applicant shall be placed on file with the
Chief of Police. The other card shall be carried on the person of the permittee
at all times while driving or serving as an attendant of an ambulance.
('63 Code, § 6-2.21)
(Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 112.35 AMBULANCE OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate an ambulance in violation of any of the
following rules or regulations:
   (A)   Every ambulance shall be equipped with a two-way radio.
   (B)   Every ambulance shall contain such equipment as may be specified by
resolution of the Council.
   (C)   No operator, driver, or attendant shall operate, or permit to be
operated, any ambulance in the city while some or any of the equipment used
therein shall be defective, unsafe, or in an insanitary condition. Every
ambulance shall be at all times subject to the inspection of any officer of the
city.
('63 Code, § 6-2.22) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 112.36 RULES AND REGULATIONS OF CITY MANAGER.
   The City Manager is hereby authorized to issue rules and regulations
prescribing and defining the duties and procedures to be observed and complied
with by an ambulance operator and by drivers and attendants, which rules and
regulations, and any amendments thereto, shall be subject to approval by the
Council. Such rules and regulations, and amendments thereto, when approved by
the Council by resolution and filed with the City Clerk, shall constitute
enforceable provisions of this chapter, and violations thereof shall be subject
to the penalty provisions of this code. Copies of such rules and regulations,
and any amendments thereto, shall be delivered to each ambulance operator and
to each driver and attendant at the time the permit is issued.
('63 Code, § 6-2.23) (Ord. 2858, passed 2-7-61)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Shooting Galleries
   
113.01   Hours of operation
Bingo Games for Charity
   
113.15   Bingo games authorized in accordance with state law
   
113.16   Licenses required
Card Rooms
   
113.30   Definition
   
113.31   Card room permits
   
113.32   Employee work permits
   
113.33   Permits not transferable
   
113.34   Permit fees
   
113.35   Card room regulations
   
113.36   Clubs excluded
   
113.37   State law violations
SHOOTING GALLERIES
§ 113.01 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, keep open, or permit anyone
to enter any shooting gallery, room, or establishment except between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. of each day.
('63 Code, § 4-12.01) (Ord. 2372, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
BINGO GAMES FOR CHARITY
§ 113.15 BINGO GAMES AUTHORIZED IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   Bingo games are hereby authorized to be conducted in the city pursuant to
the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5, which section is hereby adopted by
reference, provided a license is obtained therefor as provided in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-15.01) (Ord. 271-C.S., passed 4-1-77)
§ 113.16 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct bingo games without first obtaining a
license therefor. Any organization which qualifies under the provisions of Cal.
Penal Code § 326.5 to conduct bingo games may obtain an application for an
annual license from the Finance Department upon the payment of a $10
application fee. The completed application shall be presented to the Chief of
Police for an investigation to determine whether the applicant is qualified to
conduct bingo games. No license shall be issued to a qualified organization
unless the portion of the building in which it is proposed to conduct bingo
games has been approved by the Fire Chief for compliance with state and city
fire safety regulations.
('63 Code, § 6-15.02) (Ord. 271-C.S., passed 4-1-77)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CARD ROOMS
§ 113.30 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CARD ROOM. Any space, room, or enclosure furnished or equipped with a table
used, or intended to be used, as a card table for the playing of cards and
similar games, the use of which is available to the public or any portion of
the public; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply
to any bona fide nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor, or other
organization as defined in §
113.36 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-5.01) (Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60)
§ 113.31 CARD ROOM PERMITS.
   (A)   Required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, for himself or for any other
person, firm, or corporation, to engage in or carry on, maintain, or conduct,
or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained, or conducted, any card room
in the city without first securing a permit to do so from the city according to
the provisions of this chapter or without complying with each and every
regulation contained in this chapter pertaining to such card room. The Council
shall issue no more than five card room permits. Each permittee and operator of
a card room shall employ only those persons who have obtained a work permit
pursuant to the provisions of §
113.32(A) of this chapter.
      (2)   Any provision of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, a card
room permit shall not be issued, and any card room permit heretofore issued may
be revoked in accordance with the provisions of division (F) of this section,
if the applicant proposes to operate, or a permittee operates, a card room in
conjunction with, or proposes to engage in or is engaged in, any other business
activity on the same or adjacent premises, excepting only the operation of a
cafe, billiard parlor, tobacconist, or public premises under a general on-sale
liquor or general on-sale beer and wine license.
      (3)   Card rooms are allowed within the following described “card room”
district: All that land lying within the city which is bounded on the north by
Second Street, bounded on the south by Fourth Street, bounded on the west by
“B” Street, and bounded on the east by “I” Street. Card rooms may be permitted
by the City Council outside the card room district after a noticed public
hearing. The hearing shall be noticed in manner specified for conditional use
permits by the Zoning Regulations, Chapter 155 of this code. All card rooms
must be located within a zoning district that allows card rooms as a principal
permitted use.
('63 Code, § 6-5.02)
   (B)   Issuance of business license. The permit to carry on the business of a
card room shall be obtained before any business license shall be issued
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 110.
('63 Code, § 6-5.03)
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   An applicant for a card room permit shall file his application with
the Council. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and
accompanied by the fee required, and shall set forth the following information:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The nature of the business for which the permit is requested;
         (c)   The place where such business is to be conducted;
         (d)   The name and address of the person by whom employed, if any;
         (e)   A brief description of the nature and amount of equipment to be
used in the business;
         (f)   A personal description of the applicant;
         (g)   Evidence of the identity of the applicant in such character as
the Police Chief may require;
         (h)   Two photographs of the applicant, taken within 60 days
immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which
photographs shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of
the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;
         (i)   The true names and addresses of all persons financially
interested in the business. “Persons financially interested” shall include all
persons who share in the profits of the business on the basis of gross or net
revenues;
         (j)   The past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and of all
persons financially interested in the business; and,
         (k)   Fingerprints of the applicant and of persons financially
interested in the business.
      (2)   If an application is made by an entity other than a natural person,
the application shall be signed and verified by the president and secretary of
such entity and shall disclose the identity of all stockholders of such entity
as being persons financially interested in the business.
('63 Code, § 6-5.04)
   (D)   Investigation of applicant. A copy of the application for a card room
permit shall be furnished to the Chief of Police who shall, within a reasonable
time thereafter, inspect, or cause to be inspected, the premises at which the
card room is to be maintained. The Chief of Police shall also investigate or
have investigated the moral character and reputation of the applicant. Upon the
conclusion of his investigation, the Chief of Police shall furnish the City
Manager with a written report of such inspection and investigation, stating his
approval or disapproval for the issuance of such permit and the reasons
therefor. Thereupon, the City Manager shall endorse the Chief of Police's
report and add thereto any information or remarks considered pertinent and file
the same with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall thereupon place the
application on the Council's agenda at the earliest practical date, notifying
the applicant of the time at which the application shall be considered by the
Council.
('63 Code, § 6-5.05)
   (E)   Granting; grounds for denial. An application for a card room permit
may be denied by the Council as set forth in Bus. & Prof. Code § 19850A:
      (1)   The Council shall deny a liscense to any applicant who is
disqualified for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   Failure of the applicant to clearly establish eligibility and
qualification in accordance with this chapter.
         (b)   Failure of the applicant to provide information, documentation,
and assurances required by this chapter or requested by the Chief of Police, or
failure of the applicant to reveal any fact material to qualification, or the
supplying of information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact
pertaining to the qualifying criteria.
         (c)   Conviction of a felony, including a conviction by a federal
court or a court in another state for a crime that would constitute a felony if
committed in California.
         (d)   Conviction of the applicant for any misdemeanor involving
dishonesty or moral turpitude within the ten year period immediately preceding
the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief
pursuant to §
1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code; provided, however, that the
granting of relief pursuant to §
1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code shall not constitute a limitation
on the discretion of the Council under § 19847A or affect the applicant's
burden under § 19848A.
         (e)   Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity
or organized crime, as defined by § 186.2 of the Penal Code.
         (f)   Contumacious defiance by the applicant of any legislative
investigatory body, or other investigatory body of any state or of the United
States, when that body is engaged in the investigation of crimes relating to
gambling; official corruption related to gambling activities; or criminal
profiteering activity or organized crime, as defined by § 186.2 of the Penal
Code.
         (g)   The applicant is less than 21 years of age.
      (2)   This section shall become operative on the occurrence of one of the
events specified in § 66 of the act that added this section to the Business and
Professions Code.
   (F)   Suspension and revocation.
      (1)   Initiating action. The Chief of Police may recommend that any card
room permit issued pursuant to this chapter be suspended or revoked. Such
recommendation shall be filed with the City Manager, setting forth therein the
reasons therefor, together with all supporting facts. The City Manager shall
thereupon submit the same to the Council with his recommendations.
      (2)   Council hearing and action on recommendation. Upon the presentation
of a recommendation for the revocation of a card room permit, the Council may
order such permit suspended or revoked if the Council determines that the
holder of such permit has been guilty of violating any of the provisions of
this chapter or that, because of the manner in which such business has been
operated, its continued operation will be injurious to the public health,
safety, welfare, or morals of the residents of the city. Any of the grounds
upon which the Council shall refuse to issue a permit shall also constitute
grounds for such revocation or suspension. Before ordering such revocation or
suspension, the Council shall cause written notice to be served upon the holder
of the permit that such suspension or revocation has been recommended to the
Council and that a hearing on such recommendation shall be held in the Council
chambers in the City Hall at a time mentioned in such notice, not less than ten
days after the date of such notice. At such hearing, the holder of such permit
shall have an opportunity to be heard and present such evidence in opposition
to such recommendation as he desires.
('63 Code, § 6-5.07)
   (G)   Term. Card room permits shall continue to be valid from the date of
issuance unless suspended or revoked for any of the causes set forth in this
chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-5.08)
(Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60; Am. Ord. 199-C.S., passed 1-5-73; Am. Ord. 446-
C.S., passed 7-16-86)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.32 EMPLOYEE WORK PERMITS.
   (A)   Employee work permits. Card room employees shall obtain a work permit
from the Chief of Police. CARD ROOM EMPLOYEES are hereby defined as any natural
person employed in the operation of a card room, including, without limitation,
dealers, floor personnel, security employees, countroom personnel, cage
personnel, collection personnel, surveillance personnel, data-processing
personnel, appropriate maintenance personnel, waiters and waitresses, and
secretaries, or any other natural person whose employment duties require or
authorize access to restricted card room areas. Applications for such work
permits shall be submitted under oath and shall set forth complete information
concerning the applicant with respect to those matters enumerated in §
113.31(C) of this chapter and such other information as the Chief of Police may
desire.
('63 Code, § 6-5.09)
   (B)   Granting; revocation.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation of each
applicant for a work permit and may refuse to issue a work permit and may
suspend or revoke a work permit theretofore granted as defined in Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code § 19912A:
         (a)   Committed, attempted, or conspired to do any acts prohibited by
this chapter.
         (b)   Engaged in any dishonest, fraudulent, or unfairly deceptive
activities in connection with controlled gambling, or knowingly possessed or
permitted to remain in or upon any premises any card, dice, mechanical devices,
or any other cheating device.
         (c)   Concealed or refused to disclose any material fact in any
investigation by the division.
         (d)   Committed, attempted, or conspired to commit, any embezzlement
or larceny against a gambling licensee or upon the premises of a gambling
establishment.
         (e)   Been convicted in any jurisdiction of any offense involving or
relating to gambling.
         (f)   Accepted employment without prior Council approval in a position
for which he could be required to be licensed under this chapter after having
been denied a license or after failing to apply for licensing when requested to
do so by the Council.
         (g)   Been refused the issuance of any license, permit, or approval to
engage in or be involved with gambling or parimutuel wagering in any
jurisdiction, or had the license, permit, or approval revoked or suspended.
         (h)   Been prohibited under color of governmental authority from being
present upon the premises of any licensed gambling establishment or any
establishment where parimutuel wagering is conducted, for any reason relating
to improper gambling activities or any illegal act.
         (i)   Been convicted of any felony.
      (2)   The Council shall revoke a work permit if it finds, after hearing,
that the holder thereof would be disqualified from holding a state gambling
license for the reasons specified in paragraph (6) or (7) of Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 19850A.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any powers of
the commission with respect to licensing.
      (4)   This section shall become operative on the occurrence of one of the
events specified in § 66 of the act that added this section to the Business and
Professions Code.
      (5)   All applicants for employment work permits are subject to review by
the Department of Justice of Gaming Control. The Department of Justice Division
of Gaming Control, upon review, may object to the of a work permit on any
number of state grounds. Any Department of Justice Division of Gaming Control
objections to issuance of a work permit will result in the denial or revocation
of the permit by the city.
      (6)    Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within
five days after the denial, suspension, or revocation of the work permit. Upon
failure to file such notice within the five-day period, the action of the Chief
of Police in denying, suspending, or revoking such work permit shall be final
and conclusive.
('63 Code, § 6-5.10)
   (C)   Posting. Employee work permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises where the person issued such work permit is employed and shall
remain so posted during the period such person is so employed on the premises.
If the person issued such work permit changes his employment to employment by a
different card room permittee, he shall, within 24 hours thereafter, notify the
Chief of Police for the purpose of having his employee work permit changed so
as to properly designate the name of his new employer. A fee of $1 shall be
paid for such changed permit.
('63 Code, § 6-5.11)
   (D)   Term. Employee work permits shall continue to be valid from the date
of issuance unless suspended or revoked for any of the causes set forth in
division (B) of this section.
('63 Code, § 6-5.12)
(Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60; Am. Ord. 637-C.S., passed 11-21-00; Am. Ord. 718-
C.S., passed 12-20- 07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.33 PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
assignable or transferable.
('63 Code, § 6-5.13) (Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60)
§ 113.34 PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The fee required with the submission of an application for a permit
shall be as follows:
      (1)   For a card room permit, the sum of $50; and,
      (2)   For an employee work permit, the sum of $25.
   (B)   The required application fee shall not be returned in the event the
permit applied for is refused, revoked, or suspended.
('63 Code, § 6-5.14) (Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60)
§ 113.35 CARD ROOM REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate a card room in violation of any of the
following rules or regulations:
   (A)   The operator and his employees shall not extend credit to a player nor
shall "I.O.U.'s" be accepted. With verifiable identification, checks, credit
cards and debit cards may be accepted in the card room, however it shall be
unlawful to accept those checks prohibited under the California Gambling
Control Act as it may be amended.
   (B)   Card rooms shall be located on the ground level floor and shall be so
constructed and maintained that a clear and unobstructed view of the interior
thereof may at all times be had from at least one entrance to such room and
from at least one point outside the building in which the card room is located.
No wall, partition, screen, or similar structure shall be permitted if it
interferes with such unobstructed view of the interior of the card room.
   (C)   No minor shall be permitted at any card table or be allowed to
participate in any game thereat or remain in a card room.
   (D)   Hours of operation shall be limited to no more than 159 hours per
week, to be specified in the card room operator’s permit application and posted
on the premises. The card room operator is required to provide on-site private
security personnel, unless the operator can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the Police Department that the card room has a security/surveillance system in
place. The operator shall comply with all regulations of the Alcohol Beverage
Control as they relate to the operator.
   (E)   All card rooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of
operation.
   (F)   Only table stakes shall be permitted.
   (G)   This chapter does not impose a wagering limit at card rooms or limit
the amount of wagers on games at card rooms pursuant to Cal. Bus.& Prof. Code §
19860.
   (H)   Every two card tables, while any games subject to this chapter are
played thereat, shall have assigned to them a person holding a valid card room
work permit, whose duty it shall be to supervise the games strictly in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the
California Penal Code. The card room permittee may act as table supervisor
without having a work permit.
   (I)   Not more than eight tables shall be permitted in one card room.
   (J)   There shall be conspicuously posted in every card room in letters
plainly visible from all parts thereof, a sign bearing the title “Card Room
Operating Regulations,” which sign shall contain such information relating to
the regulations contained in this chapter as the Chief of Police may require.
   (K)   No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in any
card room.
   (L)   (1)   No charge shall be made and no revenue shall be collected on
account of the use of the card room facilities except on the basis of a uniform
charge per player per hour, or fraction thereof, or on a predetermined fixed
fee per hand assessed of all players at the table and collected prior to the
playing of the hand. This fee shall not be tied to the amount of money bet,
funds in play, winnings collected, or size of the pot.
      (2)   A schedule of such rates shall be conspicuously posted in the card
room.
   (M)    Prior to dealing a new deck of cards, the dealer shall scramble the
cards face-up.
   (N)   No person or entity owning, operating, or controlling a card room
shall allow, suffer, or cause disorderly conduct or breach of the peace in or
around the premises at which a card room is operated. Each card room and each
owner, manager, and operator of a card room shall be responsible and liable for
the security and safety of its patrons in and around the premises in which the
card room is operating. Before it shall be allowed to operate, each card room
and each owner, manager and operator of a card room shall adopt a plan to
provide for the safety and security of patrons. Such plan shall be submitted to
the Chief of Police for review and approval prior to the operation of each card
room. Each card room, and each owner, manager and operator of a card room shall
conspicuously post inside the premises in which a card room is operating the
approved patron security and safety plan, in order to give law enforcement
officials and patrons adequate notice of such plan.
('63 Code, § 6-5.15) (Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60; Am. Ord. 13-C.S., passed 3-17-
64; Am. Ord. 298-C.S., passed 10-17-78; Am. Ord. 547-C.S., passed 7-7-92; Am.
Ord. 634-C.S., passed 11-10-99; Am. Ord. 647-C.S., passed 9-4-01; Am. Ord. 718-
C.S., passed 12-20-07; Am. Ord. 735-C.S., passed 1-6-09; Am. Ord. 740-C.S.,
passed 4-7-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.36 CLUBS EXCLUDED.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to a nonprofit society, club,
fraternal, labor, or other organization having adopted by-laws and duly elected
directors and members when it appears that the tables are for the exclusive use
of members of the society, club, fraternal, labor, or other organization and no
charge is made for any of the facilities.
('63 Code, § 6-5.16) (Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60)
§ 113.37 STATE LAW VIOLATIONS.
   The Council hereby declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to
permit the licensing of any card room for the playing of any game prohibited by
the laws of the state, including but not limited to those games enumerated in
Cal. Penal Code § 330, which section includes banking and percentage games.
('63 Code, § 6-5.17) (Ord. 2853, passed 12-6-60)
SHOOTING GALLERIES
§ 113.50 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, keep open, or permit anyone
to enter any shooting gallery, room, or establishment except between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. of each day.
('63 Code, § 4-12.01) (Ord. 2372, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 114: CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Definitions
Cable System Requirements and Administration
   
114.03   Franchise required
   
114.04   Exceptions to franchise requirement
   
114.05   Failure to obtain a franchise
   
114.06   Existing franchises
   
114.07   Form of franchise
   
114.08   Filing an application
   
114.09   Application fee
   
114.10   Nature of franchise
   
114.11   Administration of chapter; adoption of regulations
   
114.12   Transfers
   
114.13   General conditions upon construction, operation and repair
   
114.14   Protection of city and residents
   
114.15   Enforcement and remedies
   
114.16   Books and records
   
114.17   Reports
   
114.18   Maps required
   
114.19   Other records required
   
114.20   Exemptions
   
114.21   Privacy
   
114.22   Procedures for paying franchise fees and fees in lieu of franchise
fees
Special Rules Applicable to Cable Systems
   
114.30   Applications generally
   
114.31   Application for an initial franchise or renewal franchise
   
114.32   Application for renewal franchise filed pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546
   
114.33   Application for transfer
   
114.34   Legal qualifications
   
114.35   Franchise fee
   
114.36   No exclusivity
   
114.37   Minimum franchise conditions
   
114.38   Rate regulation and consumer protection
Open Video Systems
   
114.40   Additional definition
   
114.41   Applications for grant or renewal of franchise
   
114.42   Transfers
   
114.43   Minimum requirements
   
114.44   Special termination rules
   
114.45   Rate regulation
   
114.46   Fee in lieu of franchise fee
   
114.47   Exclusive contracts
Miscellaneous
   
114.50   Captions
   
114.51   Calculation of time
   
114.52   Severability
   
114.53   Connections to cable system; use of antennae
   
114.54   Discrimination prohibited
   
114.55   Confidential information
   
114.56   Transitional provisions
State Video Service Franchises
   
114.57   General provisions
   
114.58   Definitions
   
114.59   Franchise fees
   
114.60   Customer service
   
114.61   Permits and construction
   
114.62   Emergency alert system
   
114.63   Public, educational, and government access channel capacity, support,
interconnection, and signal carriage
   
114.64   Notices
Cross-reference:
   Cable television users' tax, see § 35.136
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning cable systems, open video systems,
and private communication systems that use the public rights-of-way;
   (B)   Promote the availability of diverse, multimedia information resources
to the community; enhance educational opportunities throughout the community
and build a stronger community;
   (C)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive cable or open
video system services on the widest possible basis to the businesses,
institutions and residents of the city;
   (D)   Encourage economic development while preserving aesthetic and other
community values and prevent proliferation of above-ground facilities; and
   (E)   Encourage universal access to video programming services for all
residents and businesses.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in
the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number
include the plural number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine
gender. The words “shall” and “will” are mandatory, and “may” is permissive.
Words not defined in this chapter shall have the same meaning as in Title VI of
the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and, if
not defined therein, their common and ordinary meaning. References to
governmental entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or
their successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein
are renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered
provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted
broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws,
ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.
   ACCESS, PEG ACCESS, or PEG USE. The availability of a cable system or open
video system for public, education or government use (including institutional
network use) by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and
individuals, including the city and its designated access providers, to
acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a franchisee's editorial
control, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   EDUCATION ACCESS or EDUCATION USE. Access where accredited
educational institutions are the primary or designated programmers or users
having editorial control over their communications;
      (2)   GOVERNMENT ACCESS or GOVERNMENT USE. Access where government
institutions or their designees are the primary or designated programmers or
users having editorial control over their communications;
      (3)   PUBLIC ACCESS or PUBLIC USE. Access where organizations, groups, or
individual members of the general public, on a non-discriminatory basis, are
the primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over
their communications;
   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned
or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, another person.
   BASIC SERVICE. Any service tier regularly provided to all subscribers which
includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et
seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992, as further amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as
further amended from time to time.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. Open video systems (OVS) and cable systems.
   CABLE SERVICE. Shall include the following:
      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection
or use of such video programming or other programming service.
   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include: (A) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations; (B) a facility that serves
subscribers without using, or connecting to a facility that uses, any public
right-of-way within the city; (C) a facility of a common carrier which is
subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II (Common Carriers)
of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of 47 U.S.C. § 541(c)) to
the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming
directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide
interactive on-demand services; (D) any facilities of any electric utility used
solely for operating its electric utility systems; or (E) an OVS that is
certified by the FCC. Any reference to a cable system includes the cable system
as a whole, or any part thereof, including all facilities, pedestals, equipment
cabinets, electronic equipment and devices appurtenant to the system.
   CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used
in a cable system or OVS and which is capable of delivering a television
signal, whether in an analog or digital format. The definition does not
restrict the use of any channel to the transmission of analog television
signals or one way transmission.
   CITY. The City of Eureka in its present incorporated form and all
departments, divisions, and agencies thereof, or any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.
   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or the City Manager's designee.
   CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION OR REPAIR AND THE LIKE. The named actions
interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things, installation, extension,
maintenance, replacement of components, relocation, undergrounding, grading,
site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready, and excavation.
   DOWNSTREAM CHANNEL. A channel designed and activated to carry a transmission
from the headend to other points on a cable communications system, including
interconnections.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   FRANCHISE. An authorization granted by the city to the operator of a cable
communications system, giving the operator the non-exclusive right to occupy
the space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over public rights-of-
way in the city, to provide specified services within a franchise area.
   FRANCHISE AREA. The area of the city that a franchisee is authorized to
serve by the terms of its franchise or by operation of law.
   FRANCHISE FEE. In consideration of the grant and exercise of a franchise to
construct, install, operate, or provide services using a cable communications
system in the public rights-of-way, a grantee shall pay to the city a franchise
fee expressed as a percentage of gross revenues. The franchise shall specify
the fee to be paid, and the gross revenues to be included in the fee
calculation. If a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter specifies a
franchise fee established as the result of limiting applicable law, the city
shall have the option to renegotiate the amount of the franchise fee upon a
change in applicable law. Nothing herein requires a person to pay amounts in
excess of any limits that may be established by state or federal law.
   FRANCHISEE or GRANTEE. A person holding a cable communications system
franchise granted by the city.
   GROSS REVENUES. All cash, credits, property, or other consideration of any
kind or nature received directly or indirectly by a grantee or its affiliates,
from any source whatsoever arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived
from a grantee's operation of a cable system within the franchise area. Gross
revenues include, but are not limited to, fees charged to subscribers for basic
service; fees charged to subscribers for any optional, premium, per-channel, or
per-program service; monthly fees charged to subscribers for any tier of
service other than basic service; installation, disconnection, re- connection
and change-in-service fees; leased channel fees; fees, payments or other
payment received as consideration from programmers for carriage of programming
on the cable system; converter rentals or sales; studio rental, production
equipment and personnel fees; advertising revenues, including a per capita
share of advertising revenues for advertising carried on more than one cable
system; revenues from home shopping channels; sales of programming guides; and
such other revenue sources as may now exist or hereafter develop. The
definition shall be interpreted in a manner which permits the city to collect
the maximum franchise fee permitted by law, irrespective of the source of
revenue. GROSS REVENUES, however, shall not include any bad debt (defined as
unpaid subscriber or advertiser accounts), any taxes on services furnished to a
grantee and imposed directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, city or
other governmental unit and collected by a grantee on behalf of said
governmental unit. The amount paid as a franchise fee shall not be deducted
from gross revenues unless required to be deducted under federal law.
   LICENSE. The legal authorization, terminable at will, to use a particular,
discrete, and limited portion of the public rights-of-way to construct,
operate, or repair a communications facility.
   OPERATOR. When used with reference to a system, refers to a person or group
of persons: (A) who provides service over a cable communications system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such
cable communication system; or (B) who otherwise controls or is responsible
for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable
communication system facility.
   OVS. An open video system within the meaning of federal law. A reference to
an OVS includes pedestals, equipment enclosures (such as equipment cabinets),
amplifiers, power guards, nodes, cables, fiber optics and other equipment
necessary to operate the OVS, or installed in conjunction with the OVS.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint stock company, trust or any other legal entity, but not the city.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property that is owned or under the control of the city
that is not a public right-of-way, including, for purposes of this chapter, but
not limited to, buildings, parks, poles, structures in the public rights-of-way
such as utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities or property owned
by or leased to the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any
street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, drive, or right-of-way or easement dedicated for compatible uses, now
or hereafter existing within the city which may be properly used for the
purpose of installing, maintaining, and operating a cable communications
system; and any other property that a franchisee is entitled by state or
federal law to use by virtue of the grant of a franchise.
   REVOCATION. The city's affirmative act of terminating a franchise.
   SCHOOL. Any accredited primary school, secondary school, college, and
university.
   SUBSCRIBER. The city or any person who is lawfully receiving, for any
purpose or reason, any cable service via a cable communications system, whether
or not a fee is paid for such service.
   TERMINATION. The conclusion of a franchise by any means, including, but not
limited to, by expiration of its term, abandonment or revocation.
   TRANSFER.  
      (1)   Any transaction in which:
         (a)   All or a portion of any cable communication system or any rights
to use or operate facilities located in the public rights-of-way are sold,
conveyed, transferred, assigned, encumbered (except as set forth herein) or
leased, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by one or more
transactions to another person, whether voluntarily or by operation of law or
otherwise; or
         (b)   There is any change, acquisition, or transfer in the identity of
the person in control of the grantee, or any person that controls grantee,
including, without limitation, forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation
or receivership; or
         (c)   The rights or obligations under the franchise are sold,
conveyed, transferred, assigned, encumbered (except as set forth herein) or
leased, in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by one or more
transactions to another person, whether voluntarily or by operation of law or
otherwise. It will be presumed, for purposes of division (1)(b) of this
definition, that any transfer or cumulative transfer of a voting interest by a
person or group of persons acting in concert of 10% or more of grantee, or
person that controls grantee, or any change in the managing general partners of
a grantee is a change of control.
      (2)   TRANSFER does not include:
         (a)   A lease of channel capacity pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §§ 532 or 573;
         (b)   The transmission of a commodity or electronic signal using
facilities on a common carrier basis;
         (c)   A lease or other right to use the cable communications system
mandated pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 224; or
         (d)   A pledge in trust, mortgage or other encumbrance against the
cable communications system, or any portion thereof, given to a bona fide
institutional lender in connection with a loan or other financing required to
secure the construction, operation, or repair of the cable communications
system (“loan”) provided that such loan is subject to the rights and powers of
the city pursuant to the franchise and applicable law, including, without
limitation, the right of the city to approve any transfer upon foreclosure.
“Transferring” and “Transferee” shall have correlative meanings.
   UPSTREAM CHANNEL. A channel designed and activated to carry transmissions
from a point on the cable communications system, other than the headend, to the
headend or another point on the cable communications system.
   USER. A person or the city utilizing a channel, capacity or equipment and
facilities for purposes of producing or transmitting material, as contrasted
with the receipt thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
CABLE SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 114.03 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No person may construct or operate a cable communications system in the city
without first obtaining a grant of a franchise from the city.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.04 EXCEPTIONS TO FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT.
   The following persons or entities shall not be required to obtain a
franchise under this chapter:
   (A)   The city;
    (B)   A UVPP (unaffiliated video program provider) that is only delivering
cable service or other communications service (as that term is used in 47
U.S.C. § 542(h)) to subscribers.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.05 FAILURE TO OBTAIN A FRANCHISE.
   Consistent with the requirements of due process, a person's failure to
obtain a franchise as required by this chapter may, in the city's discretion,
result in:
   (A)   Forfeiture, by operation of law, of the person's cable communication
system located in the public rights-of-way that are not authorized by an
existing franchise; and/or
   (B)   A requirement that the cable communication system be removed, and that
penalties and damages be paid.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.06 EXISTING FRANCHISES.
   Grantees of franchises existing as of the effective date of this chapter
shall, in addition to all the obligations and duties prescribed by the terms of
their existing franchises, be subject to the substantive and procedural
requirements herein, except as prohibited by applicable law. Nothing herein is
intended to invalidate a lawful, existing franchise or to waive any obligations
imposed by such a franchise. Notwithstanding the foregoing, provisions of this
chapter that expressly refer to a “franchise granted pursuant to this chapter”
shall not apply to franchises initially granted prior to the effective date of
this chapter.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.07 FORM OF FRANCHISE.
   A franchise shall be issued in the form of a written agreement, approved by
resolution of the City Council, and must be accepted by the franchisee to
become effective.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.08 FILING AN APPLICATION.
   A person seeking to obtain a franchise; transfer a franchise; extend the
term of an existing franchise; renew a franchise; or modify an existing
franchise to add new services that are required to be authorized by a franchise
pursuant to this chapter, shall submit a signed original of its application and
six copies to the Clerk of the Board. The Clerk of the Board shall make a
proposal available for public inspection. The application must conform to all
of the requirements of this chapter. Requests for other types of franchise
modifications may be processed by the city without an application, and
submitted for approval. However, nothing herein shall prevent the city from
requiring a application in the event the city determines, based on the nature
of the requested modification, that the public interest would best be served by
the submission of a application pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.09 APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   An applicant shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city
related to the processing of any application. Processing costs shall include,
but not be limited to, the costs of services rendered by any city employee,
agent or representative, including consultants and attorneys.
   (B)   The initial deposit of the application fee for the consideration of an
application for issuance, renewal, transfer, or modification of a franchise
shall be in the amount of $5,000, or for a license in the amount of $1,000,
which deposit shall be submitted with the application. The city may, as costs
are incurred, draw upon the deposit to recover its administrative costs,
including, but not limited to, the reasonable cost of outside consultants
retained by the city related to the city's consideration and processing of a
franchise or license. The City Manager, at any time, may require the applicant
to deposit additional sums if it appears that the initial deposit or subsequent
deposits will be exhausted prior to the final action by the city relating to
the consideration by the city of an application for issuance, renewal,
transfer, or modification of a franchise or license. The applicant will not be
entitled to further consideration by the city its requested action until such
time as the additional deposit required by the City Manager has been deposited
with the city. In the event the amount of the deposit of an applicant is in
excess of the amount of the administrative expenses of the city related to the
action requested, then the applicant shall be entitled to a return of any such
excess amount. In addition, an applicant that is awarded a franchise or a
license shall pay the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all
publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of a
franchise or license. Such payment shall be made to the Auditor-Controller of
the city within 30 days after the city furnishes the franchisee or licensee
with a statement of such expenses.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.10 NATURE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Scope. A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall authorize
and permit a franchisee to construct, operate, maintain and repair a cable
system or an OVS (as applicable) to provide cable service in the city, and for
that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct,
maintain facilities appurtenant to such system in, on, over, under, upon,
across, and along the public rights-of-way, and along such other public
property that the city may authorize a franchisee to use.
   (B)   Nothing passes by implication. A franchise shall not convey rights
other than as specified in this chapter, or in a franchise agreement; no rights
shall pass by implication.
   (C)   Franchise not in lieu of other authorizations. A franchise shall not
include, or be a substitute for:
      (1)   Compliance with requirements for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the city, including, but not limited to,
complying with the conditions the city may establish before constructing
facilities for, or providing, non-cable services;
      (2)   Any permit, agreement or authorization required in connection with
operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including by way
of example and not limitation, encroachment permits for street construction;
      (3)   Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the
city or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the
franchise.
   (D)   Franchisee must comply with other laws. A franchise does not relieve a
franchisee of the franchisee's duty to comply with all the city ordinances and
regulations, and every franchisee must comply with the same. Likewise, the
rights granted under a franchise are subject to the exercise of police and
other powers the city now has or may later obtain, including but not limited to
the power of eminent domain. Every franchise shall be deemed to incorporate all
the requirements of the City Charter.
   (E)   Franchise not a grant of property rights. A franchise does not convey
title, equitable or legal, in the public rights-of-way. Rights granted may not
be subdivided or subleased.
   (F)   Franchise non-exclusive. No franchise shall be exclusive, or prevent
the city from issuing other franchises or authorizations, or prevent the city
from itself constructing, operating or repairing its own cable communications
system with or without a franchise.
   (G)   Franchise term. Every franchise shall be for a term of years, which
term shall be eight years, unless a franchise specifies otherwise.
   (H)   Costs borne by franchisee. Unless otherwise specifically stated in a
franchise, or is required or permitted by law, all acts which a franchisee is
required to perform under the franchise or applicable law must be performed at
the franchisee's expense.
   (I)   Failures to perform. If a cable communications system operator fails
to perform work that it is required to perform within the time provided for
performance, the city may perform the work and bill the operator therefor. The
operator shall pay the amounts billed within 30 days.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.11 ADMINISTRATION OF CHAPTER; ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Adoption of regulations. The city may from time to time adopt
regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter. This chapter, and any
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, are not contracts with any
franchisee, and may be amended at any time. Nothing in this section shall
affect a franchisee's right to challenge the lawfulness or applicability of a
future exercise of the police or legislative power of the city.
   (B)   Delegation. The City Manager or designee(s) are hereby authorized to
administer the provisions of this chapter and any franchise issued pursuant
thereto, and to provide any notices (including noncompliance notices) and to
take any action on the city's behalf that may be required hereunder or under
applicable law.
   (C)   No waiver. The failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to
exercise a right or to require compliance or performance under a franchise or
any other applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such
right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been
specifically waived in writing.
   (D)   Administration of public, educational and government access. The city
may designate one or more entities, including itself, to control and manage the
use of public, educational and government access channels, facilities and
equipment.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.12 TRANSFERS.
   (A)   Prior approval required. Every franchise shall be deemed to be held in
trust, and to be personal to the franchisee. Any transfer that is made without
the prior approval of the city shall be deemed invalid.
   (B)   Exception for mortgages. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, pledges in trust or mortgages of the assets of a cable communications
system to secure the construction, operation, or repair of the system may be
made without application and without the city's prior consent. However, no such
arrangement may be made without the city's prior consent if it would in any
respect under any condition prevent the cable communications system operator or
any successor from complying with the franchise or applicable law; or permit a
third party to succeed to the interest of the operator, or to own or control
the system, without the prior consent of the city. Any mortgage, pledge or
lease shall be subject to and subordinate to the rights of the city under any
franchise, this chapter, or other applicable law.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.13 GENERAL CONDITIONS UPON CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND REPAIR.
   (A)   Franchisee must follow local rules. The construction, operation, and
repair of cable communications systems shall be performed in compliance with
all lawful and applicable laws, ordinances, departmental rules, regulations,
and practices affecting such system. By way of example, and not limitation,
this includes zoning and safety codes, construction standards, regulations for
providing notice to persons that may be affected by system construction, and
directives governing the time, place and manner in which facilities may be
installed in the public rights-of-way. Persons engaged in the construction,
operation, or repair of communications facilities shall exercise reasonable
care in the performance of all their activities and shall use commonly accepted
methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents that are likely to
cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to property.
   (B)   No permit without franchise. A franchise is required before a permit
may be issued for work associated with the construction of a cable
communications system. Any permit issued for such work to, or on behalf of, a
person that does not hold a franchise shall vest no rights in the permittee;
the permit may be revoked at will, and the permittee shall remove all
facilities installed under the permit upon the city's demand.
   (C)   Permits must be obtained. Construction, operation, or repair of a
cable communications system shall not commence until all required permits have
been obtained from the proper city officials and all required fees have been
paid. All work performed will be performed in strict accordance with the
conditions of the permit. Upon order of the city, any work and/or construction
undertaken that is not completed in compliance with the city's requirements, or
which is installed without obtaining necessary permits and approvals shall be
removed.
   (D)   No interference. Interference with the use of the public rights-of-way
by others, including others that may be installing cable communications
systems, must be minimized. The city may require a person using the public
rights-of-way to cooperate with others through joint trenching and other
arrangements to minimize adverse impacts on the public rights-of-way.
   (E)   Plans for and publicizing work. Work shall be publicized as the city
may direct from time to time. The publication of work may be used to notify the
public and operators of other communications systems of the impending work in
order to minimize inconvenience and disruption to the public.
      (1)   Each cable communications system operator shall provide the city a
plan for any initial system construction or for any substantial rebuild,
upgrade or extension of its facility, which shall show its timetable for
construction of each phase of the project, and the areas of the city that will
be affected.
      (2)   The city may from time to time, when the city receives application
for a permit to use a particular route, or upon its own initiative, designate
by published order a route or proposed route for installation of communications
facilities and may: (1) require all persons who wish to emplace underground
facilities along that route or any part thereof to install them during a
specified period; and (2) otherwise prohibit emplacement of such facilities
along the route or any part thereof for 24 months or after such other, longer
period as is necessary to protect the public interest.
   (F)   Existing poles to be used. To the extent possible, operators of cable
communications systems shall use existing poles and conduit. Additional poles
may not be installed in the right-of-way, nor may pole capacity be increased by
vertical or horizontal extenders, without the permission of the city.
      (1)   To minimize disruption of public passage or infrastructure, to
forestall or relieve exhaustion of public rights-of-way capacity, or to protect
environmentally sensitive areas, the city may require as a condition of issuing
any public rights-of-way permit for erection of new poles or construction of
underground conduit, the installation of which requires excavation of or along
any traveled way, that the franchisee, licensee, or holder of the rights-of-way
permit emplace pole space or empty conduits in excess of its own present and
reasonably foreseeable requirements for the purpose of accommodating the city
and/or other franchisees and licensees.
   (G)   Undergrounding.
      (1)   Whenever all existing utilities are located underground in an area
in the city, every cable communications system operator in the same area must
locate its cable communications system underground.
      (2)   Whenever the owner of a pole locates or relocates underground
within an area of the city, every cable communications system operator in the
same area shall concurrently relocate its facilities underground.
      (3)   The City Manager may, for good cause shown, exempt a particular
system or facility or group of facilities from the obligation to locate or
relocate facilities underground, where relocation is impractical, where
ordinary engineering practices making undergrounding impractical, or where the
city and the subscriber's interest can be protected in another manner. Nothing
in this division (G) prevents the city from ordering communications facilities
to be located or relocated underground under other provisions of the municipal
code.
   (H)   Prompt repairs. Any and all public rights-of-way, other public
property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the
construction, operation, maintenance or repair of a cable communications system
shall be promptly repaired by the operator. Public property and public rights-
of- way must be restored to the satisfaction of the city and to a condition as
good or better than before the disturbance or damage occurred. No tree trimming
shall be performed without the permission of the city and other affected
authorities, and any tree trimming must be performed in strict accordance with
the municipal code.
   (I)   Movement of facilities for government.
      (1)   A cable communications system operator shall, within a reasonable
period of time specified by the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate, or remove any of its property when required by the city by reason of
traffic conditions; public safety; public right-of-way construction and repair
(including regrading, resurfacing or widening); public right-of-way vacation;
construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power
lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of government-owned system or
utility, public work, public facility, or improvement; or for any other purpose
where the work involved would be aided by the removal or relocation of the
cable communications system. Collectively, such matters are referred to below
as the “public work.”
      (2)   The city shall provide written notice describing where the public
work is to be performed as far in advance as reasonably possible but in any
event at least one week prior to the deadline by which a cable communications
system operator must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove its facilities. Such action on the part of the franchisee shall be
undertaken at no cost to the city. Provided that, in an emergency where a cable
communications system creates or is contributing to an imminent danger to
health, safety, or property, the city need not provide one week's written
notice but should make an effort to contact the franchisee by telephone to
enable the franchisee to take prompt action. After such effort on the part of
the city to contact the franchisee by telephone, the city may protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, remove, or relocate any or all parts of the cable
communications system without further notice, and charge the cable
communications system operator for costs incurred.
   (J)   Movement for others.
      (1)   To accommodate the construction, operation, or repair of the
facilities of another person authorized to use the public rights-of-way or
public property, a franchisee shall, by a reasonable time specified by such
person, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, temporarily relocate or
temporarily remove its facilities. The franchisee must be given written notice
describing where the construction, operation or repair is to be performed at
least 15 days prior to the time by which its work must be completed.  
      (2)   A cable communications system operator shall, on the request of any
person holding a valid permit issued by a governmental authority, temporarily
raise or lower its wires by a time specified to permit the moving of buildings
or other objects. A cable communications system operator shall be given not
less than seven days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
The reasonable costs associated with of such temporary removal, relaying,
relocation, or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid in advance by the
person requesting the same.
   (K)   Abandonment in place.
      (1)   A cable communications system operator may abandon any property in
place in the public rights-of-way upon written notice to the city. However, if,
within 90 days of the receipt of written notice of abandonment, the city
determines that the safety, appearance, functioning or use of the public right-
of- way and facilities in the public right-of-way will be adversely affected,
the property must be removed by a date specified by the city.
      (2)   A cable communications system operator that abandons its property
must, upon request, transfer ownership of the properties to the city at no
cost, and execute necessary quitclaim deeds and indemnify the City against
future costs associated with mitigating or eliminating any environmental hazard
associated with the abandoned property.
   (L)   System subject to inspection. Every cable communications system
facility shall be subject to inspection and testing by the city upon reasonable
prior notice and conditions. Each operator must respond to requests for
information regarding its system and plans for the system as the city may from
time to time issue, including requests for information regarding its plans for
construction, operation and repair and the purposes for which the plant is
being constructed, operated, or repaired.
   (M)   Underground services alert. Each operator of a cable communications
system that places facilities underground shall be a member of the regional
notification center for subsurface installations (Underground Services Alert)
and shall field mark the locations of its underground communications facilities
upon request. The operator shall identify the location of its cable
communication system for the city at no charge.
   (N)   Plan for construction. Every franchise shall specify for the city a
construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade or
rebuild of the cable communications system. The schedule shall provide for the
prompt completion of the project, shall show its timetable for construction of
each phase of the project, with benchmarks for deliverables and the areas of
the city that will be affected. The city shall have the right to impose
penalties on the operator for a failure to meet the accepted timetable and
benchmarks.
   (O)   Use of facilities by the city. The city shall have the right to
install and maintain, free of charge upon any poles or in any conduit owned by
a franchisee, any wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere
with the cable service operations of the franchisee.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.14 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS.
   (A)   Indemnity required. No franchise shall be valid or effective until and
unless the city obtains an adequate indemnity from the franchisee. The
indemnity must:
      (1)   Release the city from and against any and all loss, damage,
expense, cost (without limitation the cost of litigation) liability and
responsibility in or arising out of the construction, operation or maintenance
of the cable communications system. Each cable communications system operator
must further agree not to sue or seek any money or damages from the city in
connection with the above mentioned matters.
      (2)   Indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its elected and
appointed officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all
liability, loss, damage, cost, claims, demands or causes of action of any kind
or nature, and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys'
fees, liabilities, damages, orders, judgments or decrees sustained by the city
or any third party arising out of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of the
acts, errors or omissions of the cable communications system operator or its
agents, independent contractors or employees related to or in any way arising
out of the construction, operation or repair of the system.
      (3)   Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the
release, indemnification, and hold harmless provision shall survive the term of
the franchise or other authorization and continue in full force and effect as
to the party's responsibility to indemnify.
   (B)   Insurance required. A franchisee (or those acting on its behalf) shall
not commence construction or operation of the system without obtaining
insurance in amounts and of a type reasonably satisfactory to the city. The
required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the
franchisee has facilities in the public rights-of-way. If the franchisee, its
contractors, or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, the city may
order such entities to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and
approved.
   (C)   Proof. Certificates of insurance and endorsements, reflecting evidence
of the required insurance and naming the city as an additional insured, and
other proofs as the city may find reasonably necessary, shall be filed with the
city. For persons issued franchises after the effective date of this chapter,
certificates and other required proofs shall be filed within 30 days of the
issuance of a franchise, prior to the commencement of construction, once a year
thereafter, and whenever there is any change in coverage. For entities that
have facilities in the public rights-of-way as of the effective date of this
chapter, the certificate and endorsements shall be filed within 60 days of the
effective date of this chapter, annually thereafter, and whenever there is any
change in coverage, unless a pre-existing franchise provides for filing of
certificates and/or endorsements in a different manner. In the event that the
insurance certificate and/or endorsements provided indicates that the insurance
shall terminate or lapse during the term of the franchise or license, then in
that event, the cable communications system operator shall furnish, at least 30
days prior to the expiration of the date of such insurance, a renewed
certificate of insurance and endorsement as proof that equal and like coverage
has been or will be obtained prior to any such lapse or termination during the
balance of the franchise or license under which the cable communications system
operates.
   (D)   Certificate contents. All certificates and/or endorsements shall
contain a provision that coverages afforded under these policies will not be
canceled until at least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the
city. Policies shall be issued by companies authorized to do business under the
laws of the State of California. Financial ratings of the insurer shall be no
less than “A” VII or better in the latest edition of “Best's Key Rating Guide”,
published by A.M. Best Guide.
   (E)   Insurance amounts. A cable communications system operator (and those
acting on its behalf to construct or operate the system) shall maintain the
following minimum insurance. The city shall be named as an additional insured
by endorsement on the general liability and automotive policies; those
insurance policies shall be primary and contain a cross-liability clause.
      (1)   (a)   Comprehensive general liability insurance to cover liability,
bodily injury, and property damage. Exposures to be covered are: premises,
operations, products/completed operations, and certain contracts. Coverage must
be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability:
            1.   Bodily injury:
               a.   Each occurrence:   $1,000,000
               b.   Annual aggregate:   $3,000,000
            2.   Property damage:
               a.   Each occurrence:   $1,000,000
               b.   Annual aggregate:   $ 3,000,000
            3.   Personal injury:
               Annual Aggregate:   $3,000,000
         (b)   Completed operations and products liability shall be maintained
for two years after the termination of the franchise or license (in the case of
the cable communications system owner or operator) or completion of the work
for the cable communications system owner or operator (in the case of a
contractor or subcontractor).
         (c)   Property damage liability insurance shall include coverage for
the following hazards: X - explosion, C - Collapse, U - underground.
      (2)   Workers' compensation insurance shall be maintained during the life
of this contract to comply with statutory limits for all employees, and in the
case any work is sublet, each cable communications system operator shall
require the subcontractors similarly to provide workers' compensation insurance
for all the latter's employees unless such employees are covered by the
protection afforded by each cable communications system operator. Each cable
communications system operator and its contractors and subcontractors shall
maintain during the life of this policy employers liability insurance. Workers'
compensation insurance shall include a waiver of subrogation clause in favor of
the city. The following minimum limits must be maintained:
         (a)   Workers' compensation:   Statutory
         (b)   Employer's liability:      $500,000 per occurrence
      (3)   Comprehensive auto liability:
         (a)   Bodily injury:
            1.   Each occurrence:   $1,000,000
            2.   Annual aggregate:   $3,000,000
         (b)   Property damage:
            1.   Each occurrence:   $1,000,000
            2.   Annual aggregate   $3,000,000
      Coverage shall include owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles. In every
franchise or license agreement the city shall reserve the right to require any
other insurance coverage it deems necessary depending upon exposures.
   (F)   Performance bond. Every operator of a cable communications system
shall obtain and maintain a performance bond to ensure the faithful performance
of its responsibilities under this chapter and any franchise. The amount of the
performance bonds shall be set by the city franchise, but shall not be less
than 10% of the estimated cost of constructing or (in the case of existing
systems) upgrading the system, and shall include a sufficient amount to cover
the removal of facilities and/or restoration of city facilities within the
right-of-way. The bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be
required through the permitting process. The bond shall be in a form reasonably
acceptable to the City Attorney and Risk Manager. Bonds must be obtained prior
to the effective date of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a
franchise specifically provides otherwise.
   (G)   Security fund. Every cable communications system operator shall
establish and maintain a cash security fund or provide the city an irrevocable
letter of credit in the amount of $100,000 to secure the payment of fees owed,
to secure any other performance promised in a franchise, and to pay any taxes,
fees, penalties or liens owed to the city. The letter of credit shall be in a
form and with an institution acceptable to the city. Should the city draw upon
the cash security fund or letter of credit, the cable communications system
operator shall, within 14 days, restore the fund or the letter of credit to the
full required amount. This security fund/letter of credit may be waived or
reduced by the city for a franchisee where the city determines in its
discretion that a particular franchisee's operations are sufficiently limited
that a security fund/letter of credit is not necessary to secure the required
performance. The city may from time to time require a Franchisee to change the
amount of the required security fund/letter of credit to reflect changed risks
to the city and to the public, including delinquencies in taxes or other
payments to the city. The cash security fund or letter of credit must be
obtained prior to the effective date of any franchise, license, transfer or
franchise renewal, unless a franchise specifically provides otherwise.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.15 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   Franchise violation; notice and procedures. Before revoking a
franchise or issuing an order to assess liquidated damages, the city shall
follow the procedures set forth below:
      (1)   The city shall notify a cable communications system operator in
writing of any alleged violation (“violation notice”) of a franchise or this
chapter. The violation notice shall:
         (a)   Identify the violation;
         (b)   Direct the cable communications system operator to cure the
violation or show cause why the violation cannot or should not be cured; and
         (c)   State the time for the cable communications system operator's
response, which shall be at minimum 30 days from the date of issuance of the
violation notice, except for violations that present a danger to public health,
safety or welfare, in which case the time for response may be shortened.
      (2)   Within the time period designated for response, the cable
communications system operator shall respond in writing to the city, indicating
that:
         (a)   The cable communications system operator intends to contest the
violation notice and describing all facts relevant to its claim; or
         (b)   The cable communications system operator has completely cured
the violation, in which case the cable communications system operator shall
provide documentation demonstrating that the violation has been completely
cured; or
         (c)   The cable communications system operator has begun to correct
the violation, however, the violation cannot be corrected immediately despite
the cable communications system operator's continued due diligence, in which
case the operator shall describe in detail the steps already taken and
operator's proposed plan and time schedule for completely curing the violation.
Correction of the violation is not complete until all damages and penalties
owed are paid in full.
      (3)   If the cable communications system operator contests the violation
notice or the city determines that the cable communications system operator has
failed to completely cure the violation, to submit an acceptable plan to cure
the violation, or to work diligently to cure the violation, the city shall
schedule a hearing before the City Council (“violation hearing”). The city
shall provide the cable communications system operator written notice of the
violation hearing at least 20 days prior to the hearing (“hearing notice”).
      (4)   The hearing notice shall indicate:
         (a)   The time and place of the violation hearing;
         (b)   The nature of the violation; and
         (c)   The cable communications system operator's right to present oral
and written testimony at an open and public meeting.
      (5)   At the violation hearing, the City Council shall hear and consider
evidence from the cable communications system operator, city staff and members
of the public regarding the alleged violation. The cable communications system
operator shall be given an opportunity to present any and all evidence relating
to the alleged violation.
      (6)   If, based upon the evidence presented at the violation hearing, the
City Council finds that cable communications system operator has violated a
franchise, this chapter or any applicable state or federal law, the City
Council may issue an order assessing liquidated damages if provided for by the
cable communications system operator's franchise, or, subject to division (B)
of this section and the terms of the cable communications system operator's
franchise, revoke or shorten the franchise.
   (B)   Revocation and termination. The City Council may revoke a franchise or
reduce the term of a franchise if it finds, after complying with procedures set
forth above, that a cable communications system operator has violated this
chapter or its franchise or license; has defrauded or attempted to defraud the
city or subscriber; or has attempted to evade the requirements of this chapter
or its franchise or license. Except as to violations that are impossible to
cure, and as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section, the franchise
may only be revoked if the franchisee:
      (1)   Was given notice of the default; and
      (2)   Thirty days to cure the default; and
      (3)   The franchisee failed to cure the default, or to propose a schedule
for curing the default acceptable to the city where it is impossible to cure
the default in 30 days.
   (C)   Exception for certain acts. No opportunity to cure is required for
repeated violations, and fraud and attempted fraud shall be deemed incurable.
Further, the city may declare a franchise forfeited without opportunity to cure
where a franchisee:
      (1)   Voluntarily stops providing service it is required to provide; or
      (2)   Transfers the franchise without the prior consent of the city.
   (D)   Exception for bankruptcy.
      (1)   A franchise will terminate automatically by force of law 120
calendar days after an assignment for the benefit of creditors or the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the
franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy assignment
for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding. However, the
franchise may be reinstated within that 120-day period, if:
         (a)   Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated;
or
         (b)   Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise, and has executed an
agreement, approved by any court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to
be bound by the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise.
      (2)   In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the
facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the city may revoke the
franchise following a public hearing before the City Council by serving notice
upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the
franchise and all rights and privileges thereunder will be revoked and will
terminate 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless:
         (a)   The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the
successful bidder; and
         (b)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise and this
chapter.
   (E)   Effect of termination or forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of
a franchise, whether by action of the city as provided above, or if a franchise
expires and is not renewed, the franchisee must stop using the cable
communications system for the purposes authorized by the franchise. The city
may take possession of some or all of franchisee's facilities, or require the
franchisee or its bonding company to remove some or all of the franchisee's
facilities from the city's property, and restore affected property to its same
or better condition. This provision does not permit the city to remove
facilities that are used to provide another service for which the franchisee
holds a valid franchise issued by the city or if the franchisee's facilities
are otherwise lawfully located on the city property pursuant to applicable
local, state or federal law.
   (F)   Remedies cumulative. Remedies provided for under this chapter or under
a franchise shall be cumulative. Recovery by the city of any amounts under
insurance, the performance bond, the security fund or letter of credit, does
not limit a franchisee's duty to indemnify the city; or relieve a franchisee of
its franchise obligations or limit the amounts owed to the city.
   (G)   Liquidated damages required in franchise. A franchise granted pursuant
to this chapter shall require liquidated damages, in an amount to be specified
in the franchise, for specified breaches of the franchise, including but not
limited to, failure to commence construction, failure to meet construction plan
benchmarks, failure to comply with rebuild plan benchmarks, failure to commence
service, and material breach of franchise obligation(s). The franchise shall
also provide that the city may withdraw liquidated damages owed from the
grantee's security deposit, after complying with the procedures set forth in
division (A) of this section. Liquidated damages shall commence on that date
that performance was due and/or failed, and continue until the grantee
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that the grantee has fully
performed its obligations giving rise to the payment of liquidated damages. Any
obligation to pay liquidated damages does not in any way affect the grantee's
obligation to pay franchise fees or perform other franchise obligations and
such liquidated damages do not constitute franchise fees and are not subject to
any limitations on franchise fees contained in 47 U.S.C. § 542(b). The grantee
acknowledges that any obligation to pay liquidated damages are not costs of
satisfying franchise requirements as provided in 47 C.F.R. § 76.925. The
grantee agrees it will not pass the cost of any liquidated damages to
subscribers through subscriber rates or itemize or otherwise identify on
subscriber bills any obligation the grantee may have to pay liquidated damages.
   (H)   Penalties, fines and other monetary sanctions.
      (1)   Penalties. In addition to any other remedies provided for in this
chapter or otherwise available by law, the city shall have the power to impose
monetary penalties in the event a grantee violates any provision of this
chapter, a franchise, or any regulation lawfully adopted thereunder. The
amounts of such penalties shall be specified in the franchise and shall be
based on the following principles:
         (a)   Penalties shall exceed the financial benefits to a grantee
delaying or failing to comply with the applicable requirement;
         (b)   Even where such benefits are not easily discernible, the
penalties shall be high enough to have a significant deterrent effect on a
grantee; and
         (c)   Penalties shall be sufficient to protect the city and other
affected parties against loss of revenues resulting from violations.
      (2)   Other monetary sanctions. A franchise shall also provide for fines,
liquidated damages and other monetary sanctions, the amounts of which shall
also reflect the foregoing principles.
      (3)   Private suit against a grantee.
         (a)   Any person or organization adversely affected by a violation, or
by a pattern and practice of violations, shall have the right to sue a grantee
in a court of competent jurisdiction for damages and for injunctive and other
relief to require enforcement of the franchise. Organizations shall be entitled
to sue on behalf of themselves or their members.
         (b)   The remedy herein provided shall be in addition to any remedies
provided by law.
         (c)   Except in emergency situations in which immediate relief is
required, private litigants shall notify the City Attorney not fewer than ten
days prior to filing suit. However, suit by the city shall not preempt the
private litigant's right to proceed.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person who violates any
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for
each offense; each day of said violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.16 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Generally. Each cable communications system operator shall provide the
city access to books and records related in whole or in part to the
construction, operation, or repair of the cable communications system, or a
group of systems of which the system is a part, so that the city may inspect
and copy these books and records. The records include, but are not limited to
revenue records and other records related to compliance with any provision of
this chapter or a franchise. A franchisee is responsible for obtaining or
maintaining the necessary possession or control of all such books and records,
so that it can produce the documents upon request. Books and records must be
maintained for a period of five years, except that a franchise may specify a
shorter period for certain categories of voluminous books and records where the
information contained therein can be derived simply from other materials. The
phrase BOOKS AND RECORDS shall be read expansively to include information in
whatever format stored.
   (B)   Production. Books and records requested shall be produced to the city
by a time and at a location in the city designated by the City Manager.
However, if the requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security
reasons cannot be copied and moved, then the franchisee may request that the
inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city and
the franchisee, provided that:
      (1)   The franchisee must make necessary arrangements for copying
documents selected by the city after its review; and
      (2)   The franchisee must pay all travel and additional copying expenses
incurred by the city (above those that would have been incurred had the
documents been produced in the city) in inspecting those documents or having
those documents inspected by its designee.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.17 REPORTS.
   (A)   Obligation to submit. The City Manager may from time to time direct a
franchisee to prepare reports and to submit those reports by a date certain, in
a format prescribed by the City Manager, in addition to those required by this
chapter for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and the franchise.
   (B)   Quarterly reports. Unless an exemption is granted by the City Manager
within 45 days of the end of each calendar quarter, a franchisee shall submit a
report to the city containing the following information:
      (1)   The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll) received
during the prior quarter and the percentage of service calls compared to the
subscriber base; and
      (2)   The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of total
hours of operation. An outage is a loss of sound or video on any signal, or a
significant deterioration of any signal affecting two or more subscribers.
   (C)   Annual reports. Unless an exemption is granted by the City Manager, no
later than 120 days after the end of its fiscal year, a franchisee shall submit
the following information:
      (1)   A revenue report from the previous calendar year for the cable
communications system, certified by an officer of the franchisee and a
similarly certified statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues
used to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year and a detailed
explanation of the method of computation showing gross revenues by category
(e.g., basic, pay, pay-per-view, advertising, installation, equipment, late
charges, miscellaneous, other); and what, if any, deductions were made from
gross revenues in calculating the franchise fee (e.g., bad debt, credits and
refunds), and the amount of each deduction.
      (2)   A report showing, for each applicable customer service standard,
the Franchisee's performance with respect to that standard for each quarter of
the preceding year. In each case where the franchisee concludes it did not
comply fully, the franchisee will describe the corrective actions it is taking
to assure future compliance. In addition, the report should identify the number
and nature of all the customer service complaints received and an explanation
of their dispositions.
      (3)   An ownership report, indicating all persons who at the time of
filing control or own an interest in the franchisee of 10% or more.
   (D)   Contemporaneous reports. Within ten days of their receipt or (in the
case of documents created by the operator or its affiliate) filing, a
franchisee shall provide the city:
      (1)   Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of the
system; and
      (2)   Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any judgment
related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the franchisee or by any partnership
or corporation that owns or controls the franchisee directly or indirectly.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.18 MAPS REQUIRED.
   Each franchisee shall maintain accurate maps and improvement plans which
show the location, size, and a general description of all facilities installed
in the public rights-of-way and any power supply sources (including voltages
and connections). Maps shall be based upon post-construction inspection to
verify location. Each franchisee shall provide a map to the city showing the
location of its facilities, in such detail and scale as may be directed by the
City Public Works Director and update the map at least annually, and whenever
the facility expands or is relocated. Copies of maps shall be provided in hard
copy and on disk, in a commercially available electronic format specified by
the City Public Works Director. Any disk provided to the city shall be returned
to the franchisee after information contained therein is entered into the
city's electronic mapping or other similar such system.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.19 OTHER RECORDS REQUIRED.
   Unless the City Manager waives the requirement, a franchisee shall at all
times maintain:
   (A)   Complaint records. Records of all complaints received, their nature
and resolution. The term COMPLAINTS refers to complaints about any aspect of
the franchisee's operations or customer service.
   (B)   Outage records. Records of outages known to the franchisee, their
cause and duration.
   (C)   Complaint response. Records of service calls for repair and
maintenance indicating the date and time service was requested, the date of
acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was scheduled),
and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the date and
time the problem was solved.
   (D)   Installation records. Records of installation/reconnection and
requests for service extension, indicating date of request, date of
acknowledgment, and the date and time service was extended.
   (E)   Customer service. Records sufficient to show whether the franchisee
has complied with each customer service standard that applies to it.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.20 EXEMPTIONS.
   The City Manager may temporarily exempt any franchisee from its obligations
under §§
114.16 through
114.19 if the Manager determines that the requirement would be unduly
burdensome or unnecessary, and that the city and subscriber interests may be
adequately protected in some other manner.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.21 PRIVACY.
   A franchisee shall take all reasonable steps required so that it is able to
provide reports, books and records to the city, including by providing
appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each franchisee shall be responsible
for redacting data that applicable law prevents it from providing to the city.
Nothing in this section shall be read to require a franchisee to violate state
or federal subscriber privacy laws.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.22 PROCEDURES FOR PAYING FRANCHISE FEES AND FEES IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE
FEES.
   (A)   Fees paid quarterly. The franchise fee paid pursuant to Special Rules
Applicable to Cable Systems or fee in lieu of franchise fee paid pursuant to
open video systems shall be paid quarterly unless otherwise specified in a
franchise. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than 45
days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (B)   Quarterly statement. Unless a franchise provides otherwise, a
franchisee or other entity subject to a fee under Special Rules Applicable to
Cable Systems or open video systems shall file with the city within 45 days of
the end of each calendar quarter a statement showing gross revenues during the
preceding quarter and the number of subscribers served.
   (C)   Acceptance of payment not a release. No acceptance by the city of any
payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the
correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such payment be construed as a
release of any claim the city may have for additional sums payable.
   (D)   Fee not in lieu of taxes. Neither the franchise fee under Special
Rules Applicable to Cable Systems, nor the fee paid in lieu of the franchise
fee under open video systems, is a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other
assessment of general applicability (including any such tax, fee or assessment
imposed on both utilities and cable operators or their services, but not
including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly discriminatory against cable
operators or cable subscriber(s).
   (E)   Failure to pay franchise fee. In the event that a fee payment is not
received by the city on or before the due date set forth in this §
114.22 or in a franchise, or the fee owed is not fully paid, the person subject
to the fee will be charged interest from the due date at an interest rate equal
to 3% above the rate for three-month Federal Treasury Bills at the most recent
United States Treasury Department sale of such Treasury Bills occurring prior
to the due date of the franchise fee payment.
   (F)   Final statement of gross revenues. Within 90 days of the date a
franchisee ceases operations under a franchise (whether because of franchise
termination, transfer, bankruptcy or for any other reason), the franchisee
shall file a final statement of gross revenues covering the period from the
beginning of the calendar year in which the operations ceased to the date
operations ceased. The statement shall contain the information and be certified
as required by §
114.17(C)(1).
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO CABLE SYSTEMS
§ 114.30 APPLICATIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Application required. An application must be filed for an initial and
renewal cable system franchise, or for approval of a transfer. A request for
renewal filed under 47 U.S.C. § 546(h) need not contain the information
required by §
114.30(B)(1).
   (B)   Application contents.
      (1)   The City Manager may specify the information that must be provided
in connection with an application, and the form in which the information is to
be provided. At a minimum each application must identify the applicant, show
that the applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to
construct, maintain and operate the cable system, contain a pro forma showing
capital expenditures and expected income and expenses for the first five years
the applicant is to hold the franchise, and show that the applicant is willing
to comply unconditionally with its franchise obligations. In addition, any
application for an initial or renewal franchise or rebuild of the operators
system and/or facilities, must describe in detail the cable system that the
applicant proposes to build, show where it will be located, set out the system
construction schedule, and show that the applicant will provide adequate
channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and government
use (including institutional network use) of the cable system. The detailed
description of the physical facilities proposed, which shall include at least
the following:
         (a)   A description of the channel capacity, technical design,
performance characteristics, headend, access (and institutional network)
facilities and equipment;
         (b)   The location of proposed facility and facility design, including
a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the
size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed
along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of
the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the
operation of the same; provided, however, that, if some of the descriptive data
is not available at the time of application, the franchise may issue subject to
conditions that the data be filed and approved by the city before construction
begins and that the franchise will be deemed to be forfeited if the data is not
supplied and approved; provided, further, that the foregoing proviso does not
authorize the grant of a franchise where there is not sufficient information to
appraise the impact of the applicant's proposal;
         (c)   A map of the general route the facility will follow; a
designation of the portions of the system that will be placed above ground and
the portions that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques
that the operator proposes to use in installing the system above ground and
underground; a schedule for construction of the facility, describing when and
where construction will begin, how it will proceed, benchmarks indicating the
schedule completion of portions of the system and when construction will be
completed; and the expected effect on right-of-way usage, including information
on the ability of the public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed system,
including, as appropriate given the system proposed, an estimate of the
availability of space in conduits and an estimate of the cost of any necessary
rearrangement of existing facilities;
         (d)   A description, where appropriate, of how services will be
converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done
with existing facilities.
         (e)   A demonstration of how the applicant will reasonably meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the community, including
descriptions of the capacity, facilities and support for public, educational,
and governmental use of the system (including institutional networks) the
applicant proposes to provide and why the applicant believes that the proposal
is adequate to meet the future cable- related needs and interests of the
community. A demonstration of the financial qualifications of the applicant,
including at least the following:
            1.   The proposed rate structure, including projected charges for
each service tier, installation, converters, and all other proposed equipment
or services; and
            2.   A statement regarding the applicant's financial ability to
complete the construction to meet the time frame proposed and to operate the
cable system proposed certified by the applicant's chief financial officer.
         (f)    A demonstration of the applicant's technical ability to
construct and/or operate the proposed cable system;
         (g)   A demonstration that the applicant is legally qualified, which
proof must include a demonstration that the applicant:
            1.   Has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary
authorizations from state and federal authorities;
            2.   Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering, violation of
antitrust laws, consumer protection laws, or similar laws) that allows the city
to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with requirements of
franchise, or provisions of this chapter;
            3.   Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required
compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those
relating to the construction, operation or repair of its facilities; and has
not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing so; and
            4.   The applicant must not have submitted an application for an
initial or renewal franchise to the city, which was denied on the ground that
the applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs
and interests of the community, or as to which any challenges to such
franchising decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to
the applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application.
         (h)   An applicant may show that it would be inappropriate to deny it
a franchise by virtue of:
            1.   The particular circumstances surrounding the acts or omissions
at issue;
            2.   The steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing
therefrom and to prevent their recurrence; and the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals; or
            3.   The remoteness of the acts or omissions from the operation of
communications systems.
         (i)   The extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the
financial or technical resources of another person, including another
affiliate, proofs should be provided for that person.
         (j)   A description of the applicant's prior experience in cable
system ownership, construction, and operation, and identification of cities and
counties in California in which the applicant or any of its principals have a
cable franchise or any interest therein, provided that an applicant that holds
a franchise for the city and is seeking renewal of that franchise need only
provide this information for other cities and counties in California where its
franchise is scheduled to expire during the 12-month period prior to the date
its application is submitted to the city and for other cities and counties in
California where its franchise had been scheduled to expire during the 12-month
period after the date its application is submitted to the city. If an applicant
has no other franchise in California, it shall provide the information for its
operations in other states.
         (k)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized
officer thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of
applicable law.
      (2)   To be accepted for filing, an original and six copies of a complete
application must be submitted. All applications shall include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect
to the application.
      (3)   An applicant (and the transferor and transferee, in the case of a
transfer) shall respond to any request for information from the city, by the
time specified by the city.
   (C)   Incomplete applications. An application may be rejected if it is
incomplete, or if the response to requests for information is not timely and
complete.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.31 APPLICATION FOR AN INITIAL FRANCHISE OR RENEWAL FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to an
application for an initial franchise, or a renewal franchise application that
is not governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(h).
   (B)   Process. Any person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise by
submitting an application therefor on that person's own initiative, or in
response to a request for proposals issued by the city. If the city receives an
unsolicited application, it may choose to issue a request for additional
proposals, and require the applicant to amend its proposal to respond thereto.
The city shall promptly conduct such investigations as are necessary to act on
an application.
   (C)   Consideration of application. In determining whether to grant a
franchise, the city may consider:
      (1)   The extent to which an applicant for renewal has substantially
complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise;
      (2)   Whether an applicant's quality of service under its existing
franchise, including signal quality, response to customer complaints, billing
practices, and the like has been reasonable in light of the needs of the
community;
      (3)   Where the applicant has not previously held a cable system
franchise in the city, whether the applicant's record in other communities
indicates that it can be relied upon to provide high-quality service throughout
any franchise term;
      (4)   Whether the applicant has the financial, legal, and technical
ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in an
application, and to satisfy any minimum requirements established by the city;
      (5)   Whether the applicant's application is reasonable to meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the city, taking into account the
cost of meeting such needs and interests;
      (6)   Whether issuance of a franchise is in the public interest
considering the immediate and future effect on streets, public property, and
private property that will be used by the applicant's cable system;
      (7)   Whether issuance of the franchise would reduce competition in the
provision of cable service in the city;
      (8)   Such other matters as the city is authorized or required to
consider.
   (D)   Issuance of franchise. If the city determines that issuance of a
franchise would be in the public interest considering the factors described
above, it may offer a franchise agreement to the applicant. No franchise shall
become effective until the franchise is unconditionally accepted by the
applicant, approved by the City Council, and the franchise agreement is signed
by both parties.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.32 APPLICATION FOR RENEWAL FRANCHISE FILED PURSUANT TO 47 U.S.C. §546.
   (A)   Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to
applications for renewal governed by 47 U.S.C. § 546(a)-(g).
   (B)   Process. A franchisee which intends to exercise rights under 47 U.S.C.
§ 546(a)-(g) shall submit a notice in writing to the city in a timely manner
clearly stating that it is activating the procedures set forth in those
sections. The city shall thereafter commence any proceedings that may be
required under federal law, and upon completion of those proceedings, the city
may issue a request for proposals and an application may be submitted for
renewal. The city may preliminarily deny the application by resolution, and if
the application is preliminarily denied, the city may conduct such proceedings
and by resolution establish such procedures and appoint such individuals as may
be necessary to conduct any proceedings to review the application.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.33 APPLICATION FOR TRANSFER.
   (A)   Scope. This section establishes additional provisions that apply to
applications for transfer approval.
   (B)   Information. An application for transfer must contain all the
information required by the City Manager, by §
114.30, and all information required by any FCC transfer form.
   (C)   Consideration of application. In determining whether a transfer
application should be granted, denied, or granted subject to conditions, the
city may consider the legal, financial, and technical qualifications of the
transferee to operate the cable system; any potential impact of the transfer on
subscriber rates or services; whether the incumbent cable operator is in
compliance with its franchise; whether the transferee owns or controls any
other cable system in the city, whether operation by the transferee may
eliminate or reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city;
and whether operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would
otherwise adversely affect subscribers, the public, or the city's interest
under this chapter, the franchise, or other applicable law. The proposed
transferee shall pay all reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and
evaluating the applications.
   (D)   Minimum conditions. In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an
applicant must show, at a minimum, that: the transferee is qualified; the
transfer will not adversely affect the interests of subscribers, the public, or
the city; and those noncompliance issues have been resolved. No application
shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by
and accept all terms of this chapter and the franchise, and that it will assume
the obligations, liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions,
known and unknown, of the previous franchisee for all purposes.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.34 LEGAL QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Standards.
      (1)   The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and applicable laws; and to comply with such requirements of a
franchise as the city may lawfully require.
      (2)   The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked, (including any appeals) by the city within three years
preceding the submission of the application.
      (3)   The applicant must not have had an application to the city for an
initial or renewal cable system franchise denied on the ground that the
applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs and
interests of the community, or as to which any challenges to such franchising
decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application; and
must not have had an application for an initial or renewal OVS franchise denied
on any ground within three years of the application.
      (4)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time
during the ten years preceding the submission of the application, the applicant
was convicted of fraud, racketeering, anti-competitive actions, unfair trade
practices or other conduct of such character that the applicant cannot be
relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers, or to
substantially comply with its obligations.
      (5)   The applicant must have the necessary authority under California
and federal law to operate a cable system, or show that it is in a position to
obtain that authority.
      (6)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files
materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
      (7)   For purposes of divisions (A)(2) through (4) of this section, the
term applicant includes any affiliate of the applicant.
   (B)   Exception. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, an applicant
shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show that a franchise should
issue even if the requirements of divisions (A)(3) and (4) are not satisfied,
by virtue of the circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by
the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence,
the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the
matter from the operation of a cable system.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.35 FRANCHISE FEE.
   A cable operator shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal to
5% of gross revenues, or such other amount as may be specified in the
franchise; provided, however, that if the franchise specifies an amount, that
amount shall be subject to increase should federal limits on fee payments be
eliminated or changed and other cable operators are subject to a higher fee.
   (A)   Bundled services. In the event that the franchisee shall, during the
term of the franchise, offer bundled, tied, or combined cable services (which
are subject to the franchise fee) with non-cable services (which may not be
subject to the franchise fee) to individual subscribers, the combined revenues
from such bundled services shall be allocated consistent with the rates or
prices advertised by the franchisee through its marketing materials or on its
published rate card. In the event the franchisee does not advertise or publish
separate prices for the combined services, the percentage that the price for
the combined services is discounted from the regular retail rates of the
individual services shall be pro-rated across all the services in the bundled
package; provided, however, that the net revenues derived from services subject
to mandatory tariff rates imposed by the California Public Utilities Commission
(or other governmental entity having such authority) shall be deducted from the
combined revenue to determine the revenue subject to the franchise fee. As an
example, the franchisee may offer a “bundle” of video, voice and data services
for a flat fee of $75 where the retail rate for the services purchased on an
individual basis would equal $100. Assuming that there is no service subject to
the mandated tariff rate, the grantee would apply a 25% discount to each
service. Thus, if the retail rate for the cable service in the bundle were $50,
the grantee would recognize cable service revenue in the amount of $37.50 and
pay a franchise fee on that revenue.
   (B)   The definition of GROSS REVENUE is to be as inclusive as possible
consistent with existing applicable law. If a change in federal law occurs
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter, such change shall not impact
the gross revenues definition in such a way to reduce gross revenues, unless
the change specifically preempts the affected portion of the definition above.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.36 NO EXCLUSIVITY.
   A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to
enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing
service. However, nothing herein prevents a franchisee from entering into an
otherwise lawful, mutually desired exclusive arrangement with a building owner
or manager of a multiple dwelling unit or commercial subscriber.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.37 MINIMUM FRANCHISE CONDITIONS.
   In addition to satisfying such additional or stricter conditions as the City
finds necessary, based on its investigations, the following elements shall be
required in every franchise serving more than 1,000 subscribers: An operator
who provides service in an area which is defined as “isolated rural” maybe
exempted from the minimum franchise requirements for that area.
   (A)   System design. Each franchisee shall provide a cable system which uses
at least 750 MHz equipment of high quality and reliability. Each franchisee
shall install and activate the return portion of the cable system in the sub-
low frequency spectrum of 5 MHz to 30 MHz.
   (B)   Public, educational and government use of the system.
      (1)   A franchisee shall provide a minimum of three channels for PEG
access to each subscriber.
      (2)   Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace as necessary,
a dedicated, bi-directional fiber optic link between its headend and a location
designated by the city as the primary access center.
      (3)   Each franchisee shall install, maintain, and replace activated two-
way cable plant and all headend, cable plant, and node equipment required to
make it operable so that the city, schools, and all designated PEG access
centers and access facilities located within the franchise area will be able to
send and receive signals (video, audio, and data) using the activated two-way
cable plant.
      (4)   Each franchisee shall ensure that technically adequate signal
quality, routing systems, and switching and/or processing equipment are
initially and continuously provided for all access interconnections both within
the franchisee's cable system and with other cable systems throughout the
duration of its franchise.
      (5)   In the event a franchisee makes any change in the cable system and
related equipment and facilities or in the franchisee's signal delivery
technology which directly or indirectly substantially affects the signal
quality or transmission of access programming, the franchisee shall, at its
expense, take necessary steps or provide necessary technical assistance,
including the acquisition of all necessary equipment, to ensure that the
capabilities of access programmers are not diminished or adversely affected by
such change.
      (6)   A franchisee shall maintain all access channels (both upstream
channels and downstream channels) and all interconnections of access channels
at the same level of technical quality and reliability as the best commercial
channels carried on the grantee's system.
   (C)   Service to franchise area. It is the policy of the city to ensure that
every cable system provide service in its franchise area upon request to any
person or any government building. Each franchisee shall extend service upon
request within its franchise area, provided that a franchise may permit a
franchisee to require a potential subscriber to contribute a fair share of the
capital costs of installation or extension as a condition of extension or
installation in cases where such extension or installation may be unduly
expensive. Service must be provided within time limits specified in division
(D) of this section.
   (D)   Time for extension.
         (1)   Except as a franchise otherwise provides, service must be
extended upon request to any person or to any government building in a
franchisee's franchise area:
            (a)   Within seven days of the request, where service can be
provided by activating or installing a drop;
            (b)   Within 90 days of the request where an extension of one-half
mile or less is required; or
            (c)   Within six months where an extension of one-half mile or more
is required.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the franchisee shall not be deemed
to be in violation of this section in the event the franchisee uses reasonable
efforts to complete the extension in a timely manner but weather or other
circumstances beyond the reasonable control of the franchisee to prevent such
timely completion.
   (E)   Technical standards. A cable system within the city shall meet or
exceed the technical standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601 and any other
applicable technical standards.
   (F)   Testing. Each cable operator shall perform at its expense such tests
as may be necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with
its obligations under applicable FCC standards, this chapter or a franchise.
   (G)   Interconnection. Upon request of the city, every cable system shall be
required to interconnect with every other cable system within the city, or
adjacent to the city, on fair and reasonable terms for purposes of providing
PEG and I-Net services.
   (H)   Continuity of service. Each franchisee shall, during the term of the
franchise, ensure that subscribers are able to receive continuous service. In
the event the franchise is revoked or terminated, the franchisee may be
required to continue to provide service for a reasonable period to assure an
orderly transition of service from the franchisee to another entity. A
franchise may establish more particular requirements under which these
obligations will be satisfied.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.38 RATE REGULATION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION.
   (A)   All rates subject to regulation. The city may regulate any of the
cable operator's rates and charges, except to the extent it is prohibited from
doing so by law. The city will regulate rates in accordance with FCC rules and
regulations, where applicable. Except to the extent FCC rules provide
otherwise, all rates and charges that are subject to regulation, and changes in
those rates or charges must be approved in advance. The City Manager may take
any required steps to file complaints, toll rates, issue accounting orders or
take any other steps required to comply with FCC regulations. The City Council
shall be responsible for issuing rate orders that establish rates or order
refunds.
   (B)   No rate discrimination. Except to the extent the city may not enforce
such a requirement, a cable operator is prohibited from discriminating in its
rates or charges or from granting undue preferences to any subscriber,
potential subscriber, or group of subscribers or potential subscribers;
provided, however, that a franchisee may offer temporary, bona fide promotional
discounts in order to attract or maintain subscribers, so long as such
discounts are offered on a non-discriminatory basis to similar classes of
subscribers throughout the franchise area; and a franchisee may offer discounts
for the elderly, the disabled, or the economically disadvantaged; and such
other discounts as it is expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if
such discounts are applied in a uniform and consistent manner.
   (C)   Redlining prohibited. A cable operator shall not deny access or charge
different rates to any group of subscribers or potential subscribers because of
the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides.
   (D)   Customer service.
      (1)   Each cable operator must satisfy FCC, state and the city cable
customer service standards or consumer protection standards. The city cable
customer service standards may be adopted by resolution. In the case of a
conflict among standards, the stricter standard shall apply.
      (2)   For violation of cable customer service standards, penalties will
be imposed as follows:
         (a)   Two hundred dollars for each day of each material breach, not to
exceed $600 for each occurrence of material breach.
         (b)   If there is a subsequent material breach of the same provision
within 12 months, $400 for each day of each material breach, not to exceed
$1,200 for each occurrence of the material breach.
         (c)   If there is a third or additional material breach of the same
provision within 12 months of the first, $1,000 for each day of each material
breach, not to exceed $3,000 for each occurrence of the material breach.
      (2)   Any penalty assessed under this section will be reduced dollar for
dollar to the extent any liquidated damage provision of a franchise imposes a
monetary obligation on a franchisee for the same customer service failures, and
no other monetary damages may be assessed. The city will provide notice, and
impose penalties under this section pursuant to the procedures established by
Cal. Gov't Code § 53088.2(r).
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
§ 114.40 ADDITIONAL DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   OVS AGREEMENT. A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter between the city and an OVS franchisee setting forth the terms and
conditions under which the franchise will be exercised.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.41 APPLICATIONS FOR GRANT OR RENEWAL OF FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Initial and renewal franchise: application.
      (1)   A written application shall be filed with the city for grant of an
initial or renewal franchise.
      (2)   To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application
shall be submitted together with six copies. The application must conform to
any applicable request for proposals, and contain all information required
under division (B) of this section. All applications shall include the names
and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with
respect to the application.
   (B)   Contents of applications. The City Manager may specify the information
that must be provided in connection with a request for proposals or an
application for an initial or renewal franchise. At a minimum, each application
must: identify the applicant, where it plans to construct its system, and the
system construction schedule; show that the applicant will provide adequate
channels, facilities and other support for public, educational and government
use (including institutional network use) of the OVS; and show that the
applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to construct and
operate the OVS. The application must contain the following information;
      (1)   Identity of the applicant; the persons who exercise working control
over the applicant; and the persons who control those persons, to the ultimate
parent;
      (2)   A proposal for construction of the open video system that includes
at least the following:
         (a)   A description of the services that are to be provided over the
facility.
         (b)   Identification of the area of the city to be served by the
proposed system, including a description of the proposed franchise area's
boundaries.
         (c)   The location of proposed facility and facility design, including
a description of the miles of plant to be installed, and a description of the
size of equipment cabinets, shielding and electronics that will be installed
along the plant route, the power sources that will be used and a description of
the noise, exhaust and pollutants, if any, that will be generated by the
operation of the same.
         (d)   A map of the route the facility will follow; a designation of
the portions of the system that will be placed above ground and the portions
that will be placed underground, and the construction techniques that the
operator proposes to use in installing the system aboveground and underground;
a schedule for construction of the facility, describing when and where
construction will begin, how it will proceed, benchmarks for competition of
phases, and when it will be completed; and the expected effect on right-of-way
usage, including information on the ability of the public rights-of-way to
accommodate the proposed system, including, as appropriate given the system
proposed, an estimate of the availability of space in conduits and an estimate
of the cost of any necessary rearrangement of existing facilities.
         (e)   A description, where appropriate, of how services will be
converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and what will be done
with existing facilities.
      (3)   Evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant has the
financial resources to complete the proposed project, and to construct, operate
and repair the proposed facility over the franchise term. It is not the intent
of the city to require an applicant to prove that the services it proposed to
offer will succeed in the marketplace.
      (4)   Evidence satisfactory to the City that applicant is technically
qualified to construct, operate and repair the proposed facility. At a minimum,
the applicant must show that it has experience or resources to ensure that work
is to be performed adequately, and can respond to emergencies during and after
construction is complete.
      (5)   Evidence satisfactory to the city that the applicant is legally
qualified, which proof must include a demonstration that the applicant:
         (a)   Has received, or is in a position to receive, necessary
authorizations from state and federal authorities;
         (b)   Has not engaged in conduct (fraud, racketeering, violation of
antitrust laws, consumer protection laws, or similar laws) that allows the city
to conclude the applicant cannot be relied upon to comply with requirements of
the franchise, or provisions of this chapter;
         (c)   Is willing to enter into a franchise, to pay required
compensation and to abide by the provisions of applicable law, including those
relating to the construction, operation or maintenance of its facilities, and
has not entered into any agreement that would prevent it from doing so;
      (6)   An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or authorized officer
thereof certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, and certifying that the application meets all requirements of
applicable law.
      (7)   An applicant may show that it would be inappropriate to deny it a
franchise by virtue of: the particular circumstances surrounding the acts or
omissions at issue; the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing
therefrom and to prevent their recurrence; and the lack of involvement of the
applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the acts or omissions from the
operation of open video system facilities.
      (8)   To the extent that the applicant is in any respect relying on the
financial or technical resources of another person, including another
affiliate, the proofs should be provided for that person. An applicant will be
presumed to have the requisite financial, or technical or legal qualifications
to the extent such qualifications have been reviewed and approved by a state
agency of competent jurisdiction; or if applicant is a holder of a franchise in
the city for a cable system or open video system, and conduct under such other
franchise provides no basis for additional investigation.
   (C)   Procedure for applying for grant of a franchise.
      (1)   A person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise on its own
initiative or in response to a request for proposals. Upon receipt of an
application the city shall promptly proffer the applicant a proposed OVS
agreement, which shall be mailed to the person requesting its issuance and made
available to any other interested party. The city may request such additional
information as it deems appropriate.
      (2)   An applicant shall respond to requests for information completely,
and within the time directed by the city, and must strictly comply with
procedures, instructions, and requirements the city may establish.
      (3)   An application may be rejected if it is incomplete or the applicant
fails to follow procedures or respond fully to information requests.
   (D)   Evaluation. In evaluating a franchise application, the city may
consider the following:
      (1)   The extent to which the applicant has substantially complied with
the applicable law and the material terms of any existing city OVS franchise;
      (2)   Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to hold an OVS franchise;
      (3)   Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements
established by the city for, or will otherwise provide adequate public,
educational, and governmental use capacity, facilities, or financial support
(including with respect to institutional networks);
      (4)   Whether issuance of a franchise would require replacement of
property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the
public rights-of-way;
      (5)   Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the city.
   (E)   Issuance. If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue
a franchise considering the factors above, and such other matters as it is
required or entitled to consider, and subject to the applicant's entry into an
appropriate OVS agreement, it shall issue a franchise. Prior to deciding
whether or not to issue a franchise, the city may hold one or more public
hearings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on
an application may be received.
   (F)   Legal qualifications. In order to be legally qualified:
      (1)   The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this
chapter and applicable laws, and to comply with such requirements of an OVS
agreement as the city may lawfully require;
      (2)   The applicant must not hold a cable system franchise, or have
pending an application for a cable system franchise;
      (3)   The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked, (including any appeals) by the city within three years
preceding the submission of the application;
      (4)   The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or
renewal cable system franchise to the city denied on the ground that the
applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs and
interests of the community, or as to which any challenges to such franchising
decision were finally resolved (including any appeals) adversely to the
applicant, within three years preceding the submission of the application;
      (5)   The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or
renewal OVS franchise denied on any grounds within three years of the
application.
      (6)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if, at any time
during the ten years preceding the submission of the application, applicant was
convicted of fraud, racketeering, anti-competitive actions, unfair trade
practices or other conduct of such character that the applicant cannot be
relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers or to
substantially comply with its obligations.
      (7)   The applicant must have the necessary authority under California
and federal law to operate an OVS, and must be certified by the FCC under
Section 653 of the Cable Act.
      (8)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files
materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
      (9)   For purposes of divisions (F)(2) through (5) of this section, the
term “applicant” includes any affiliate of the applicant.
   (G)   Exception. Notwithstanding division (F) of this section, an applicant
shall be provided a reasonable opportunity to show that a franchise should
issue even if the requirements of divisions(F)(4) through (6) of this section,
by virtue of the circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by
the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence,
the lack of involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the
matter from the operation of a Cable system.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.42 TRANSFERS.
   (A)   City approval required. No transfer shall occur without prior written
notice to and approval of the city.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   A franchisee shall promptly notify the city of any proposed
transfer, and submit an application for its approval.
      (2)   The City Manager may specify information that must be provided in
connection with a transfer application. At a minimum, an application must:
describe the entities involved in the transaction and the entity that will hold
the franchise; describe the chain of ownership before and after the proposed
transaction; show that the entity that will hold the franchise will be legally,
financially, and technically qualified to do so; attach complete information on
the proposed transaction, including the contracts or other documents that
relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents, schedules, exhibits, or
the like referred to therein; and attach any shareholder reports or filings
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) that discuss the transaction.
      (3)   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the
prospective transferee and such other matters as the city may deem necessary to
determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be
approved, denied, or conditioned. If the transferee or franchisee refuse to
provide information, or provide incomplete information, the request for
transfer may be denied.
   (C)   Determination by the city.
      (1)   In deciding whether a transfer application should be granted,
denied or granted subject to conditions, the city may consider the legal,
financial, and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the OVS;
whether the incumbent OVS operator is in compliance with its OVS agreement and
this chapter and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such
noncompliance; whether the transferee owns or controls any other OVS or cable
system in the city, and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or
reduce competition in the delivery of cable service in the city; and whether
operation by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect
subscribers, the public, or the city's interest under this chapter, the OVS
agreement, or other applicable law.
      (2)   In order to obtain approval of a transfer, an applicant must show,
at a minimum, that: the transferee is qualified; the transfer will not
adversely affect the interests of subscribers, the public or the city; and that
noncompliance issues have been resolved. No application shall be granted unless
the transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of
this chapter and the franchise, and that it will assume the obligations,
liabilities, and responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown,
of the previous franchisee for all purposes. The proposed transferee shall pay
all reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating the
applications.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.43 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   PEG access. No OVS operator shall be issued a franchise, or may
commence construction of an OVS system, until: it agrees to match in all
respects the highest PEG obligations borne by any cable operator in the city;
or it agrees to PEG obligations acceptable to the city.
   (B)   Institutional network. Any OVS operator that constructs an I-Net must
match in all respects the highest I-Net obligations borne by any cable operator
in the city, unless it agrees to alternative I-Net obligations acceptable to
the city.
   (C)   Construction provisions. Every OVS agreement shall specify the
construction schedule that will apply to any required construction, upgrade or
rebuild of the OVS. The schedule shall provide for prompt completion of the
project, considering the amount and type of construction required.
   (D)   Testing. Each OVS operator shall perform at its expense such tests as
may be necessary to show whether or not the franchisee is in compliance with
its obligations under this chapter or a franchise.
   (E)   Consumer protection provisions. Every franchisee must satisfy customer
service consumer protection requirements established from time to time under
state or local law and applicable to OVS.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.44 SPECIAL TERMINATION RULES.
   If a franchisee's FCC certification is revoked or otherwise terminates as a
result of the passage of time or as a matter of law, the city may revoke the
OVS franchise after a hearing. The OVS franchise may also be revoked if federal
regulations or statutory provisions governing OVS are declared invalid or
unenforceable, or are repealed.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.45 RATE REGULATION.
   The city may regulate a franchisee's rates and charges except as prohibited
by law, and may do so by amendment to this chapter, separate ordinance, by
amendment to an OVS agreement, or in any other lawful manner.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.46 FEE IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   OVS operators. In lieu of the franchise fee required by §
114.35, an OVS franchisee shall pay a fee of 5% of the gross revenues of the
franchisee, its affiliates or any OVS operator of the OVS.
   (B)   Persons leasing OVS capacity.
      (1)   A person leasing capacity from an OVS operator, other than a person
whose revenues are included in the payment made under division (A) of this
section shall pay the city a fee in lieu of the franchise fee required by §
114.35 of 5% of the gross revenues of such person.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, where the franchisee charges a
person, other than an affiliate, to use its OVS (the “use payments”); and that
person recovers those use payments through charges to its subscribers that are
included in that person's gross revenues; and that person fully recovers the
use payments through the charges to its subscribers and pays a fee on those
charges pursuant to division (A) of this section, then the franchisee may
deduct from its gross revenues the use payments it receives from that person.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.47 EXCLUSIVE CONTRACTS.
   A franchisee may not require a subscriber or a building owner or manager to
enter into an exclusive contract as a condition of providing or continuing
service, nor may a franchisee enter into any arrangement that would effectively
prevent other persons from using the OVS to compete in the delivery of cable
services with a franchisee or its affiliates.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
MISCELLANEOUS
§ 114.50 CAPTIONS.
   The captions to sections throughout this chapter are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
chapter. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
chapter.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.51 CALCULATION OF TIME.
   Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter or payment is required under this chapter or any franchise, and a period
of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is
fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include
the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.52 SEVERABILITY.
   If any term, condition or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be
held to be invalid or unenforceable by a valid order of any court or regulatory
agency, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue
to be effective. In the event of a subsequent change in applicable law so that
the provision which had been held invalid is no longer invalid, said provision
shall thereupon return to full force and effect without further action by the
city and shall thereafter be binding on the franchisee and the city.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.53 CONNECTIONS TO CABLE SYSTEM; USE OF ANTENNAE.
   (A)   Subscriber right to attach. To the extent consistent with federal law,
subscribers shall have the right to attach VCRs, receivers, and other terminal
equipment to a franchisee's cable system. Subscribers also shall have the right
to use their own remote control devices and converters, and other similar
equipment.
   (B)   Removal of existing antennae. A franchisee shall not, as a condition
of providing service, require a subscriber or potential subscriber to remove
any existing antenna, or disconnect an antenna except at the express direction
of the subscriber or potential subscriber, or prohibit installation of a new
antenna, provided that such antenna is connected with an appropriate device and
complies with applicable law.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.54 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No retaliatory actions. A cable communications system operator shall
not discriminate among persons or the city or take any retaliatory action
against a person or the city because of that entity's exercise of any right it
may have under federal, state, or local law, nor may the operator require a
person or the city to waive such rights as a condition of taking service.
   (B)   Employment and hiring practices. A cable communications system
operator shall not refuse to employ, discharge from employment, or discriminate
against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment because of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, sexual
orientation, age, disability, religion, ethnic background, or marital status. A
cable communication system operator shall comply with all federal, state, and
local laws and regulations governing equal employment opportunities, and hiring
practices, as the same may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
Penalty, see § 114.15
§ 114.55 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   Access to a cable communication system operator's records shall not be
denied to the city on the basis that said records contain proprietary
information. Refusal to provide information to the city required herein, or
required in a franchise or license shall be grounds for franchise revocation.
Subject to applicable law, including the California Public Records Act, Cal.
Gov't Code §§ 6250 et seq., the city shall keep any information which is marked
“proprietary” or “confidential” (and, under applicable law, deemed
“proprietary” or “confidential”) submitted by the franchisee or licensee as
required under this chapter or by a franchise or license (“information”) in
confidence, as contemplated by Cal. Gov't Code § 6254.15. In the event that the
city believes requested information must be disclosed, the city shall not
disclose the Information or any part thereof to any third party, government
agency or regulatory body seeking to inspect or obtain the information under a
California Public Records Act request without first informing the cable
communication system operator of such request and affording the cable
communication system operator the opportunity to resist such disclosure at its
sole cost and expense. The city shall not be liable to a cable communication
system operator for any submission or disclosure of such information to a third
party as required by applicable law or to a government agency or regulatory
body seeking the information and claiming jurisdiction in any of these events.
Nothing in this §114.55 shall limit the right of the cable communication system
operator to contest disclosure or submission to a third party as required by
law or to a government agency or regulatory body asserting jurisdiction over it
or such subject matter before such disclosure shall be effected.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
§ 114.56 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Persons operating without a franchise. The operator of any facility
installed as of the effective date of this chapter, for which a franchise is
required under this chapter, shall have three months from the effective date of
this chapter to file one or more applications for a franchise. Any operator
timely filing such an application under this division (A) shall not be subject
to a penalty for failure to have such a franchise so long as said application
remains pending; provided, however, nothing herein shall relieve any cable
communications system operator of any liability for its failure to obtain any
permit or other authorization required under other provisions of the municipal
code, and nothing herein shall prevent the city from requiring removal of any
facilities installed in violation of the municipal code.
   (B)   Persons holding franchises. Any person holding an existing franchise
for a cable communications system may continue to operate under the existing
chapter to the conclusion of its present term (but not any renewal or extension
thereof) with respect to those activities expressly authorized by the
franchise; and provided further that such person shall be subject to the other
provisions of this chapter to the extent permitted by law.
   (C)   Persons with pending applications. Pending applications shall be
subject to this chapter. A person with a pending application shall have 30 days
from the effective date of this chapter to submit additional information to
comply with the requirements of this chapter governing applications.
(Ord. 678-C.S., passed 4-20-04)
STATE VIDEO SERVICE FRANCHISES
§ 114.57 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is applicable to video service providers who
have been awarded a state video franchise under the Cal. Public Utilities Code
§§ 5800 et seq. (the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006
[“DIVCA”]), to provide cable or video services in any location(s) within the
incorporated boundaries of the city. It is the purpose of this section to
implement within the incorporated boundaries of the city the provisions of
DIVCA and the rules of the California Public Utilities Commission promulgated
thereunder that are applicable to a “local franchising entity” or a “local
entity” as defined in DIVCA.
   (B)   Rights reserved.
      (1)   The rights reserved to the city under this §
114.57 are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by
this
Chapter 114 or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided by DIVCA, a state franchise shall not
include, or be a substitute for:
         (a)   Compliance with applicable requirements for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city, including, but not
limited to, compliance with the conditions that the city may establish before
facilities may be constructed for, or providing, non-video services;
         (b)   Any permit or authorization required in connection with
operations on or in public rights-of-way or public property, including, but not
limited to, encroachment permits, street work permits, pole attachment permits
and street cut permits; and
         (c)   Any permit, agreement or authorization for occupying any other
property of the city or any private person to which access is not specifically
granted by the state franchise.
      (3)   No permit issued by the city to a state franchise holder is itself
a franchise, nor shall any permit create a vested right that would prohibit the
city from revoking or amending the permit.
   (C)   Compliance with city ordinances. Nothing contained in this subchapter
shall be construed so as to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance
with all ordinances, rules or regulations of the city now in effect or which
may be hereafter adopted which are consistent with this subchapter or Cal.
Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq., or any obligations under any franchise
issued by the city insofar as those obligations may be enforced under Cal.
Public Utilities Code §§ 5800 et seq.
   (D)   Compliance with DIVCA. When a video service provider holding a state
franchise provides notice to the city pursuant to § 5840(m) of DIVCA that it is
commencing to provide video service to the city, a holder of a local franchise
is entitled to seek a state franchise pursuant to § 5930(c) and the upon
issuance of a state franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission for
the franchise area the local franchise shall terminate.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
§ 114.58 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Definitions generally; interpretation of language. For purposes of
this subchapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meaning given in this section. Words not defined in this section
shall have the same meaning as established in: (1) DIVCA, and if not defined
therein, (2) California Public Utilities Commission rules implementing DIVCA,
and if not defined therein, (3) Title VI of Title 47 of the Communications Act
of 1934, as amended, 47U.S.C. § 521 et seq., and if not defined therein (4)
their common and ordinary meaning. When not inconsistent with the context,
words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number
include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural
number, and “including” and “include” are not limiting. The words “shall” and
“will” are always mandatory, but the use of those terms grants no private
rights to any person with respect to the city. References to governmental
entities (whether persons or entities) refer to those entities or their
successors in authority. If specific provisions of law referred to herein are
renumbered, then the reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered
provision. References to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted
broadly to cover government actions, however nominated, and include laws,
ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted or amended.
   GROSS REVENUES. All revenues actually received by the holder of a state
franchise or its affiliates that are derived from the operation of the holder’s
network to provide cable service or video service within the incorporated areas
of the city.
   PEG ACCESS or PEG. The availability of a cable or state franchise holder’s
system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies,
institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including organizations,
groups, or individual members of the general public, educational institutions,
and the city and its designated access providers, to acquire, create, and
distribute programming not under a state franchise holder’s editorial control.
   STATE FRANCHISE HOLDER. A cable operator or video service provider that has
been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to
provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in Cal.
Public Utilities Code § 5830, within any portion of the incorporated limits of
the city.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
§ 114.59 FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   State franchise fees. Any state franchise holder operating within the
incorporated areas of the city shall pay to the city a state franchise fee
equal to 5% of gross revenues that may be subject to a franchise fee under Cal.
Public Utilities Code § 5860.
   (B)   Payment of franchise fees. The state franchise fee required pursuant
to this §
114.59 shall be paid quarterly, in a manner consistent with Cal. Public
Utilities Code § 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city, by
check or other means, which shall be agreed to by the city, a separate payment
for the state franchise fee not later than 45 days after the end of each
calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a report, detailing
how the payment was calculated, and shall include such additional information
on the appropriate form as designated by the city.
   (C)   Examination of business records. The city may examine the business
records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner consistent with Cal.
Public Utilities Code § 5860(i).
   (D)   Late payments. In the event a state franchise holder fails to make
payments required by this §
114.59 on or before the due dates specified herein, the city shall impose a
late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during
the period of delinquency, plus 1%.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
§ 114.60 CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   (A)   Customer service standards. A state franchise holder shall comply with
Cal. Government Code §§ 53055, 53055.1, 53055.2 and 53088.2; the FCC customer
service and notice standards set forth in 47 C.F.R. 76.309, 76.1602, 76.1603,
and 76.1619; Cal. Penal Code § 637.5; the privacy standards of 47 U.S.C. 551;
and, to the extent consistent with DIVCA, all other applicable state and
federal customer service and consumer protection standards pertaining to the
provision of video service, include any such standards hereafter adopted. In
case of a conflict, the stricter standard shall apply. All customer service and
consumer protection standards under this paragraph shall be interpreted and
applied to accommodate newer or different technologies while meeting or
exceeding the goals of the standards.
   (B)   Penalties for violations of standards. The city shall enforce the
compliance of state franchise holders with respect to the state and federal
customer service and consumer protection standards set forth in this §
114.60. The city will provide a state franchise holder with a written notice of
any alleged material breaches, as defined in Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900,
of applicable customer service or consumer protection standards, and will allow
the state franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the
specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied by a state franchise
holder within the 30-day time period, irrespective of the number of customers
affected, will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:
      (1)   For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of $500 may
be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500
for each violation.
      (2)   For a second material breach of the same nature within 12 months, a
fine of $1,000 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not
to exceed $3,000 for each violation.
      (3)   For a third material breach of the same nature within 12 months, a
fine of $2,500 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not
to exceed $7,500 for each violation.
   (C)   Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner
consistent with Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5900.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
§ 114.61 PERMITS AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as expressly provided in this §
114.61, all provisions of Title IX Chapter 98 (Streets and Sidewalks) of the
Eureka Municipal Code, and all City administrative rules and regulations
developed to any of these provisions, as now existing or as hereafter amended,
shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a state franchise holder
on any city public rights-of-way, public property, or city easement.
   (B)   Permits. Prior to commencing any work for which a permit is required
by Title IX Chapter 98, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a
permit in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 20 and shall comply with
all other applicable laws and regulations, including but not limited to all
applicable requirements of Division 13 of the Cal. Public Resources Code, §§
21000 et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act).
   (C)   The City Manager shall either approve or deny state franchise holder’s
application for any permit required under Title IX Chapter 98 within 60 days of
receiving a completed permit application from the state franchise holder.
   (D)   If the City Manager denies a state franchise holder’s application for
a permit, the City Manager shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of
denial, furnish to the applicant a detailed explanation of the reason or
reasons for the denial.
   (E)   A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final
decision of the City Manager may appeal the denial to the City Council. Upon
receiving a notice of appeal, the City Council shall take one of the following
actions:
      (1)   Affirm the action of the City Manager without any further hearing;
or
      (2)   Refer the matter back to the City Manager for further review with
or without instructions; or
   (F)   In rendering its decision on the appeal, the City Council shall not
hear or consider any argument or evidence of any kind other than the record of
the matter received from the City Manager unless the City Council is itself
conducting a public hearing on the matter.
   (G)   The issuance of a permit is not a franchise, and does not grant any
vested rights in any location in the public rights-of-way, or in any particular
manner of placement within the rights-of-way. Without limitation, a permit to
place cabinets and similar appurtenances aboveground may be revoked and the
permittee required to place facilities underground, in accordance with
applicable law.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
§ 114.62 EMERGENCY ALERT SYSTEM.
   Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency
messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder’s network. As such
capability was required under local franchises in effect in the City on January
1 to December 30, 2006 and as consistent with Cal. Public Utilities Code §
5880, each state franchise holder shall install and maintain equipment to allow
the Humboldt County Emergency Management Office to air audio and video messages
on the video system to alert subscribers to emergency situations. This
capability shall be remotely activated without the assistance of the state
franchise holder and shall allow a representative of the city to override the
audio and video on all channels, except those where grantee has, consistent
with FCC regulations, agreed with the broadcaster, not to override the channel
for EAS messages.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
§ 114.63 PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL CAPACITY, SUPPORT,
INTERCONNECTION, AND SIGNAL CARRIAGE.
   (A)   PEG channel capacity.
      (1)   A state franchise holder shall designate a sufficient amount of
capacity on its network to allow the provision of four PEG channels to satisfy
the requirement of Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5870 within the time limits
specified therein.
      (2)   A state franchise holder shall provide an additional PEG channel
when the city satisfies the standards set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code §
5870(d) or any entity designated by the City to manage one or more of the PEG
channels.
   (B)   PEG support.
      (1)   Amount of PEG support fee. Any state franchise holder shall pay to
the city, or if directed by the city, to the city’s designated PEG provider, a
PEG fee equal to 1.401%.
      (2)   The PEG support fee shall be used for PEG activities, in a manner
that is consistent with the terms of the incumbent cable operator’s franchise
during the period of January 1, 2006 to December 30, 2006 and settlements.
      (3)   A state franchise holder shall remit the PEG support fee quarterly,
within 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall
be accompanied by a summary, detailing how the PEG support fee was calculated.
      (4)   In the event that a state franchise holder fails to pay the PEG
support fee when due, or underpays the proper amount due, the state franchise
holder shall pay interest at the rate per year equal to the highest prime
lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus 1%, or the maximum rate
specified by state law.
      (5)   Notwithstanding Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5870(n), upon the
expiration of any state franchise, without any action of the City Council, this
section shall be deemed to have been automatically reauthorized, unless the
state franchise holder has given the City Manager and the City Council written
notice 60 days prior to the expiration of its state franchise that the section
will expire pursuant to the terms of Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5870(n).
   (C)   PEG carriage and interconnection.
      (1)   As set forth in Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 5870(b) and 5870(g)
(3), state franchise holders shall ensure that all PEG channels are receivable
by all subscribers, whether they receive digital or analog service, or a
combination thereof, without the need for any equipment other than that needed
to receive the lowest cost tier of service. PEG access capacity provided by a
state franchise holder shall be of similar quality and functionality to that
offered by commercial channels (unless the PEG signal is provided to the state
franchise holder at a lower quality or with less functionality), shall be
capable of carrying a National Television System Committee (NTSC) television
signal, and shall be carried on the state franchise holder’s lowest cost tier
of service. To the extent feasible, the PEG channels shall not be separated
numerically from other channels carried on the lowest cost tier of service and
the channel numbers for the PEG channels shall be the same channel numbers used
by any incumbent cable operator, unless prohibited by federal law. After the
initial designation of the PEG channel numbers, the channel numbers shall not
be changed without the agreement of the city unless federal law requires the
change.
      (2)   Where technically feasible, each state franchise holder and each
incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to interconnect their
networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming. Interconnection may be
accomplished by any means authorized under Cal. Public Utilities Code § 5870
(h). Each state franchise holder and incumbent cable operator shall provide
interconnection of PEG channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not
withhold the interconnection. If a state franchise holder and an incumbent
cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement for
PEG carriage, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow each
state franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable
operator’s network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise
holder’s network as identified by the state franchise holder. If no technically
feasible point of interconnection is available, each state franchise holder
shall make interconnection available to each PEG channel originator programming
a channel in the city and shall provide the facilities necessary for the
interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by each state
franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by
the parties.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 826-C.S., passed 11-17-15; Am. Ord.
926-C.S., passed 10-5-21)
§ 114.64 NOTICES.
   (A)   Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall
file with the city a copy of all applications or notices that the state
franchise holder or applicant are required to file with the California Public
Utilities Commission.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in this section, all notices or other
documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city
under this section or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to
both the City Manager and the city staff person in charge of cable and
telecommunications, or their successors or designees.
(Ord. 762-C.S., passed 1-4-11)
CHAPTER 115: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND OUTDOOR DINING AREAS
Section
   
115.01   Permit required
   
115.02   Exemptions from provisions
   
115.03   Permit and inspection fee
   
115.04   Suspension and revocation of permit
   
115.05   Outdoor dining areas
§ 115.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a bakery,
confectionery, candy factory, ice cream factory, soda fountain, restaurant,
hotel, tavern, grocery, meat market, sausage factory, delicatessen, store, or
other place in which food is prepared for sale, manufactured, packed, or
stored, or otherwise disposed of, for human consumption or to vend or peddle
from any wagon or other vehicle or from any basket, hand-steamer, or street
stand any food products which are sold, or otherwise disposed of, for human
consumption in the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from
the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall not issue such permit unless the
applicant therefor has complied with all the laws of the state and the county
relative to the maintenance and operation of any such business or establishment
which the applicant proposes to operate and maintain. The permit, when issued,
shall be kept displayed in a prominent place on the premises of the person to
whom it is issued. Such permit shall not be transferable.
('63 Code, § 5-3.01) (Ord. 2745, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.02 EXEMPTIONS FROM PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person engaged
exclusively in selling, or otherwise disposing of fruits and vegetables which
are grown by such person.
('63 Code, § 5-3.02) (Ord. 2745, passed - - )
§ 115.03 PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEE.
   Permit and inspection fees shall be in the amounts and payable at such times
and manner as shall be provided under the laws of the county or the state. All
fees shall be deposited in the County Treasury.
('63 Code, § 5-3.03) (Ord. 2745, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 236-C.S., passed 9-6-74)
§ 115.04 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
temporarily suspended by the Health Officer upon the violation of any of the
laws of the county or state, and, in the event of serious or repeated
violations, such permit may be revoked by the Health Officer after a notice and
hearing. Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a permit shall be given in
writing by the Health Officer stating the grounds of the complaint and the time
and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permittee by
registered mail at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
('63 Code, § 5-3.04) (Ord. 2745, passed - - )
§ 115.05 OUTDOOR DINING AREAS.
   (A)   Purpose. To promote increased business and pedestrian traffic by
providing safe and visually appealing opportunities to create outdoor dining
areas on public sidewalks and public rights-of-way in commercial zone
districts.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ESTABLISHMENT. A restaurant, bar, or other commercial establishment
operating an outdoor dining area.
      IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT. Adjoining, abutting, or fronting.
      INTOXICATING BEVERAGES. A beverage containing alcohol, including beer,
wine, or spirits.
      LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment in which intoxicating beverages
are permitted by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to be
served and consumed.
      OUTDOOR DINING AREA. Portions of the public sidewalk or public rights-of-
way within a commercial zone district used by an establishment for the serving
and consumption of food and beverages, and including licensed establishment for
the serving and consumption of intoxicating beverages.
   (C)   Requirements. An outdoor dining area shall comply with all laws and
licensing requirements, including but not limited to possession of the
following:
      (1)   A valid city business license; and
      (2)   Licenses or permits to operate from the Humboldt County
Environmental Health Department; and
      (3)   If intoxicating beverages are to be served, a license from the
California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
   (D)   Location.
      (1)   All outdoor dining areas shall be located and operated immediately
adjacent and incidental to an establishment.
      (2)   Unless otherwise permitted by the outdoor dining area permit, use
of the public sidewalk and public right-of-way shall be confined to the actual
public sidewalk and public right-of-way fronting the establishment and shall
not encroach upon adjacent public sidewalk or public right-of-way.
   (E)   Service and consumption.
      (1)   Service and consumption of intoxicating beverages shall occur
immediately adjacent to the licensed establishment only under the following
conditions:
         (a)   The establishment shall be in compliance with §
115.05(C) at all times; and
         (b)   The intoxicating beverage must be served by the licensed
establishment; and
         (c)   The intoxicating beverage must be consumed inside the licensed
establishment or within the boundaries of the outdoor dining area in compliance
with a license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage
Control; and
         (d)   No patron or employee of a licensed establishment shall transfer
or provide an intoxicating beverage to another person outside of the outdoor
dining area; and
         (e)   No patron may exit the licensed establishment or outdoor dining
area in possession of an intoxicating beverage.
      (2)   The use of non-disposable, reusable plastic or glass containers is
highly encouraged, but the use of recyclable containers shall be allowed.
   (F)   Health standards.
      (1)   All exterior surfaces within the outdoor dining area shall be kept
clean at all times.
      (2)   Tables shall be bussed within five minutes of the patron leaving
the outdoor dining area.
      (3)   All trash shall be contained and immediately removed from the
outdoor dining area.
      (4)   The surface, furniture, and adjacent areas of the outdoor dining
area, including without limitation the public sidewalk and public right-of-way,
shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all times.
      (5)   Restrooms for outdoor dining areas shall be provided and available
within the establishment.
   (G)   Special closures. The city shall have the right at any time, and from
time to time to prohibit the use of the public sidewalk and public right-of-way
as an outdoor dining area. Such prohibitions may arise from but are not limited
to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades, marches, repairs to the
street or sidewalk, or emergencies occurring within the area.
   (H)   Permits, liability insurance, and indemnification.
      (1)   In order to operate an outdoor dining area, the owner of an
establishment shall obtain an outdoor dining area permit issued by the city.
The application for an outdoor dining area shall be processed by the city as an
encroachment permit for the outdoor dining area.
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the
city; and
         (b)   Certificates of insurance, including General Liability and
Worker's Compensation Insurance, with original authorized signatures, naming
the City of Eureka as additional insured and providing the minimum insurance
coverages required by the city.
      (2)   Licensed establishments serving intoxicating beverages shall
execute a Hold Harmless and Indemnity Agreement in favor of the City of Eureka
with regard to their services and consumption of intoxicating beverages. Such
Hold Harmless and Indemnity Agreement shall include the employees and patrons
of the licensed establishment.
   (I)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Pursuant to Eureka Municipal Code
Chapter 97, no smoking shall be allowed in outdoor dining areas.
      (2)   The licensed establishment shall post signage, clearly visible to
patrons stating that no intoxicating beverages shall be removed from or
consumed outside of the outdoor dining area.
   (J)   Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
prosecuted under the provisions of §
10.99 as a misdemeanor or infraction subject to the discretion of the City
Attorney.
(Ord. 823-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
CHAPTER 116: RESERVED
 
CHAPTER 117: MASSAGE PARLORS
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Posting signs and permits
   
117.03   Application to existing businesses
Permits, Registrations and Certifications
   
117.15   Permits and registration required
   
117.16   Exemptions
   
117.17   Permit application and fee; investigations
   
117.18   Denial of permits; hearing
   
117.19   Expiration and renewal of permits
   
117.20   Revocation of permits; appeals
   
117.21   Massagists certificates of registration
   
117.22   Transfer of permits
   
117.23   Notices of employees' status
GENERAL PROVISIONS
7§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MASSAGE. A method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial or
hygienic purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting, or tapping with
the hand or with an instrument. MASSAGE shall not include therapy, that is,
means employed in effecting the cure of disease; or the management of disease
or of diseased patients.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment in which the practice of massage is
carried on for compensation or from which a person goes to administer a massage
at any other place for compensation.
   MASSAGIST. Any person who practices massage as defined in this section.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL. Any school or institution of learning which has for its
purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of a massagist.
('63 Code, § 6-14.01) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.02 POSTING SIGNS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the main entrance
identifying the establishment as a massage establishment.
   (B)   The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place in such a manner
that it can be easily seen by persons entering the establishment.
   (C)   Persons acting in the capacity of massagists shall have the
certificates of registration issued them in their possession during the hours
they are acting as such in massage establishments.
('63 Code, § 6-14.18) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.03 APPLICATION TO EXISTING BUSINESSES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described in this chapter, whether the activities described in this
chapter were established before or after June 22, 1973.
('63 Code, § 6-14.21) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
PERMITS, REGISTRATIONS AND CERTIFICATIONS
§ 117.15 PERMITS AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall establish or maintain a massage establishment without
first obtaining and maintaining in effect a permit from the Chief of Police,
nor shall he employ as a massagist any person who does not possess a current
unrevoked certificate of registration as a massagist.
   (B)   No person shall practice massage for compensation without first
obtaining and maintaining in effect a certificate of registration as a
massagist.
   (C)   No person shall be issued a permit or a certificate of registration
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless such person shall be at least
18 years of age and shall be either a graduate of a recognized school of
massage or shall have had at least one year's experience in the profession,
work, and method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial
purposes or hygienic purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting, or
tapping with the hand or by instrument.
('63 Code, § 6-14.02) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.16 EXEMPTIONS.
   No permit or certificate of registration shall be required of any person
licensed by the state as a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, nurse,
vocational nurse, physical therapist, or barber.
   (A)   The provisions of §
117.15 of this chapter shall not apply to any physician, surgeon, chiropractor,
or osteopath, nor to any nurse working under the supervision of a physician,
surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath duly licensed to practice his profession in
the state; nor shall the requirements of said §
117.15 of this chapter apply to any treatment administered in good faith in the
course of the practice of any healing art or other profession by any person
licensed to practice any such art or profession under the Business and
Professions Code of the state.
   (B)   The provisions of §
117.15 of this chapter relating to age, education, or experience shall not
apply to any corporation, partnership, or similar firm or association applying
for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, nor shall the
education or experience provisions apply to any person, natural or otherwise,
seeking a permit who does not propose to operate the massage establishment
personally and directly.
('63 Code, § 6-14.03) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.17 PERMIT APPLICATION AND FEE; INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Every person who proposes to conduct or operate an establishment
for the practice of massage shall make a written application to the Chief of
Police for a permit for each such establishment. The application shall include
the following:
         (a)   The full name and present address of the applicant;
         (b)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of applicant and the dates of residence of each;
         (c)   The names and addresses of at least three bona fide adult
residents of the county who will serve as character references. These
references shall be persons other than relatives and business associates;
         (d)   Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years;
         (e)   The applicant's weight, height, color of eyes and hair, and date
of birth;
         (f)   The name under which, and place where, such applicant proposes
to operate a massage establishment, together with the street, city, county, and
state address where such applicant practiced or conducted any similar business,
if any, within 24 months immediately preceding the date of such application,
and the name under which the same was so conducted; and,
         (g)   Written proof that the applicant has had at least one year's
experience in the profession, work, and method of treating the external parts
of the body for remedial purposes or hygienic purposes by rubbing, stroking,
kneading, adjusting, or tapping with the hand or by instrument, or the
applicant shall furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall retain the original copy and transmit
duplicates to the Fire Chief and the Director of Community Development for
their investigation and approval.
('63 Code, § 6-14.04)
   (B)   Fee. A nonrefundable fee of $15 shall be paid at the time of the
issuance of the permit described in division (A) of this section and shall be
due and payable at the time of the original application and upon an application
for renewal.
('63 Code, § 6-14.08)
   (C)   Investigation.
      (1)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant's background
and qualifications and shall investigate the premises where the massage
establishment is to be operated for the purpose of assuring that such location
does not pose a police problem and that the business will be in the interests
of the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall photograph and fingerprint the applicant.
Within 30 days after such application is filed with the Chief of Police, the
Chief of Police shall return the duplicate thereof to the applicant with his
approval thereon in writing or, in the event the application is not approved, a
statement to that effect with his reasons therefor fully set forth in writing
and based on the following grounds:
         (a)   That the applicant is lacking in the background and
qualifications to conduct a bona fide massage establishment; or,
         (b)   That the operation of a massage establishment at the location in
question would be contrary to the interests of the public health, safety, or
welfare.
('63 Code, § 6-14.05)
(Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.18 DENIAL OF PERMITS; HEARING.
   (A)   Denial of permits. The Chief of Police may refuse to issue a permit
if, after investigating the matter, it is determined that the applicant is
lacking in the background and qualifications to conduct a bona fide massage
establishment or the operation of the proposed massage establishment would be
injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and for
any reason set forth in Cal. Gov't Code, § 51032.
('63 Code, § 6-14.06)
   (B)   Hearings.
      (1)   Within five days after receiving notification by certified mail
that his application for a permit or a renewal permit to practice, engage in,
carry on, or operate the business of a massagist or conduct or carry on a
massage parlor pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has been denied, any
applicant may file with the City Clerk a written statement, addressed to the
Council, requesting a public hearing on the application before the Council, and
stating therein written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the Chief
of Police based his denial of the application. Such exceptions shall include,
but not be limited to statements why the applicant believes the Chief of Police
acted improperly or failed to act properly. Upon the filing of such a
statement, the Council shall fix a time, date, and place for a public hearing
thereon and shall notify the applicant thereof. The hearing shall be held at a
regular meeting of the Council not later than 30 days from the date on which
the written statement was filed with the City Clerk. At the hearing, the
applicant may present evidence in support of his application and exceptions.
Any interested party may, in the discretion of the Council, be allowed to
participate in the hearing and present evidence in support of or in opposition
to the application and exceptions. The burden of proof shall be on the
applicant. The Council, by resolution, shall no later than 15 days after the
conclusion of the hearing, make findings of fact and either deny or grant the
application for a permit, subject to any reasonable conditions thereto as the
Council deems appropriate. The Council, in such resolution, shall state the
facts upon which its decision is based and its ruling upon any exceptions to
the original findings of fact of the Chief of Police upon the application. A
copy of such resolution shall be served by mail upon the applicant and all
parties to the hearing requesting the same.
      (2)   The Council's decision by such resolution shall be final.
('63 Code, § 6-14.07)
(Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.19 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF PERMITS.
   Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire
annually on the anniversary of its issuance, unless sooner revoked. An
unrevoked permit may be renewed on a year-to-year basis on written application
to the Chief of Police, made at least one month before its expiration date, and
on the payment of a permit renewal application fee of $10.
('63 Code, § 6-14.09) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.20 REVOCATION OF PERMITS; APPEALS.
   (A)   Revocation of permits. Whenever the Chief of Police has probable cause
to believe that a permittee hereunder has conducted or carried on the business
of a massage establishment in violation of the provisions of this chapter; has
made a materially false statement on his application for a permit hereunder;
has committed any crime of violence against another person or any crime
involving lewdness, indecent exposure, or prostitution; has violated any law
relating to or regulating such business; or is conducting or maintaining such
business without due regard for the public health or the health of patrons or
customers or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene, the Chief of
Police shall, in addition to other remedies provided in this chapter,
immediately give the permittee written notice, by certified special delivery
mail, of a hearing to be held by the Chief of Police within five days after the
date of such mailing to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked.
Such notice shall state the date, time, and place of the hearing and contain a
statement of the facts upon which the Chief of Police has acted in calling the
hearing. At the hearing, the permit holder and any other interested person
shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts upon which the Chief
of Police proposes to revoke the permit, and any other facts which may aid the
Chief of Police in determining whether the provisions of this chapter have been
violated, and whether any of the acts set forth in this section have occurred.
If, after such hearing, the Chief of Police finds that any or all of such acts
have occurred, he shall, within two days after the hearing, serve, by certified
mail upon the permittee and all interested persons participating in the hearing
and requesting such statement, a written statement of the facts upon which he
bases such finding and shall immediately revoke the permit.
('63 Code, § 6-14.10)
   (B)   Appeal.
      (1)   Within five days after receiving notification by certified mail
that his permit hereunder has been revoked, any permittee may file with the
City Clerk a written notice of appeal from such revocation, addressed to the
Council, requesting a public hearing before the Council on the appeal and
stating therein written exceptions to the findings of fact upon which the Chief
of Police based his revocation of the permit. Such exceptions shall include,
but not be limited to, statements why the permittee believes the Chief of
Police acted improperly or failed to act properly. Upon the filing of such
notice of appeal, the Council shall fix a time, date, and place for a public
hearing thereon and shall send, by certified mail to the permittee, a notice of
the time, date, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be held at a
regular meeting of the Council not more than 14 days after the date on which
the notice of appeal was filed with the City Clerk. At the hearing, the
permittee may present evidence in support of his stated exceptions and the
reissuance of his permit. Any interested party, including the Chief of Police,
may, in the discretion of the Council, be allowed to participate in the hearing
and present evidence in support of, or in opposition to, the revocation. The
burden of proof shall be on the Chief of Police. No later than 15 days after
the conclusion of the hearing the Council, by resolution, shall make findings
of fact and either affirm or reverse the revocation of the permit by the Chief
of Police. The Council, in such resolution, shall state the facts upon which
its decision is based and its ruling upon any exceptions filed to the original
findings of fact by the Chief of Police upon the revocation. A copy of such
resolution shall be served by mail upon the applicant and all parties to the
hearing requesting the same.
      (2)   The Council's decision by such resolution shall be final and
conclusive.
('63 Code, § 6-14.11) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.21 MASSAGISTS CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Certificates of registration.
      (1)   Every person who desires to be employed as a massagist shall make a
written application to the Chief of Police for a certificate of registration.
An individual possessing a current unrevoked permit required by the provisions
of §
117.17(A) of this chapter need not to obtain a certificate of registration. The
application shall be in the form set forth in said §
117.17(A) of this chapter.
      (2)   In the event such application is not approved, the Chief of Police
shall deny the certificate and notify the applicant thereof in writing and
advise him that he has a right to appeal within ten days.
('63 Code, § 6-14.12)
   (B)   Investigations. The Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant's
background and experience as provided in §
117.17(C) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-14.13)
   (C)   Fees. A nonrefundable fee of $10 shall be paid at the time of the
issuance of the certificate described in division (A) of this section, and such
fee shall be due and payable at the time of the original application and upon
an application for renewal.
('63 Code, § 6-14.14)
   (D)   Expiration; renewal. Each certificate of registration issued pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the anniversary of its
issuance unless sooner revoked. An unrevoked certificate of registration may be
renewed on a year-to-year basis on written application to the Chief of Police
made at least one month before its expiration date.
('63 Code, § 6-14.15)
   (E)   Revocation of certificates of registration. The Chief of Police may
revoke a certificate of registration issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter upon determining that the certificate holder has violated, or caused or
permitted any other person under his control or supervision to violate, any
provision of this chapter or of state or federal law in connection with the
practice of massage or operation of the massage establishment. The Chief of
Police shall transmit by certified mail to the applicant's address, as shown on
the application or otherwise more recently on record, a written notice that
such certificate of registration is revoked at the end of the fifth day after
such mailing of the notice. A revoked certificate of registration shall be
immediately surrendered to the Chief of Police.
('63 Code, § 6-14.16)
   (F)   Appeals. An applicant for or holder of a certificate of registration
may, within ten days following the mailing of the notice of refusal by the
Chief of Police to issue or renew such certificate, or his revocation thereof,
appeal from the action of the Chief of Police to the Council. The matter shall
be set for a public hearing before the Council at its next regular meeting, not
sooner than the fifth day after such appeal is filed. Unless the Council shall
reverse the action of the Chief of Police by majority vote, his decision shall
be deemed affirmed. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant if the appeal
is from a determination to refuse to issue, and it shall be on the Chief of
Police if the appeal is from a determination to refuse to issue, and it shall
be on the Chief of Police if the appeal is from a determination to revoke or to
refuse to renew.
('63 Code, § 6-14.17)
(Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
§ 117.22 TRANSFER OF PERMITS.
   No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
transferred or assigned in any manner, whether by operation of law or
otherwise, from location to location or from person to person.
('63 Code, § 6-14.19) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.23 NOTICES OF EMPLOYEES' STATUS.
   Every person holding a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of §
117.17(C) of this chapter shall report immediately in writing to the Chief of
Police the employment or termination of massagists practicing in such
establishment.
('63 Code, § 6-14.20) (Ord. 211-C.S., passed 6-22-73)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 118: SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, AND SIDEWALK VENDORS
Section
General Provisions
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Restrictions on solicitors and canvassers during certain hours
   
118.03   Exemptions
   
118.04   Vending locations
   
118.05   Sidewalk vendors, farmer's markets, and swap meets
   
118.06   Sidewalk vendors and temporary special permits
   
118.07   Sidewalk vendors, roaming sidewalk vendors, and stationary sidewalk
vendors who sell food
   
118.08   Sidewalk vendors, roaming sidewalk vendors, and stationary sidewalk
vendors and the Americans with Disabilities Act
Licensing
   
118.15   License required for solicitors and canvassers
   
118.16   Application and fee for solicitors and canvassers
   
118.17   License required for sidewalk vending
   
118.18   Application and fee for sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk vendors,
and roaming sidewalk vendors
   
118.19   Information required for sidewalk vendor permit
   
118.20   Confidentiality and sidewalk vendors
   
118.21   Appeals
 
   
118.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDOR. A sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and
stops only to complete a transaction.
   SIDEWALK VENDING. The sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, prepared, pre-
packaged; or unprepared, unpackaged food or food stuff of any kind by a
sidewalk vendor, a stationary sidewalk vendor, or a roaming sidewalk vendor.
   SIDEWALK VENDOR. Means a person who sells food or merchandise from a
pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other
nonmotorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other
pedestrian path.
   SOLICITOR or CANVASSER. Any person who travels from place to place by any
type of conveyance taking, or attempting to take, orders for products for
future delivery. The word SOLICITOR or CANVASSER shall not include any person
who goes upon private property to solicit or canvass, having been invited to do
so by the owner or occupant of such property.
   STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDOR. Means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed
location.
   THE CITY. The City of Eureka.
   VEND or VENDING. The sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, prepared, pre-
packaged; or unprepared, unpackaged food or food stuff of any kind.
(‘63 Code, § 6-11.02) (Ord. 395-C.S., passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 477-C.S., passed
10-20-88; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
§ 118.02 RESTRICTIONS ON SOLICITORS, AND CANVASSERS DURING CERTAIN HOURS.
   It shall be a violation for any person, regardless of age, to solicit or
canvass as defined in §
118.01 of this chapter, at any residence between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:
00 a.m. each day unless such person has, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:
00 p.m. of each day, obtained the advance consent from a person residing at
such residence.
(‘63 Code, § 6-11.03) (Ord. 395-C.S., passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed
7-19-16; Am. Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   All religious, nonprofit, and charitable organizations shall be exempt
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any fair, show, or exhibition of arts, crafts, or similar handiwork,
or city-wide celebrations, observances, or special events, such as an annual
sidewalk or parking lot sale shall be exempt from this chapter; provided,
however that the sponsors shall apply to the City Manager for a special events
license.
   (C)   Yard and garage sales (not exceeding three per year at one location)
shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   The sale of household goods or food products made or raised by the
salesperson on his or her premises shall be exempt from this chapter, provided
that such sales take place on the premises of the salesperson. This exemption
shall not apply to businesses operated under §
155.215, Home Occupations or §
155.216, Cottage Food Operation Home Occupation Permits.
   (E)   The terms of this chapter do not include the acts of persons selling
personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to paper
carriers, nor to the acts of merchants or their employees in delivering goods
in the regular course of business. Nothing contained in this chapter prohibits
any sale required by statute or by order of any court, or to prevent any person
conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.
   (F)   Vendors, merchants, exhibitors, and salespersons who exhibit,
demonstrate, or solicit orders for goods or merchandise in conjunction with,
and as part of the organized program of conventions, professional meetings,
trade association meetings, seminars, or other similar meetings held at hotels,
motels, or public or private meeting areas within the city shall be exempt from
the provisions of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 6-11.09) (Ord. 395-C.S., passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed
7-19-16; Am. Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
§ 118.04 VENDING LOCATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation for sidewalk vendors and stationary sidewalk
vendors, as defined in §
118.01 of this chapter, to operate in residential areas.
   (B)   It shall be a violation for roaming sidewalk vendors, as defined in §
118.01 of this chapter, to vend in any residential area between the hours of 8:
00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day unless such person has, between the hours of 8:
00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. of each day, obtained the advance consent from a person
residing at a residence therein.
   (C)   It shall be a violation for sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk
vendors, and roaming sidewalk vendors who vend on the sidewalk to:
      (1)   Impede access to the entrance of any adjacent building or driveway;
      (2)   Occupy any public sidewalk;
      (3)   Occupy any public or private street, or any right of way;
      (4)   Locate within 50 feet of a fire hydrant, fire escape, bus stop,
loading zone, driveway or driveway of a fire station, police station, hospital
or ambulance station;
      (5)   Vendors selling food, beverages, goods or merchandise on behalf of
service clubs, lodges, societies, organizations or corporations or other local
groups of a beneficial purpose may apply for a permit as provided herein, and
upon investigation and confirmation by the City Manager may be exempt from the
fees herein provided;
      (6)   Allow waste water to be permitted to flow into the street;
      (7)   Fail to remove all trash or debris accumulating by reason of any
vending and deposit the trash in a trash receptacle;
      (8)   Vend between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
      (9)   Operate without maintaining sanitary conditions;
      (10)   Locate within 300 feet of the grounds of any elementary or
secondary school on any school day;
      (11)   Locate within 500 feet of a freeway entrance or exit;
      (12)   Locate on public sidewalk or within any public street adjacent to
a curb which has been duly designated by the city as a white, yellow, blue, or
red zone;
      (13)   No vendor shall locate within 200 feet of any other vendor
operating during the vending hours specified in this section.
   (D)   It shall be a violation for sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk
vendors, and roaming sidewalk vendors who vend in the park to:
      (1)   Impede the use of any public facility;
      (2)   Occupy any public path;
      (3)   Operate without maintaining sanitary conditions;
      (4)   Fail to remove all trash or debris accumulating by reason of any
vending and deposit the trash in a trash receptacle;
      (5)   Vend at a time other than the park's normal hours of operation;
      (6)   Allow the unsanitary accumulation of waste water.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.05 SIDEWALK VENDORS, FARMER'S MARKETS, AND SWAP MEETS.
   It shall be a violation for sidewalk vendors, roaming sidewalk vendors, and
stationary sidewalk vendors to operate within the immediate vicinity of a
permitted certified farmers' market or a permitted swap meet during the limited
operating hours of that certified farmers' market or swap meet.
   (A)   A "certified farmers' market" means a location operated in accordance
with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food
and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.
   (B)   A "swap meet" means a location operated in accordance with Article 6
(commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and
Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.06 SIDEWALK VENDORS AND TEMPORARY SPECIAL PERMITS.
   It shall be a violation for sidewalk vendors, roaming sidewalk vendors, and
stationary sidewalk vendors to operate within the immediate vicinity of an area
designated for a temporary special permit issued by the city.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a temporary special permit is a permit
issued by the city for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk
or other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit,
special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes including, but
not limited to, filming, parades, or outdoor concerts.
   (B)   A prohibition of sidewalk vendors pursuant to this section shall only
be effective for the limited duration of the temporary special permit.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.07 SIDEWALK VENDORS, ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDORS, AND STATIONARY SIDEWALK
VENDORS WHO SELL FOOD.
   It shall be a violation for sidewalk venders, roaming sidewalk vendors, and
stationary sidewalk vendors to sell food without:
   (A)   Complying with Part 7 (commencing with Section 113700) of Division 104
of the Health and Safety Code.
   (B)   Maintaining sanitary conditions.
   (C)   Obtaining any additional licenses required from other state or local
agencies to the extent required by law.
   (D)   Complying with other generally applicable laws.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.08 SIDEWALK VENDORS, ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDORS, AND STATIONARY SIDEWALK
VENDORS AND THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT.
   It shall be a violation for sidewalk vendors, roaming sidewalk vendors, and
stationary sidewalk vendors to operate without complying with the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-336) and any disability
access standards under California law. A clear path of 48 inches must be
maintained.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
LICENSING
§ 118.15 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
   It is unlawful for any person over 18 years of age to solicit or canvass as
defined in §
118.01 of this chapter within the corporate limits of the city without first
obtaining a business license.
(‘63 Code, § 6-11.01) (Ord. 395-C.S., passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 477-C.S., passed
10-20-88; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.16 APPLICATION AND FEE FOR SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS.
   Solicitors and canvassers engaging in any business or other activity
described in §
118.01 of this chapter shall first procure from the Director of Finance, a
business license permitting him or her to engage in any of the selling or
soliciting activities referred to in this chapter. The business license shall
be issued in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Business licenses issued to solicitors and canvassers shall be issued
for a period of one year and shall be renewable for successive periods of one
year upon the payment of the annual license fee.
   (B)   A written statement from the Eureka Police Department, indicating that
the applicant is not a threat to public safety, shall be submitted to the
Finance Department with the business license application for solicitors and
canvassers.
(‘63 Code, § 6-11.04) (Ord. 395-C.S., passed 1-3-84; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed
7-19-16; Am. Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.17 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR SIDEWALK VENDING.
   It is a violation for any person over 18 years of age to engage in sidewalk
vending as defined in §
118.01 of this chapter within the corporate limits of the city without first
obtaining a sidewalk vendor's permit.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.18 APPLICATION AND FEE FOR SIDEWALK VENDORS, STATIONARY SIDEWALK VENDORS,
AND ROAMING SIDEWALK VENDORS.
   Every sidewalk vendor, stationary sidewalk vendor, and roaming sidewalk
vendor transacting any business or other activity described in §
118.01 of this chapter shall first procure from the Director of Finance, a
sidewalk vendor's permit authorizing him or her to engage in any of the selling
or soliciting activities referred to in this chapter. The sidewalk vendor
permit shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Permits issued to sidewalk vendors, stationary sidewalk vendors, and
roaming sidewalk vendors shall be issued for a period of one year and shall be
renewable for successive periods of one year upon the payment of the annual
permit fee.
   (B)   Every person engaging in sidewalk vending in the city shall pay the
sidewalk vendor permit fee herein listed:
      (1)   The annual permit fee shall be $55, plus $11.50 per annum for each
full-time equivalent employee in addition to the first owner, partner, or
franchisee, the total annual fee is in no case to exceed $1,000, exclusive of
penalties.
   (C)   A written statement from the Eureka Police Department, indicating that
the applicant is not a threat to public safety, shall be submitted to the
Finance Department with the permit applications for sidewalk vendors.
   (D)   Sidewalk vendors shall acquire any additional applicable licenses from
other state or local agencies to the extent required by law.
   (E)   Sidewalk vendors must remain in compliance with other generally
applicable laws.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.19 INFORMATION REQUIRED FOR SIDEWALK VENDOR PERMIT.
   (A)   The Director of Finance shall accept the following forms of
identification as valid for the permit:
      (1)   A valid California driver's license or identification number;
      (2)   An individual taxpayer identification number;
      (3)   A social security number; or
      (4)   A municipal identification number.
   (B)   Sidewalk vendors shall submit the following information on his or her
operations:
      (1)   The name and current mailing address of the sidewalk vendor.
      (2)   A description of the merchandise offered for sale or exchange.
      (3)    If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company,
partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal.
      (4)   A certification by the vendor that to his or her knowledge and
belief, the information contained on the form is true.
      (5)   Any other information required by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18) Penalty, see §
118.99
§ 118.20 CONFIDENTIALITY AND SIDEWALK VENDORS.
   The identification information required for a sidewalk vending permit is
confidential and shall not be available to the public for inspection, except as
required to administer the permit program or to comply with a state law or
state or federal court order.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
§ 118.21 APPEALS.
   Persons who are denied licenses or whose licenses have been suspended or
revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council.
The appeal must be filed within ten work days after receipt of the notice of
denial, or suspension or revocation. The City Council shall hear and determine
the final appeal and the decision of the Council shall be final.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by sidewalk
vendors, stationary sidewalk vendors, or roaming sidewalk vendors shall be
punishable by an administrative fine according to the following provisions:
      (1)   An administrative fine of $100 for a first violation.
      (2)   An administrative fine of $200 for a second violation within one
year of the first violation.
      (3)   An administrative fine of $500 for each additional violation within
one year of the first violation.
      (4)   The city may rescind a permit issued for sidewalk vending for the
term of that permit upon the fourth violation or any subsequent violation.
   (B)   Engaging in sidewalk vending without a permit is punishable by an
administrative fine according to the following provisions:
      (1)   An administrative fine of $250 for a first violation.
      (2)   An administrative fine of $500 for a second violation within one
year of the first violation.
      (3)   An administrative fine of $1,000 for each additional violation
within one year of the first violation.
      (4)   Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the city, the administrative
fines set forth in this division shall be reduced to the administrative fines
set forth in division (A), respectively.
   (C)   Failure to pay an administrative fine pursuant to divisions (A) and
(B) shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor.
   (D)   Additional fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions
beyond those authorized in divisions (A) and (B) shall not be assessed.
   (E)   (1)   When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to divisions (A)
and (B), the city shall take into consideration the person's ability to pay the
fine. The city shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to
request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions
or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination at
adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is
delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program. 
      (2)   If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or
(B) of Section 68632 of the Government Code, the city shall accept, in full
satisfaction, 20% of the administrative fine, or may offer the following
alternatives:
         (a)   Community service in lieu of paying the total administrative
fine.
         (b)   Waiver of the administrative fine.
         (c)   An alternative disposition.
(Ord. 881-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
CHAPTER 119: SECOND-HAND DEALERS
Section
   
119.01   License required
   
119.02   Dealers' records and reports
   
119.03   Report form; filing of reports
   
119.04   Merchandise tags
§ 119.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Any person engaging in the business of dealing in second-hand radios,
phonographs, electric irons, electric cooking equipment, electric motors,
automobile accessories, cameras, bathtubs, patent toilets, musical instruments,
sewing machines, washing machines, drag saws, gasoline motors, saddles, spurs,
bicycles, clothing, tools, harnesses, ropes, whips, garden hose, firearms,
diamonds, jewelry, silverware, old gold and silver, or either or any of such
articles, either as merchant pawnbroker, or otherwise, shall make application
to the Council for a license so to do. Such license may be granted by the City
Clerk upon the payment of the license fee required and Council order by
resolution. The City Clerk may thereafter from time to time renew such license
upon the payment of the license fee; provided, however, the Council shall have
the power to revoke such license upon good cause being shown.
('63 Code, § 6-10.01) (Ord. 2093, passed - - )
§ 119.02 DEALERS' RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   Records. The licensee shall keep a record of all such articles sold,
purchased, pledged, or otherwise dealt in, which shall at all times during
business hours be open to the inspection of the Chief of Police or any police
officer. Such record shall contain a description of the article purchased,
sold, pledged, or otherwise dealt in, the name and residence of the person from
whom purchased or to whom sold, or by whom pledged, or with whom otherwise
dealt, the age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard, style of dress,
and height of such person, and the time when the articles were purchased, sold,
pledged, or otherwise dealt in.
('63 Code, § 6-10.02)
   (B)   Reports. The licensee shall at least once a day make and deliver to
the Chief of Police, on a form to be furnished by the Chief of Police for that
purpose, a full, true, and complete report of all dealings during the 24 hours
preceding such report, together with the hour of the day when purchased, sold,
pledged, or otherwise dealt in or with, and a description of the person from
whom purchased, or to whom sold, or by whom pledged, or with whom dealt, and
the true name, as nearly as the same is known to the person making such report.
Such report shall be written in the English language in a clear, legible
manner.
('63 Code, § 6-10.03)
(Ord. 2093, passed - - )
§ 119.03 REPORT FORM; FILING OF REPORTS.
   (A)   Report form. The Chief of Police shall cause report forms to be
printed to provide for the following information:
      (1)   The name and residence of the person from whom purchased, to whom
sold, by whom pledged, or with whom otherwise dealt;
      (2)   The age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard, style of
dress, and height of such person;
      (3)   The time when the articles were purchased, sold, pledged, or
otherwise dealt in;
      (4)   The date of the report;
      (5)   The name and place of residence of the person making the report;
and,
      (6)   The hour of the day when the report was made.
('63 Code, § 6-10.04)
   (B)   Filing of reports. The Chief of Police shall deliver report forms to
the licensees free of charge and shall, upon receipt of such reports, file the
same in his office. Such reports shall at all times be open to inspection only
by the Police Department of the city and the peace officers of the county.
('63 Code, § 6-10.05)
(Ord. 2093, passed - - )
§ 119.04 MERCHANDISE TAGS.
   The licensee shall affix to each of the articles enumerated in §
119.01 of this chapter a tag upon which shall be inscribed a number, in legible
characters, which number shall correspond to the number in the record book
required to be kept as provided in §
119.02(A) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 6-10.06) (Ord. 2093, passed - - )
CHAPTER 120: TAXICABS AND LIMOUSINES
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Certificate of public convenience and necessity
   
120.03   Hearing after filing of application
   
120.04   Proof of public convenience and necessity
   
120.05   Certificate not transferable; change in ownership
   
120.06   Revocation of certificates
   
120.07   Duties of certificate holder; annual renewal
   
120.08   Liability insurance; indemnity
   
120.09   Testing of drivers for controlled substances and alcohol
   
120.10   Vehicles permits
   
120.11   Driver's permit required
   
120.12   Application for driver's permit
   
120.13   Eligibility for driver's permit
   
120.14   Driver's permit, form, display, use
   
120.15   Revocation or suspension of permits
   
120.16   Hearing
   
120.17   Vehicle color design
   
120.18   Identification of taxicabs
   
120.19   Signs or advertising on taxicabs
   
120.20   Taximeter
   
120.21   Schedule of rates, display
   
120.22   Interference with inspection; inspection of vehicles
   
120.23   Operating regulations
   
120.24   Maintenance of vehicles
   
120.25   Permits not transferable
   
120.26   Duties of city
   
120.27   Horse-drawn vehicles for hire
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the
context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are
defined as follows:
   ADA PARATRANSIT PROVIDER. A taxicab or public transportation vehicle
operator that provides paratransit services to eligible individuals with
disabilities in order to effectuate the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
under contract with any government agency or under contract with a broker
designated by any government agency. An ADA PARATRANSIT PROVIDER , while in the
performance of providing paratransit services under such government contract
controls shall be exempt from the regulatory requirements of this chapter.
   CERTIFICATE HOLDER. Any person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity is
issued.
   DRIVER . A person in direct and immediate possession or charge of driving or
operating a taxicab, or public transportation vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, association or corporation having proprietary
control of or right to proprietary control of any vehicle as herein defined.
   PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION VEHICLE.  Every for-hire, unmetered automobile or
motor-propelled vehicle having a seating capacity of no more than five persons,
excluding driver, used in the business of transporting passengers over the
streets of this city, irrespective of whether such operations extend beyond the
city, and which is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature publicly maintained and
opened to the use of vehicular traffic.
   TAXICAB. A motor-propelled vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the
city, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver,
and used for the transportation of passengers for hire. The term shall exclude
a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state
agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having
a certificate of public necessity issued by any state agency, including the
Public Utilities Commission.
   TAXIMETER. Any instrument or device approved for use under the applicable
laws of the State of California, which mechanically or electronically
calculates the charge for the use of a taxicab. The TAXIMETER registers such
charge by means of figures, including dollars and cents, calculated by an
initial charge and thereafter a charge for distance traveled, and/or waiting
time:
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.02 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   It is unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation, or the like, to provide taxicab or public transportation vehicle
service in this city without a certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued pursuant to this chapter by the City Manager or his or her designee. The
certificate of public convenience and necessity required by this chapter shall
be in addition to any business license required by this code.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.03 HEARING AFTER FILING OF APPLICATION.
   Applicants shall furnish such information as may be required by the hearing
officer upon forms to be furnished by the city. A public hearing on the
question of issuance of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall
be held within 60 days after filing of a completed application with the City
Manager's office. The hearing shall be held before the City Manager or his or
her designee. Notice of the hearing shall be included in two consecutive
council packets and shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation
at least ten days before the hearing. The cost of the publication shall be
borne by the applicant.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.04 PROOF OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   (A)   Applicant shall have the burden of proving:
      (1)   That there is a public demand for additional service or that
service to the public will be improved by the issuance of a certificate to the
applicant;
      (2)   That applicant has sufficient experience and assets to properly
conduct such a business;
      (3)   That traffic conditions or hazards will not be appreciably
increased or parking problems made worse.
   (B)   The decision of the hearing officer shall be final and nonappealable.
If denied, the applicant shall not file for a certificate of public convenience
and necessity for six months from date of denial.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.05 CERTIFICATE NOT TRANSFERABLE; CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   No certificate shall be assignable or transferable. If ownership in excess
of 33% of the business, whether corporate stock, partnership interest, or
otherwise, changes, a new certificate must be obtained.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.06 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   Certificates of public convenience and necessity may be revoked for any
cause which would have warranted denial thereof in the first instance, for a
failure to provide, in a complete and truthful manner, any information required
in the application for certificate of public convenience and necessity, for a
failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, a failure to
comply with any conditions imposed upon the certificate or in any instance
where operations have ceased for ten consecutive days. If a certificate of
public convenience and necessity is granted, and operation of the service for
which the certificate is granted does not commence within four months of the
date of the approval thereof, the certificate shall be automatically null and
void. Any revocation herein shall be held before the City Manager or a
representative of such person; ten days' written notice shall be provided to
the certificate holder and the certificate holder shall have the opportunity to
present at the hearing any evidence deemed relevant by the hearing officer. The
decision of the hearing officer shall be final and nonappealable. If revoked,
the applicant shall not file for a certificate of public convenience and
necessity for six months from date of revocation.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.07 DUTIES OF CERTIFICATE HOLDER; ANNUAL RENEWAL.
   (A)   Certificate holders shall render a service to the public desiring to
use taxicabs and public transportation vehicles. Taxicab companies shall keep
their place of business open 24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls
and dispatching vehicles.
   (B)   Certificate holders shall answer all requests received by them for
services inside the corporate limits as soon as practicable; and, if the
service cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, the certificate holder
shall inform the prospective passenger how long it will be before the call can
be answered and give the reason therefor. Any certificate may be revoked after
a hearing when a certificate holder refuses to accept a request for service
anywhere within the corporate limits of the city, having vehicles and drivers
available for service.
   (C)   Certificate holders shall be responsible for the business authorized
by the certificate, including dispatch services. A certificate holder shall
assure that the vehicles operated by the certificate holder are operable and in
safe condition. A certificate holder shall be responsible to provide
sufficient, permitted drivers to operate the business in accordance with the
requirements of the certificate and this chapter.
   (D)   Notice of change of business or dispatch address or of telephone
number shall be provided the Police Department at least 72 hours before the
change is effected.
   (E)   Each certificate holder must renew the certificate annually and shall
certify its accuracy completeness. Upon payment of the nonrefundable
administrative fees as provided in the most recent fee schedule adopted by the
City Council, the City Manager shall issue an annual renewal.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE; INDEMNITY.
   (A)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a policy of
comprehensive automobile liability insurance in a form prescribed by the risk
manager, executed by an insurance company approved by the risk manager with a
Best's Key Rating of not less than "A VII," unless otherwise approved by the
risk manager, whereby the owner and driver of each of the vehicles operating
pursuant to the certificate as well as the holder of the certificate of public
convenience and necessity are insured against liability for damage to property
and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the ownership operation
or other use thereof. The minimum liability limits shall not be less than
$1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence applicable to all owned, non-
owned and hired vehicles; provided, however, that a different amount may be
required by the risk manager if deemed necessary.
   (B)   Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that
the policy will not be canceled until notice in writing has been given to the
city, addressed in care of the City Clerk, at least 30 days immediately prior
to the time such cancellation becomes effective.
   (C)   Such policy of insurance shall name the city, its officers, agents and
employees as additional insured.
   (D)   Contribution not required. As respects work performed by the named
insured for or on behalf of the city, the insurance afforded by this policy
shall: (a) be primary insurance as respects the city, its officers, officials,
employees and volunteers; or (b) stand in an unbroken chain of coverage excess
of the named insured's primary coverage. Any insurance or self-insurance
maintained by the city, its officers, officials, employees and volunteers shall
be excess of the named insured's insurance and not contribute with it.
   (E)   Certificate holders, vehicle owners and drivers shall indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, from any
loss, liability, claim, injury or damage arising or alleged to arise from the
willful or negligent acts or omissions of the certificate holder, vehicle owner
or driver in connection with the provision of transportation service pursuant
to the certificate.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.09 TESTING OF DRIVERS FOR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND ALCOHOL.
   (A)   Each holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall
maintain a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification
program consistent with the controlled substances and alcohol use and testing
requirements of 49 CFR Part 40 for all drivers of vehicles operated under the
certificate. Under the program and the requirements of this section, a negative
test for alcohol means an alcohol screening test showing a breath alcohol
concentration of less than 0.02%. The program shall contain requirements for
rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing and other
requirements conforming substantially to 49 CFR Part 382.
   (B)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
renewed unless the holder at the time of certificate issuance or renewal files
with the City Manager or his or her designee a certification that the holder
maintains a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification
program consistent with the controlled substances and alcohol use and testing
requirements of 49 CFR Part 40 for all drivers of vehicles operated under the
certificate. Records of testing shall be maintained by the holder of the
certificate for a period of three years and produced upon demand by the City
Manager or his or her designee. The program shall contain requirements for
rehabilitation and for return-to-duty and follow-up testing and other
requirements conforming substantially to 49 CFR Part 382.
   (C)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
renewed unless the holder at the time of certificate issuance or renewal files
with the City Manager or his or her designee a certification that, prior to
employment with the holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity, each driver of vehicles operated under the certificate has tested
negatively for controlled substances under a mandatory controlled substance
testing certification program consistent with the controlled substances and
alcohol use and testing requirements of 49 CFR Part 40.
   (D)   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
renewed unless the holder at the time of certificate issuance or renewal shall
file with the City Manager or his or her designee a certification that each
driver of vehicles operated under the certificate has tested negatively for
controlled substances and alcohol under a mandatory controlled substance and
alcohol testing certification program consistent with the controlled substances
and alcohol use and testing requirements of 49 CFR Part 40.
   (E)   No driver's permit shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant and
the certificate holder for which the driver is authorized to operate a vehicle
both certify that the driver is in compliance with a mandatory controlled
substance and alcohol testing certification program consistent with the
controlled substances and alcohol use and testing requirements of 49 CFR Part
40.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.10 VEHICLE PERMITS.
   (A)   No vehicle may legally be operated under any certificate of public
convenience and necessity unless such vehicle has been duly permitted in
accordance with this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
any vehicle described in
§ 120.01, or for any certificate holder or any person who owns or controls any
such vehicle to allow such vehicle to be driven which has not been duly
permitted in accordance with this section.
   (B)   The certificate holder shall apply for an annual permit for each
vehicle proposed to be operated, up to the maximum number permitted by the
certificate. Upon payment of the nonrefundable fee provided in the municipal
fee schedule, and upon submitting proof that each vehicle has passed the annual
inspection provided for in
§ 120.22, the City Manager or his or her designee shall issue a permit for each
vehicle.
   (C)   Each vehicle permit shall be valid for one year, so long as the
certificate under which the vehicles are permitted is in force and effect, and
the vehicle continues to be insured according to the requirements of
§ 120.08.
   (D)   A copy of the permit shall be posted in the vehicle in a place
designated by the Police Department.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.11 DRIVER'S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any vehicle described in
§ 120.01 upon the streets of the city and no person who owns or controls any
such vehicle shall permit it to be so driven and no such vehicle licensed by
the city shall be so driven unless the driver of the vehicle has first obtained
and has then in force a driver's permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.12 APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S PERMIT.
   (A)   Any person may apply to the city for a permit to operate a vehicle
defined in
§ 120.01 by filing with the Police Department, upon forms supplied by the city.
   (B)   The application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and age of applicant;
      (2)   Convictions, if any, in the courts of any state of the United
States or in any United States court; the applicant is to be employed as a
driver;
      (3)   Number and expiration date of State of California driver's license;
      (4)   Such other information regarding the health, mentality and
experience of the applicant as may be necessary or desirable to enable the
Police Department to ascertain applicant's qualification for a driver's permit.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.13 ELIGIBILITY FOR DRIVER'S PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Upon receipt of an application for a driver's permit the Police
Department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and, on the basis of
such investigation, shall either approve or deny the application within 15 days
of the date the Police Department received the application. In the event the
Department of Justice is unable to provide the Police Department with the
necessary information within the 15 day time period, then the Police Department
may issue a temporary permit that shall automatically expire within 30 days of
application.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued to any of the following persons:
         (a)   Any person under the age of 18 years;
         (b)   Any person convicted of any felony or misdemeanor offense which
is reasonably and directly related to the functions involved in the operation
of motor vehicles for hire and indicates potential risk to the public. This
restriction shall apply only to felony or misdemeanor convictions occurring
within five years of the date of application;
         (c)   Any person convicted of hit-and-run driving, of reckless
driving, or of driving a vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating
liquor and/or any drug within six months of the application, or upon conviction
of any two or more of these offenses within five years of the date of
application. However, no permit shall be issued to any person convicted of any
offense described herein if such person was driving a motor vehicle for hire at
the time the offense was committed;
         (d)   Any person not possessing a valid State of California driver's
license of the class required by state law for the type of motor vehicle for
hire the applicant intends to drive;
         (e)   The provisions of
§ 120.15 of this title shall be applicable to any person applying for a permit
hereunder.
   (B)   The restrictions in division (A) of this section shall apply to
persons possessing driver's permits and persons seeking renewal of such
permits. Driver's permits shall be subject at all times to revocation or
suspension as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.14 DRIVER'S PERMIT, FORM, DISPLAY, USE.
   (A)   Upon approval of an application for a driver's permit and upon payment
of the nonrefundable fee provided for in the municipal fee schedule, the Police
Department shall issue a permit to the applicant. The permit shall bear the
name and photograph of the applicant, and the name of the certificate holder
for which the driver is authorized to operate a vehicle. Such permit shall be
made available to the applicant named therein at the Police Department, and
shall be valid only so long as the driver continues in the employ of such
certificate holder.
   (B)   Such permit shall be displayed in the vehicle being driven by the
permittee in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers in such
vehicle.
   (C)   Upon the termination of any driver's employment, the certificate
holder by whom such driver has been employed shall immediately give the Police
Department written notice of such termination, the reasons therefor and shall
forthwith surrender the driver's permit to the Chief of Police for
cancellation.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.15 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Any person issued a driver's permit who subsequently is convicted of
any felony or misdemeanor offense or who ceases to possess a valid State of
California driver's license of the class required by state law for the type of
motor vehicle for hire such person drives shall immediately so inform his or
her employer and the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Chief of Police may revoke any driver's permit if such driver
becomes ineligible for the permit. The permit holder, may request a hearing as
provided in
§ 120.16.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may revoke or suspend any driver's permit if the
driver's State of California Department of Motor Vehicles record includes four
or more moving violations within the preceding 12-month period or if the Chief
of Police determines that the driver is a danger to the public safety. The
permit holder may request a hearing as provided in
§ 120.16; however, the driver may be suspended pending the hearing.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.16 HEARING.
   (A)   Every driver whose application has been denied or whose permit has
been revoked shall have the right to a hearing before the Chief of Police or
his or her designee prior to final denial and prior to revocation.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall give the applicant or permit holder written
notice of intent to deny the application or to revoke the driver's permit. The
notice shall set forth the ground or grounds for the Chief of Police's
intention to deny or revoke, and shall inform the applicant or permit holder
that he or she has ten days from the date of receipt of the notice to file a
written request for a hearing. The application may be denied or the permit may
be revoked if a hearing request is not received within the ten-day period.
   (C)   If the applicant or permit holder files a timely hearing request, the
Chief of Police shall set a time and place for the hearing. All parties
involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible
evidence bearing on the issues and to be represented by counsel. The decision
of the Chief of Police whether to deny the application or revoke or suspend the
permit is final and nonappealable.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.17 VEHICLE COLOR DESIGN.
   The vehicles of every certificate holder operating in the city shall be of a
color scheme and bear the certificate holder's trade name, monogram or insignia
which are distinguishable from the color scheme, owner's trademark, monogram or
insignia used on the vehicles of any other certificate holders already
operating pursuant to this chapter. No change in the color scheme or
distinguishing characteristics of any vehicle shall be made without written
permission from the City Manager or his or her designee. It is unlawful for any
person soliciting patronage from any vehicle described in this chapter to
represent by word, sign or insignia that the vehicle for which the person is
soliciting such patronage is a vehicle operated by other than the actual
certificate holder.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.18 IDENTIFICATION OF TAXICABS.
   Every taxicab operated in the city shall bear the following identification:
The certificate holder's trade name, monogram or insignia, as approved by the
City Manager or his or her designee, together with a cab number and the
certificate holder's telephone number or numbers painted upon the metal portion
of the outside of each side of the taxicab and the cab number and certificate
holder's telephone number or numbers painted upon the outside rear panel of the
taxicabs. All lettering mentioned in this section shall be not less than two
and one-fourth inches in height.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.19 SIGNS OR ADVERTISEMENTS ON TAXICABS.
   In addition to the identification required by
§ 120.18, taxicabs may bear the following signs or advertisements:
   (A)   A metal sign bearing the words "FOR HIRE" and being no longer than six
inches by nine inches;
   (B)   A sign attached to the top of the cab bearing the word "VACANT," "FOR
HIRE," and/or "the taxicab company's name" and being no larger than two and
one-half inches by nine inches;
   (C)   Advertisements not exceeding 12 square feet in total area subject to
the rules and regulations of the City Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.20 TAXIMETER.
   (A)   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall be
equipped with taximeter of the type and design approved by the City Manager or
his or her designee, located in the vehicle so as to render the figures visible
to the passengers at all times, day and night. After sundown, the face of the
taximeter shall be illuminated. Such taximeter shall be subject to inspection
from time to time by the City Manager and his or her designee and shall require
the certificate holder to discontinue the operation of any taxicab in which the
taximeter is found to calculate inaccurately until such taximeter is replaced
by one approved by the City Manager or his or her designee or is adjusted
accurately.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a taxicab driver, while carrying passengers, to
display the flag or the device attached to the taximeter in such position as to
denote that the vehicle is for hire, to cause the taximeter to record when the
vehicle is not actually employed, to fail to cause the device on the taximeter
to be placed into a nonrecording position at the termination of each and every
service, or to charge any fare other than that recorded on the taximeter.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.21 SCHEDULE OF RATES, DISPLAY.
   The certificate holder shall file, with the application for a certificate, a
true and correct schedule of rates to be charged for the transportation of
passengers in any and all vehicles operated by the certificate holder. A
schedule of such charges shall be posted conspicuously in each vehicle operated
by the certificate holder. The rates shall not be changed or modified in any
manner without first filing the changed or modified rates with the City Manager
or his or her designee 30 days prior to the effective date of such change or
modification.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.22 INTERFERENCE WITH INSPECTION; INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a certificate holder, owner or driver of any
vehicle defined in this chapter and operated in the city to interfere with or
prohibit any police officer of the city or any person designated by the City
Manager from at any time inspecting or thoroughly examining any such vehicle or
any taximeter used upon any taxicab.
   (B)   The certificate holder of each vehicle for which a permit has been
issued in accordance with this chapter shall cause to have each such vehicle
inspected annually by an Official Brake and Lamp Station. The cost of such
inspections shall be borne by the permit holder.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.23 OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Direct route. Any driver employed to carry any passenger to a definite
point shall take the most direct route which will carry the passenger safely
and expeditiously to the point of destination.
   (B)   Receipt. Every driver shall, if requested, give a correct receipt upon
payment of the correct fare.
   (C)   Interference with vehicular traffic prohibited. Vehicles shall not be
operated over public streets in search of or soliciting prospective passengers
for hire in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Capacity. No driver shall accept, take into the vehicle or transport
any larger number of passengers than the rated seating capacity of the vehicle.
   (E)   Refusal to carry passengers. It is unlawful for any driver operating
under a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter to refuse, when the
vehicle is in service, to transport any person who represents himself or
herself for carriage in a sober and orderly manner and for a lawful purpose.
   (F)   Solicitation of passengers. It is unlawful for any driver to leave the
side of the vehicle to solicit passengers or to solicit passengers in a louder
tone of voice than that used in ordinary conversation.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 120.24 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the certificate holder to assure
that every vehicle operating under its certificate is in safe working order.
   (B)   The interior and exterior of each vehicle shall be clean and well
maintained and meet California Vehicle Code requirements at all times when in
operation.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.25 PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter no permit issued under the
provisions of this chapter may be sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred
without the approval of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.26 DUTIES OF CITY.
   No duty described in this chapter shall be considered a mandatory duty for
purposes of the California Torts Claim Act, Cal. Gov't Code §§ 815 et seq.
Specifically, the failure of the city to inspect any vehicle authorized as a
taxicab or other vehicle for hire pursuant to this chapter or the negligent
inspection of any such vehicle by the city shall not create liability under
this chapter upon city.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 120.27 HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   Applicants for permits to engage in, and every person engaging in the
business of operating for hire horse-drawn vehicles for the transportation of
persons over and along any public street in the city shall comply with all of
the provisions of this chapter, except those provisions which by their very
nature can have no application, and with the terms or conditions of any permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The Council shall have the
authority to include in any such permit such terms and conditions relating to
the operation of horse-drawn vehicles as may be reasonably necessary to protect
the public health and safety and which will promote the public welfare.
(Ord. 653-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
CHAPTER 121: OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Permit required; application
   
121.03   Issuance or denial of permit
   
121.04   Business license fees
   
121.05   Regulations
   
121.06   Schedules of routes and fares; completion of routes
   
121.07   Suspension of permit
   
121.08   Surrender of permit; notice
   
121.09   Operation of buses, pedicab or horse drawn carriage by employees or
agents
   
121.10   Assignment of permit
   
121.11   Number of permits not restricted
   
121.12   Horse-drawn vehicles for hire
   
121.13   Pedicabs
   
121.14   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on board the pedicab
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All other
words and phrases shall have the meaning commonly ascribed to them.
   MOTOR BUS. Any motor vehicle which is used for the transportation of
passengers for hire over and along public streets over fixed routes and on
established schedules. Motor vehicles used exclusively as school buses,
taxicabs, and limousines, and other automobiles or conveyances transporting
passengers, parcels, or packages for hire not over fixed routes or on
established schedules, are not to be deemed included in this definition.
   PEDICAB. Is defined as any of the following:
      (1)   A bicycle that has three or more wheels, that transports, or is
capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the bicycle, that is
operated by a person, and that is being used for transporting passengers for
hire.
      (2)   A bicycle that pulls a trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that
transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the
trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that is operated by a person, and that is
being used for transporting passengers for hire.
      (3)   A four or more wheeled device that is primarily or exclusively
pedal-powered, has a seating capacity for eight or more passengers, cannot
travel in excess of 15 miles per hour, and is being used for transporting
passengers for hire. A pedicab defined under this subdivision is subject to the
requirements of Article 4.5 (commencing with Section 21215) of Chapter 1 of
Division 11 of the Cal. Vehicle Code.
   PERMITTEE. The person to whom a permit shall be granted pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.01) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19)
§ 121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of operating or causing to be operated for hire any motor bus, pedicab
or horse-drawn vehicle to transport persons over and along any public street in
the city unless a permit from the Council shall first have been secured or
without complying with each and every regulation set forth in this chapter
pertaining to the business of operating for hire a motor bus, pedicab or horse-
drawn vehicle for the transportation of persons. (‘63 Code, § 6-8.02)
   (B)   Application. An applicant for a permit to engage in the business of
operating a motor bus shall file his application with the City Manager or his
designee. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   The fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does
business or proposes to do business;
      (3)   The business address of the applicant or business address of the
proposed place of business;
      (4)   The names and residence addresses of all managers, directors,
officers, trustees, and/or other individuals connected, or professing to be
collected, directly or indirectly, with the business;
      (5)   A description of the vehicles which the applicant proposes to use,
giving the type, make, year of manufacture, and rated seating capacity of each
such vehicle;
      (6)   The number of vehicles proposed to be used;
      (7)   The color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing
characteristics proposed to be used on such vehicles;
      (8)   A schedule of rates or fares to be charged;
      (9)   A description of the route over which the applicant intends to
operate, showing schedules of stops and operating time;
      (10)    A brief statement of facts showing that the public convenience
and necessity require the granting of such permit or license;
      (11)    A statement as to the financial status of the applicant,
including the amounts of unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature
of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments;
      (12)    A statement showing the experience of the applicant in the
transportation of passengers; and,
      (13)    An agreement or promise of the applicant to conform to and comply
with all the requirements of the permit to be granted, with all of the
provisions and requirements of this chapter, and with all valid laws existing
from time to time regulating the operation of motor vehicles in the city.
('63 Code, § 6-8.03)
(Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 232-C.S., passed 7-26-74; Am. Ord. 886-
C.S., passed 6-4-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.03 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The permit, when issued, shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the number of motor buses, pedicabs or horse drawn carriage which may be
operated under the permit, the date of issuance of the permit, and a statement
that the permittee is entitled, by reason of the permit so granted, to procure
a business license to engage in the business of operating a motor bus, pedicabs
or horse drawn carriage on the streets of the city subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.04) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19)
§ 121.04 BUSINESS LICENSE FEES.
   Every person engaging in the business of operating a motor bus, pedicabs or
horse drawn carriage shall pay the license fees required under the provisions
of
Chapter 110 of this title.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.05) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.05 REGULATIONS.
   In order to secure the safety of the public and in order to insure
reasonably adequate service of any such permittee, the permittee shall comply
with each and all of the following requirements, the breach of any of which
requirements shall be unlawful and shall be cause for the revocation or
suspension of such permit in the discretion of the City Manager or his/her
designee:
   (A)   Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of
insurance and endorsement will be required naming the City of Eureka as an
additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal
injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage. The City of Eureka, its
officers, employees and volunteers shall be named as “additional insureds” by
endorsement of the policy. The policy shall not be subject to cancellation or
modification until after ten days written notice to the City of Eureka. An
original copy of the certificate and endorsements will remain on file with the
city.
   (B)   Worker’s compensation insurance. An applicant shall conform to all
applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance
for all persons operating under a permit and shall execute a waiver of its
subrogation rights against the city.
   (C)   Compliance with state law. Any motor bus operating under the authority
of such permit shall comply with all the provisions established by the laws of
the state.
   (D)   Bus stops. Every motor bus operated under the authority of such permit
shall stop to take on and let off passengers at specified points, and wherever
provision shall be made therefor by the Council, shall stop next to the curb at
spaces reserved for that purpose, and insofar as possible all stops shall be
made after crossing intersections.
   (E)   Safe equipment required. All motor buses shall be under the
supervision and control of the City Manager, and no permittee or driver shall
operate or permit to be operated any motor bus in the city while some or any of
the equipment used therein shall be defective, unsafe, or in an insanitary
condition, and every motor bus shall be at all times subject to the inspection
of any officer of the city.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.06) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 490-C.S., passed 3-11-
89; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.06 SCHEDULES OF ROUTES AND FARES; COMPLETION OF ROUTES.
   (A)   Schedules of routes and fares. The schedules as to routes, stopping
places, operating times, and rates or fares which accompany the application
shall be approved by the City Manager and shall not be amended or varied from
except with the consent of or by order of the City Manager. The City Manager or
designee may from time to time review such schedules as to routes, stopping
places, operating times, and rates or fares and may, based upon its findings on
the question of reasonableness and uniformity, order changes therein which
shall be complied with. The permittee shall at all times operate motor buses in
conformity with the schedules from time to time in force, except when prevented
from so doing by strikes, storms, destruction of property, acts of God, or
other unavoidable causes. In the event of emergencies the City Manager reserves
the right to order temporary routing or to suspend operations. (‘63 Code, § 6-
8.07)
   (B)   Completion of routes. Every motor bus operated under a permit issued
by the Council shall proceed to the terminus of the route before returning to
the leaving station, except when rendered inoperative by accident, breakage, or
lack of motor power. (‘63 Code, § 6-8.08)
(Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.07 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Inoperation. If any permittee shall for any consecutive period of more
than 30 days fail to operate motor buses, pedicab or horse drawn carriage as
specified in his permit, unless excused by some or any of the circumstances
specified in §
121.06(A) of this chapter, the City Manager or designee may at its option
revoke or suspend such permit. (‘63 Code, § 6-8.09)
   (B)   Violation; hearing. Violation by the permittee of any of the terms or
conditions of such permit or of this chapter shall be cause for the revocation
or suspension of the permit by the City Manager for any alleged violation of
the terms of the permit or of this chapter. The permittee shall be entitled to
a public hearing before the Council. Written notice of such public hearing
shall be served upon the permittee not less than ten days before the time fixed
for the public hearing. (‘63 Code, § 6-8.10)
(Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-19)
§ 121.08 SURRENDER OF PERMIT; NOTICE.
   The holder of any permit may surrender the same at any time and discontinue
the operation of such motor bus, pedicab or horse drawn carriage by giving 30
days’ previous notice to the City of the proposed surrender of the same, and
after the expiration of the period of 30 days, the permit shall become
ineffectual, and the holder thereof shall be under no further obligation to
maintain motor bus, pedicab or horse drawn carriage service in the city.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.11) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19)
§ 121.09 OPERATION OF BUSES, PEDICAB OR HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGE BY EMPLOYEES OR
AGENTS.
   Any permit granted or issued shall entitle the permittee thereof to operate
motor buses, pedicab or horse drawn carriage either personally or by his
employees, agents, and representatives.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.12) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19)
§ 121.10 ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT.
   Any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be
assigned by the permittee thereof to any other person; provided, however, as a
condition to the effectiveness of such assignment notification to the City
Manager or designee and all provisions of this chapter are met.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.13) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19)
§ 121.11 NUMBER OF PERMITS NOT RESTRICTED.
   Nothing contained in this chapter, nor in any permit issued pursuant hereto,
shall be construed as limiting or restricting the power of the city through its
Council to grant permits to more than one person if in the judgment of the
Council, the public convenience and necessity require the granting of
additional permits to additional applicants.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.14) (Ord. 2868, passed 6-6-61; Am. Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-
19)
§ 121.12 HORSE-DRAWN VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   Applicants for permits to engage in, and every person engaging in the
business of operating for hire horse-drawn vehicles for the transportation of
persons over and along any public street in the city shall comply with all of
the provisions of this chapter, except those provisions which by their very
nature can have no application, and with the terms or conditions of any permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager or
designee shall have the authority to include in any such permit such terms and
conditions relating to the operation of horse-drawn vehicles as may be
reasonably necessary to protect the public health and safety and which will
promote the public welfare.
(‘63 Code, § 6-8.15) (Ord. 232-C.S., passed 7-26-74; Am. Ord. 886- C.S., passed
6-4-19)
§ 121.13 PEDICABS.
   Applicants for permits to engage in and every person engaging in the
business of operating pedicabs, as defined by Section 467.5 of the California
Vehicle Code, for the transportation of persons over and along any public
street in the city shall comply with all of the provision of this chapter and
as defined in Article 4.5 (commencing with Section 21215) of Chapter 1 of
Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-19)
§ 121.14 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON BOARD THE PEDICAB.
   (A)   The consumption of alcoholic beverages on a four or more wheeled
pedicab is subject to the regulations set forth in this section.
   (B)   An onboard safety monitor who is 21 years of age or older shall be
present whenever alcohol is being consumed by passengers during the operation
of the multi wheeled pedicab. The onboard safety monitor shall not be under the
influence of any alcoholic beverage and shall be considered as driving the
pedicab for purposes of Article 2 (commencing with section 23152) of Chapter 12
of Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code during the operation of the four
or more wheeled pedicab.
   (C)   Both the operator and the onboard safety monitor shall have completed
either the Licensee Education on Alcohol and Drugs (LEAD) program implemented
by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control or a training course utilizing
the curriculum components recommended by the Responsible Beverage Service
Advisory Board established by the Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Operators and onboard safety monitors must carry proof of completion of a LEAD
or LEAD equivalent certification.
   (D)   Alcoholic beverages shall not be provided by the operator or onboard
safety monitor of the multi wheeled pedicab or any employee or agent of the
operator or onboard safety monitor. Alcoholic beverages may only be supplied by
the passengers of the multi wheeled pedicab. All alcoholic beverages supplied
by passengers of the multi wheeled pedicab shall be in enclosed, sealed, and
unopened containers that have been labeled pursuant to Chapter 13 (commencing
with section 25170) of Division 9 of the Business and Professions Code prior to
their consumption on board the four-wheeled pedicab.
   (E)   Alcoholic beverages may be consumed by a passenger of the multi
wheeled pedicab only while he or she is physically on board and within the
four-wheeled pedicab.
   (F)   Alcoholic beverages allowed on board the multi wheeled pedicab are
beer in non-glass containers are limited as follows per passenger:
      (1)   Thirty-six ounces of alcoholic beverages containing 7% ABV or less.
      (2)   Eighteen ounces of alcoholic beverage containing between 7%-18%
ABV.
   (G)   No hard liquor, pre-mixed drinks, or gelatin-based alcohol shots are
permitted on the multi-wheeled pedicab at any time.
   (H)   All passengers shall be 21 years of age or older if alcohol is
consumed during operation of the multi-wheeled pedicab.
   (I)   For purposes of this section, passengers who are pedaling are not
operators of the multi-wheeled pedicab.
   (J)   A license or permit from the Department of Alcoholic Beverages Control
is not required of the operator or onboard safety monitor, so long as neither
they, nor their employees or agents sell, serve, or furnish any alcoholic
beverage to any passenger.
(Ord. 886-C.S., passed 6-4-19)
CHAPTER 122: FOREIGN-TRADE ZONE
Section
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   Purpose
   
122.03   Principle and policies
   
122.04   Goals
   
122.05   Functions
   
122.06   Powers
   
122.07   Creation
   
122.08   Officers and terms
   
122.09   Voting
   
122.10   Meetings
   
122.11   Finances
   
122.12   Executive Secretary
   
122.13   Operating procedures
§ 122.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. North Coast Foreign-Trade Zone Board of Governors.
   COMMITTEES. From time to time, the board may call for a committee to be
established on a temporary basis to review various issues before the board.
   EXECUTIVE SECRETARY. Executive Secretary means the Grantee Zone
Administrator who will also function as the lead agent to the board.
   FOREIGN-TRADE ZONE. The area, region and/or project for foreign-trade zone
activities. This area, region and/or project is defined as the Greater Humboldt
Bay Area of Northern California.
   GRANTEE. The City of Eureka
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to create a board to advise the City Council
on the activities of the foreign-trade zone project and to ensure the federally
mandated marketing, support and administrative services are equitably applied
to the participating cities and counties.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.03 PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES.
   (A)   The North Coast Foreign-Trade Zone Board of Governors (board) is
created to encourage participation in the Foreign-Trade Zone Project by the
cities and counties of the Greater Humboldt Bay Area of Northern California.
Creation of the board will enable discussion, study and review of long-term
zone marketing, support and administrative efforts. Further, the board shall be
the forum to raise those problems and needs which require review and
recommendations on an area-wide basis.
   (B)   The board is based upon the principle of equality of membership and
nothing contained in this document shall authorize the board to intervene in
matters which are strictly within the local jurisdiction of any member without
its consent.
   (C)   The board is not intended to be in any form a substitute for local
government. Its prime purpose is to be an organization through which individual
governmental units can provide input directly to the City Council (Grantee)
concerning foreign-trade zone matters.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.04 GOALS.
   The goals of the board are as follows:
   (A)   To provide a board for discussion and study of regional foreign-trade
zone initiatives of mutual interest to area governments.
   (B)   To insure through cooperation and coordination, maximum efficiency and
economy in foreign-trade zone operations.
   (C)   To identify problems that may be solved through mutual cooperation.
   (D)   To facilitate recommendations to the grantee regarding marketing,
support and administration.
   (E)   To provide for the adoption of policies which may be beneficial to the
regional foreign-trade zone project.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.05 FUNCTIONS.
   The functions of the board are:
   (A)   Assure and advise that marketing efforts conducted for the regional
foreign-trade zone project are focused on the entire region.
   (B)   Assure and advise that marketing activities are consistent with the
grantee's marketing plan and are within proposed budget allocations.
   (C)   Assure and advise that marketing activities promote the region's
efforts to develop jobs for existing and future residents.
   (D)   Advise that actions of the Foreign-Trade Zone Administrator are
consistent with the public utility principle.
   (E)   Advise and recommend on the zone schedule annual fee adjustment.
   (F)   Advise on the general support to the foreign-trade zone project by any
interested and/or participating party.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.06 POWERS.
   The powers of the board shall include, but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   The study and development of policy matters and the formulation of
policy recommendations as they relate to the foreign-trade zone marketing
support or administration.
   (B)   The review of current and projected budget activities.
   (C)   The initiation and/or request for studies to be undertaken by the
Foreign-Trade Zone Administrator or designee as deemed appropriate.
   (D)   The appointment of such committees as are considered necessary by the
board.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.07 CREATION.
   The North Coast Foreign-Trade Zone Board of Governors will be comprised of
those members, recommended by the governmental entity or land/industry owner,
appointed by the Mayor and ratified by the City Council, as follows:
   (A)   A member of the Eureka City Council.
   (B)   A member of the Humboldt County Board of Supervisors.
   (C)   A member of the Humboldt Bay Harbor District Board.
   (D)   A representative from Humboldt Bay Forest Products.
   (E)   An at-large member of the public.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00; Am. Ord. 648-C.S., passed 9-18-01)
§ 122.08 OFFICERS AND TERMS.
   The North Coast Foreign-Trade Zone Board of Governors shall be presided over
by a chairperson and vice chairperson, both of whom must be voting members of
the board, and shall be elected by the majority vote of the board at its first
regular meeting held each year and shall serve for a period of one year. The
first election of officers shall be held during the initial meeting of the
board, with officers serving until the first meeting of the following year.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.09 VOTING.
   Each representative shall have one vote.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.10 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The board shall meet at least four times annually.
   (B)   At least 72 hours before a regular meeting, the agenda for that
meeting shall be posted at the City Hall. The agenda shall contain a brief
general description of each item of business to be transacted or discussed at
the meeting. The agenda shall specify the time and location of the regular
meeting. No action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the posted
agenda unless it meets one of the exceptions hereinafter described.
   (C)   A special meeting of the board may be called at any time by the
chairperson, or by a majority of the board, by delivering personally or by
mail, written notice to each member of the board and to each local newspaper of
general circulation, radio or television station. The notice shall be received
at least 24 hours before the time of the meeting as specified in the notice.
The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and
the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such
special meeting. Written notice may be dispensed with as to any member who at
or prior to the time the meeting convenes, files with the Executive Secretary a
written waiver of notice. Written notice may also be dispensed with as to any
member who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. Notice
shall be required for a special meeting regardless of whether any action is
taken at the special meeting. The call and notice for a special meeting shall
be posted at least 24 hours prior to the special meeting at the offices of each
participating entity.
   (D)   Every agenda for regular meetings shall provide an opportunity for
members of the public to address the board on items of interest to the public
that are within the subject matter jurisdiction of the board, provided that no
action shall be taken on any item not appearing on the agenda unless the action
is otherwise authorized by Cal. Gov't Code § 54954.2(b).
   (E)   The Executive Secretary of the board, or an employee designated by the
Executive Secretary, shall prepare a certificate of posting for each agenda
posted as required by these operating procedures. Such certificates shall be
kept on file in the records of the board for a period of three years.
   (F)   Any regular meeting of the board may be canceled by the chairman upon
giving of at least 72 hours written notice to all members of the board.
   (G)   Notice of regular meetings shall be mailed or delivered personally to
each member of the board at least five days prior to each meeting and
accompanying the notice shall be the written agenda for that meeting, and
supporting or pertinent documents relating to the agenda items.
   (H)   The board may adopt its own rules and procedures for its meetings,
which are not in conflict with those operating procedures. Robert's Rules of
Order shall be followed if no contrary rule has been adopted by the board.
   (I)   The committee shall meet on the call of the chairman of the committee.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.11 FINANCES.
   (A)   The North Coast Foreign-Trade Zone Board of Governors shall have
fiduciary responsibility limited to the provision of an annual contribution and
may advise the City Council on the allocation of funds. Expenses incurred by
the board, or members thereof, in the authorized (majority vote) performance of
duties specified under the purpose of this organization and approved by the
grantee will be reimbursed by the city.
   (B)   The board shall have the power to receive bequests, donations, grants
and gifts of all kinds of property, in fee simple, and to do all acts necessary
to carry out the purposes of such in accordance with the terms of the bequests,
donations, grants or gifts, or absolutely in case no conditions were attached.
   (C)   The board shall not be empowered to levy taxes, or authorized to
exercise any administrative or legislative authority over the member agencies.
   (D)   The city, County of Humboldt and Humboldt Bay Harbor District shall
each make an annual contribution, in an amount determined by the board, for the
administration and marketing of the Foreign Trade Zone.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00; Am. Ord. 648-C.S., passed 9-18-01)
§ 122.12 EXECUTIVE SECRETARY.
   (A)   The Executive Secretary shall be appointed by the City Council
(grantee). The person shall also function as the Foreign-Trade Zone
Administrator.
   (B)   The Executive Secretary shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, the
correspondence, library, records and archives of the board.
   (C)   The Executive Secretary, or his or her designee, shall prepare, or
cause to be prepared, all regular or special reports, studies and reviews, as
requested by the board or its committees.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
§ 122.13 OPERATING PROCEDURES.
   The Foreign-Trade Advisory Board may adopt such operating procedures it
deems necessary to perform its function. Such operating procedures shall be
approved by a majority vote of the board at a regularly scheduled meeting of
the board. The operating procedures may be amended from time to time by the
majority vote of the board after proper public notice.
(Ord. 635-C.S., passed 9-17-00)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
         
131.   PROPERTY OFFENSES
         
132.   DRUG OFFENSES
         
133.   WEAPONS OFFENSES
         
134.   ABATEMENT OF CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Drinking intoxicating beverages in public
   
130.02   [Reserved]
   
130.03   Disturbing schools, funerals, assemblages and processions
   
130.04   Curfew for minors
   
130.05   Cruising
   
130.06   [Reserved]
   
130.07   Police service charges
   
130.08   Parental responsibility for delinquent acts of minors
   
130.09   Events and gatherings
   
130.10   Public nudity.
   
130.11   Aggressive and obstructive conduct
   
130.12   Sitting or lying on sidewalks in commercial districts
   
130.13   Obstruction of movement in public ways
   
130.14   Storage of personal property
   130.15 - 130.29 [Reserved]
Abandoned Shopping Carts
   
130.30   Abandoned and derelict shopping carts; authority
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DRINKING INTOXICATING BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC.
   (A)   Except as provided by §
115.05, and division (B) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or
possess upon his or her person an open container of any intoxicating beverage
as defined in §
115.05(B) upon any sidewalk, street, alley or other public place in the city.
   (B)   It shall not be unlawful to drink intoxicating beverages at a special
event provided a Special Event Permit has been issued by the City of Eureka,
and the event operator complies with all regulations of the California
Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control including possession of an appropriate
license to serve intoxicating beverages.
('63 Code, § 4-4.01) (Ord. 2403, passed 11-5-47; Am. Ord. 317, passed - - ; Am.
Ord. 224, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 363-C.S., passed 5-18-82; Am. Ord. 380-C.S.,
passed 3-15-83; Am. Ord. 785-C.S., passed 7-17-12; Am. Ord. 823-C.S., passed
11-17-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 [RESERVED
§ 130.03 DISTURBING SCHOOLS, FUNERALS, ASSEMBLAGES AND PROCESSIONS.
   Every person who shall disturb, disquiet, or interrupt any school, school
procession, funeral, funeral procession, or any other lawful procession or
assemblage of people met for a lawful purpose, or for the purpose of attending
a funeral or the burial of the dead, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 4-4.06) (Ord. 224, passed - - )
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.04 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Prohibition.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter or
remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours, except as
provided in division (B) of this section.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter or
remain in any public place within the city during curfew hours, except as
provided under division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Exemptions. A minor under the age of 18 shall not be in violation of
this chapter, if at the time the minor was stopped by a police officer, the
minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian.
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without detour or stops.
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
      (4)   Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going to or returning
home from a lawful employment activity, without detour or stop.
      (5)   Acting in response to an emergency.
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence which is immediately adjacent to the minor's residence.
      (7)   Returning directly home, without detour or stop, from a school,
cultural, sports, amusement, entertainment, or recreation activity, or any
organized rally, demonstration, meeting or similar activity.
      (8)   Waiting at a bus station or taxi stand for transportation.
      (9)   Emancipated in accordance with the California Family Code or other
applicable state law.
   (C)   Enforcement procedure.
      (1)   Before taking any enforcement action under division (A) of this
section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place.
      (2)   The officer shall not take enforcement action under this chapter
unless the officer has probable cause to believe that no exemption under
division (B) of this section applies.
   (D)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)    CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   The hours between 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. for minors under the
age of 16 years; or,
         (b)   The hours between 11:30 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. for minors under the
age of 18 years.
      (2)    EMERGENCY. An unforeseen circumstance or circumstances or the
resulting situation that calls for immediate action to prevent serious bodily
injury or loss of life. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a
natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate
action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      (3)    ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately owned place of business to which the
public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement,
entertainment, or recreation.
      (4)    GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor;
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court; or
         (c)   A person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a
parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
      (5)    LOITER. To delay, linger or idle about without a lawful purpose.
      (6)    MINOR. Any person under 18 years of age.
      (7)    PARENT. A person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or
step-parent of a minor.
      (8)    PUBLIC PLACE.
         (a)   Any out-of-doors area to which the public or a substantial group
of the public has access, including, but not limited to streets, highways,
sidewalks, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds; and,
         (b)   The out-of-doors common areas of establishments, including, but
not limited to entry ways and parking lots.
      (9)    REMAIN.
         (a)   Linger or stay; or,
         (b)   Fail to leave a public place when requested to do so by a police
officer or the person in control of the public place.
      (10)   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial
risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or
protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. 599, passed 11-7-95)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.05 CRUISING.
   (A)   Prohibited. No person shall engage in the activity known as CRUISING
as defined in this section on the public streets, alleys, or highways of the
city in any area which has been posted as a No-Cruising Zone.
   (B)   Loitering in a no-cruise zone prohibited. It shall be unlawful to
loiter on any property in the proximity of any posted No-Cruise Zone between
the hours of 6:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. the next day.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)    CRUISING. The repetitive driving of any motor vehicle past a
traffic-control point in traffic which is congested at or near the traffic-
control point.
      (2)    CONGESTED TRAFFIC. Traffic on any public street, alley, or highway
which is delaying to the point that:
         (a)   Motor vehicles cannot move through a 100-yard approach corridor
to an intersection controlled by a traffic light within two complete green-
light cycles where the delay in forward movement is due to the position of
other motor vehicles;
         (b)   Motor vehicles cannot move through a 100-yard approach corridor
to an intersection controlled by a traffic light, stop sign, or yield sign
within a five-minute period of time where the delay in forward movement is due
to the position of other motor vehicles; or,
         (c)   Motor vehicles cannot readily move forward on portions of public
streets, alleys, or highways between intersections because traffic speed is
slowed to less than five miles per hour, and the delay in movement is due to
the position of other motor vehicles.
      The determination that a street, alley, or highway is congested shall be
made by the ranking peace officer on duty within the affected area.
      (3)    GREEN LIGHT CYCLE. The period commencing upon the switching of a
traffic light from a red light to a green light through to the return of a red
light.
      (4)    LOITER. To delay, linger, or idle about without a lawful purpose.
      (5)    PROPERTY ON THE PROXIMITY OF ANY POSTED NO-CRUISING ZONE. Any
property which is both visible from and located within 300 feet of any portion
of a street, alley, or highway which is posted as a No-Cruising Zone pursuant
to this section.
      (6)    TRAFFIC-CONTROL POINT. A location along a public street, alley, or
highway utilized by a peace officer on duty within the affected area as an
observation point in order to monitor traffic conditions for potential
violations of this chapter.
   (D)   Warning against cruising. A peace officer may issue a written notice
to any person operating or occupying any motor vehicle passing a traffic-
control point stating that any subsequent passage past that traffic-control
point within the next succeeding four hours will be a violation of this
section.
   (E)   Violation. Any person who, after having received a written notice as
described in division (D) of this section, subsequently drives past or is a
passenger in a vehicle passing the same traffic-control point within the next
succeeding four hours shall be in violation of this section.
   (F)   Posting of signs. This section may be enforced in any area which has
been posted as a “No-Cruising Zone.” The following streets are established as
"No Cruising Zones": U.S. Hwy. 101, 4th and 5th Streets, through the downtown
area of Eureka, between Broadway and "V" Streets. “No Cruising” signs shall be
posted at the beginning and the end of any public street, alley, or highway, or
portion thereof, which is a No-Cruising Zone, or at any other locations within
the zone as deemed appropriate. The signs shall reference Cal. Veh. Code §
21100(k) and this section.
   (G)   Violation.  
      (1)   The refusal of any person to leave the premises after having been
cited by any peace officer for a violation of this section shall constitute a
misdemeanor. The punishment for a misdemeanor violation of this section shall
be as provided by §
10.99 of this code.
      (2)   Violation of this section is an infraction. The penalties as
provided by §
10.99 are:
         (a)   First conviction - $50 fine.
         (b)   Second conviction within one year - $100 fine.
         (c)   Third or subsequent conviction within one year - $250 fine.
      (3)   Any minor who is cited for violation of this section shall be
considered in violation of a traffic offense for purposes of Cal. Welf. & Inst.
Code § 256.
(Ord. 600, passed 11-7-95; Am. Ord. 615-C.S., passed 5-20-97)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.06 [RESERVED.]
§ 130.07 POLICE SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Issuance of written warning. When a police officer determines that a
party, gathering, or assemblage or on-going disturbance is a threat to public
peace, health, safety or general welfare, the police officer shall issue a
written warning to the person responsible for control of the location of the
event and/or the person responsible for the event, or if either of those
persons is a minor, the parents or guardians of that minor.
   (B)   Contents of warning. The written warning shall state that if police
department personnel are required to return to the location of the event or
must recontact the person in the event, or if there are continuing complaints
from other persons, or if police personnel observe continuing violations within
the following 24-hour period and the responding personnel determine that the
subsequent event is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general
welfare, each such response shall constitute the provision of special security
services. The warning shall state that the person receiving the warning shall
be charged for the cost of the city providing such special security services
for the event or response to issues caused by that /those person(s). An event
requiring over 30 minutes of cumulative, on-site police officer time on the
initial response will also result in a fee covering cost of police services.
   (C)   Costs for special security services. The costs of providing these
special security services shall include but not be limited to all direct and
indirect costs attributable to the subsequent response to the event. Costs
shall be established by resolution.
   (D)   Collection of costs. The collection costs for these special security
services shall not be in excess of $500 for each subsequent response. The city
shall have the option to pursue any other legal remedies for recovery when such
costs exceed $500 per response.
   (E)   Debt owed to city. The amount of such costs charged shall be deemed a
debt to the city of the person or persons responsible for use of the special
security services and, if minors, their parents or guardians. Any person
required to pay such costs shall be liable in an action brought in the name of
the city for recovery of such costs, including reasonable attorney's fees.
(Ord. 602-C.S., passed 12-5-95; Am. Ord. 693-C.S., passed 7-19-05)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.08 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR DELINQUENT ACTS OF MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DELINQUENT ACTS. Those acts which violate the laws of the United States,
or the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city, or those acts which
would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the
juvenile division of the Humboldt County Court, but does not include traffic
violations.
      ILLEGAL DRUGS. Controlled substances as defined in the Cal. Health &
Safety Code obtained without a legal prescription.
      JUVENILE DELINQUENT. Those minors whose behavior interferes with the
rights of others or menaces the welfare of the community.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years residing with a parent or
guardian.
      PARENT. Mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the
care or custody of a minor, or any person acting in the parents stead who has
custody or control of the minor.
   (B)   Parental duties. 
      (1)   It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise
reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act.
      (2)   Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable
parental control are the following parental duties:
         (a)   To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and
legal firearms in places that are not accessible to the minor;
         (b)   To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally
possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile
delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or
private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary.
   (C)   Notification of parents; record of notification.
      (1)   Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any
delinquent act within the city, the parent of the minor shall be immediately
notified by the city Police Department, advising the parent of such arrest or
detention, the reason therefore, and the parent's responsibility under this
ordinance.
      (2)   A record of such notifications shall be kept by the Police
Department.
   (D)   Violations. No parent or guardian of any minor under the age of 18
years shall fail to exercise reasonable parental control over such minor. An
adjudication that the minor has violated a provision of this code which is an
infraction or misdemeanor, or a finding that the minor is responsible for a
violation of this code which is deemed a civil infraction shall be prima facie
evidence that the parent or guardian failed to exercise reasonable parental
control.
(Ord. 611-C.S., passed 9-17-96)
Penalty, see § 130.99
§ 130.09 EVENTS AND GATHERINGS.
   (A)    Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALCOHOL means and includes ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or
spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine,
beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or
beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume
and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or
combined with other substances.
      CONTROL means any form of dominion, including ownership, tenancy, or
other possessory right.
      EVENT or GATHERING means any group of three or more persons who have
assembled or gathered together for a social occasion or other activity.
      HOST means to aid, conduct, allow, entertain, organize, supervise,
control, or permit a gathering or event.
      JUVENILE means any person less than 18 years of age.
      PARENT means any person having legal custody of a juvenile:
         (a)    As natural, adoptive parent, or step-parent;
         (b)   As a legal guardian; or
         (c)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
      PERSON means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, corporation, or
any association of one or more individuals.
      RESIDENCE or PREMISES means a home, yard, field, land, apartment,
condominium, hotel or motel room, or other dwelling unit, or a hall or meeting
room, park or any other place of assembly, public or private, whether occupied
on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling, party or
other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or
without compensation.
      RESPONSE COSTS means the costs associated with response, such as
responses by law enforcement, fire and other emergency response providers to
underage or unruly gatherings, including but not limited to:
         (a)   The portion of the costs of salaries and benefits of law
enforcement, fire and other emergency response personnel for the amount of time
spent responding to, remaining at, or otherwise dealing with the underage or
unruly gatherings, and the administrative costs attributable to such response
(s);
         (b)   The cost of any medical treatment to or for any law enforcement,
fire or other emergency response personnel injured responding to, remaining at
or leaving the scene of an underage or unruly gathering;   
         (c)   The cost of the use of any city equipment or property, and the
cost of repairing any city equipment or property damaged in responding to,
remaining at or leaving the scene of an underage or unruly gathering; and
         (d)   Any other costs recoverable in compliance with Cal. Civil Code §
1714.9.
      RESPONSIBLE PERSON means a person or persons with a right of possession
in the residence or other private property on which an underage or unruly
gathering is conducted, including, but is not limited to:
         (a)   The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of
the premises where the gathering occurs;
         (b)   A tenant or lessee of the residence or other private property;
         (c)   The landlord or another person responsible for the gathering,
including a master tenant who sublets a unit to another person;
         (d)   Any other person in charge of the residence or other private
property; and
         (e)   The person who organizes or supervises or conducts the event or
any other person(s) accepting responsibility for such a gathering.
      A RESPONSIBLE PERSON for the underage gathering need not be present at
such gathering for the imposition of civil penalties and/or response costs.
      If the person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the juvenile
and the parents or guardians of the juvenile may be jointly and severally
liable for the response costs and penalties imposed pursuant to this section.
      UNDERAGE PERSON means any person under 21 years of age.
   (B)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It is unlawful for any person(s) to host or allow an event or
gathering at any residence, premises, or any other private or public property
where alcohol or alcoholic beverages are present when the person knows or
reasonably should know that an underage person will or does consume or possess
any alcohol or alcoholic beverage with the intent to consume it; and the person
fails to take reasonable steps to prevent possession or consumption by the
underage person(s).
         (a)   A person is criminally responsible for violating division (B)(1)
above if the person intentionally aids, advises, hires, counsels, or conspires
with or otherwise procures another to commit the prohibited act.
         (b)   A person who hosts an event or gathering as described in
division (B)(1) above does not have to be present at the event or gathering to
be criminally responsible.
   (C)    Exceptions.
      (1)   This section does not apply to conduct solely between an underage
person and his or her parents while present in the parent's household.
      (2)   This section does not apply to legally protected religious
observances.
      (3)   This section does not apply to situations where underage persons
are lawfully in possession of alcohol or alcoholic beverages during the course
and scope of their employment.
   (D)   Recovery of response costs.
      (1)   Issuance of written warning. When a law enforcement officer makes
an initial response to an underage gathering at a residence or other private
property within the city, and a police officer issues a citation for violation
of this section, the officer shall issue a written warning.
         (a)   Contents of warning. The warning shall state that an underage
gathering existed on the date of the incident in question and the responsible
persons will be charged for any response costs incurred for subsequent
responses to the property for an underage gathering within a 12-month period.
         (b)   Delivery of warning.
            1.   This warning shall be given to all identified responsible
persons at the time of the first response to an underage gathering where a
citation is issued for violation of this section.
            2.   The officer may subsequently return to the residence or other
private property and issue the warning to a then-present responsible person(s).
            3.   Within 30 calendar days of the initial citation, an additional
written warning shall be transmitted via certified mail to the record owner of
the residence or private property.
      (2)   Recovery of response costs. When a law enforcement officer issues a
second citation to the same responsible person(s) within 12 months of an
earlier citation of the first warning at the same residence or other private
property, all responsible persons who received a previous warning shall be
jointly and severally liable for the city's response costs concerning such
second or subsequent underage or unruly gathering. Only those who were
responsible person(s) at both the first and subsequent underage or unruly
gathering shall be subject to response costs under this subdivision.
      (3)   Remedy not exclusive. The remedy prescribed by this section shall
be cumulative, and the use of an action to collect such an amount as a debt by
civil action shall not bar the use of any other remedy provided by this code or
by law for the purpose of enforcing the provisions thereof.
      (4)   Response costs deemed administrative penalties. All response costs
incurred by the city shall be deemed administrative penalties pursuant to this
Code.
   (E)   Penalties.
      (1)   Violations of this section shall be charged as an infraction or a
misdemeanor at the discretion of the City Attorney pursuant to §
10.99 of this Code. Each violation shall constitute a separate charge.
      (2)   Any person who violates this section shall also be subject to the
following:
         (a)   The parent and/or responsible person of the event or gathering
shall be held civilly responsible for the damages caused by the event or
gathering; and
         (b)   Fines:
            1.   First violation within a 12-month period shall result in a
fine of $250;
            2.   Second violation within a 12-month period shall result in a
fine of $500;
            3.   Third violation within a 12-month period shall result in a
fine of $1,000.
      (3)   Such penalties and fines shall not constitute the sole remedies of
the city.
   (F)   Severability. The provisions of this section are declared to be
separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or portion of this section, or the invalidity of the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder of this section, or the validity to other persons or
circumstances.
   (G) Non-exclusivity. Nothing in this section shall limit or preclude the
enforcement of other applicable laws.
   (H)   No duty of care imposed on city. This section is not intended to
impose, and shall not be construed or given effect in a manner that imposes
upon the city, or any officer, employee, agent, or representative of the city,
a mandatory duty of care toward person or property within or without the city
limits, so as to provide a basis of civil or criminal liability.
(Ord. 807-C.S., passed 11-4-14)
§ 130.10 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases are defined as follows:
      NUDE or NUDITY means exposure of the genitals, pubic area, anus, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; or exposure of a female breast
below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at the areola's highest
point with less than a fully opaque covering.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY means any property owned or controlled by the city,
including, but not limited to, any park, building, street, sidewalk, bike path,
alley, parking lot, plaza, park, playground, pool, beach or adjacent waters, or
other place open to the public.
   (B)   Public nudity prohibited. No person shall be nude upon public property
or upon any portion of private property that is visible from public property.
   (C)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Children under the age of five years;
      (2)   The exposure of a breast while breastfeeding a nursing child;
      (3)   Theatrical performances in a theater, concert hall, or other
similar establishment located on public property;
      (4)   Nudity within a fully enclosed structure intended to allow brief
nudity, such as a bathroom, locker room, dressing room, or changing room; and
      (5)   Any act that is expressly permitted or prohibited by any law of the
State of California.
   (D)   Penalty.
      (1)   Every violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor
pursuant to §
10.99 and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or
by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, or by both.
      (2)   Violations of this section are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and the City Attorney is authorized to bring and prosecute an action
in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the violations.
      (3)   In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates
this section is subject any other remedy allowed by law including, but not
limited to, criminal sanctions, civil action and administrative penalties as
provided for in this Code or any other local, state or federal law.
   (E)   Severability. If any provision, clause or word of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such
invalidity shall not affect any other provision, clause, word or application of
this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision, clause or
word, and to this end the provisions of this section are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. 824-C.S., passed 11-17-15)
§ 130.11 AGGRESSIVE AND OBSTRUCTIVE CONDUCT.
   (A)   Purpose and findings.
      (1)   The purpose and intent of this section is to protect the safety and
welfare of the general public and improve the quality of life and economic
vitality of the City of Eureka by imposing reasonable restrictions on
aggressive and obstructive conduct while respecting the constitutional rights
of free speech and privacy for all citizens.
      (2)   Aggressive conduct typically includes using profane, offensive or
abusive language or acts directed at another person, threats of physical
contact, or the intentional blocking of the movement of a person or their
bicycle or vehicle. The City Council finds that an increase in aggressive and
obstructive conduct throughout the city has become disturbing and disruptive to
persons and businesses and has contributed not only to the loss of access to
and enjoyment of places open to the public, but has also created an enhanced
sense of fear of intimidation, disorder, and apprehension.
      (3)   The City Council finds that aggressive or obstructive conduct is
especially intimidating and threatening at or near banks, or in close proximity
to automated teller machines. Such activity often carries with it an implicit
threat to both persons and property.
      (4)   This law is timely and appropriate because current laws and city
regulations are insufficient to address the aforementioned problems. In
enacting this legislation, the City Council recognizes the availability of
community service and other sentencing alternatives, which may be appropriate
remedies for violations of this law. The goal of this law is to protect persons
from the fear and intimidation resulting from certain kinds of aggressive or
obstructive conduct.
   (B)   Applications.
      (1)   The provisions of this section apply generally to all property
throughout the City of Eureka wherein any of the conditions specified are found
to exist; provided, however, that any conduct or condition which would
otherwise be deemed a violation of this section, but which is permitted or
authorized under any state or federal law, including state or federal
constitutional provisions, is not a violation of this section.
   (C)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms
and phrases have these definitions:
      AGGRESSIVE CONDUCT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Conduct intended or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear
bodily harm to themselves or to another, damage to or loss of property, or
otherwise to be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;
         (b)   Intentionally touching or causing physical contact or
threatening physical contact with another person without that person's consent;
         (c)   Persisting in closely following, approaching, or accosting a
person after that person has informed the person following, approaching or
accosting that they do not want to be followed, approached or accosted;
         (d)   Using threatening gestures toward a person; or
         (e)   Using profane, offensive or abusive language towards a person in
order to cause fear or intimidation, or which is likely to provoke an immediate
violent or fearful reaction; or
         (f)   Conduct in violation of the California Vehicle Code, including
for example but not by way of limitation, violations such as the pedestrian
conduct prohibited by Cal. Veh. Code Sections 21950, 21954, 21955, 21957,
21964, or 21966.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE (ATM). Any electronic information-processing
device that accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or
convenience account.
      AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY. The area comprised of one or more
automated teller machines, and any adjacent space, which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.
      BANK. Any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank,
banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution
organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the
deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
      CREDIT UNION. Any federal credit union and any state- chartered credit
union, where accounts are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit
Union.
      DRIVEWAY. A lane of travel that is the transition from a public roadway
to a public or private parking lot, drive-through facility or loading facility.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any of the following as defined herein: bank,
savings and loan association and/or credit union.
      OBSTRUCTIVE CONDUCT. Intentional blocking or disruption, whether by
personal positioning or the use of physical objects, of traffic, pedestrians,
wheel chairs or bicycles on public roadways, crosswalks, sidewalks, driveways,
entrances to businesses or public buildings, bicycle lanes, bicycle paths or
recreational trails.
      PUBLIC PLACE or PLACE OPEN TO THE PUBLIC. A place to which the public or
a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to,
any street, highway, sidewalk, crosswalk, street or highway median, pedestrian
safety island, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, public
transportation vehicle, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any
doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any business
establishment, apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment
designed for actual residence, and including any area within 15 feet of the
entrance or exit of a financial institution or any area within 15 feet of an
automated teller machine or the entrance or exit of an automated teller machine
facility.
      SAVINGS AND LOAN ASSOCIATION. Any federal savings and loan association
and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing
Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 1752 of the
Federal Credit Union Act.
   (D)   Prohibited conduct.
      (1)   No person may engage in aggressive conduct in any public place or
place open to the public.
      (2)   No person may engage in obstructive conduct in any public place or
place open to the public.
   (E)   Penalty and severability.
      (1)   Any person who violates any provision of the section is subject to
the provisions of §
10.99. Each violation of this section is a separate offense. A violation of
this section is punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction, chargeable at the
City Attorney's discretion.
      (2)   The provisions of this section are declared to be separate and
severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision,
section or portion of this section, or the invalidity of the application
thereof to any person or circumstance does not affect the validity of the
remainder of this section, or the validity of its application to other persons
or circumstances.
(Ord. 897-C.S., passed 1-21-20) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.12 SITTING OR LYING ON SIDEWALKS IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Prohibition. No person or group of people shall sit or lie down upon a
public sidewalk, curb or street, or upon a blanket, chair, stool, or other
object placed upon a public sidewalk, curb or street between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 11:00 p.m. in the following areas:
      (1)   The Downtown/Old Town Business District, defined as described
below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6891.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Broadway/Highway 101 and 2nd
Street; and then
         •   continuing northeasterly along 2nd Street to a point approximately
385 feet easterly of the intersection of 2nd and A Streets; and then
         •   extending north, parallel with C Street approximately 300 feet to
Waterfront Drive; and then
         •   continuing easterly along Waterfront Drive to the intersection
with First and C Streets; and then
         •   continuing easterly along First Street to the intersection of
First and H Streets; and then
         •   continuing in a northeasterly direction approximately parallel to
2nd Street to the intersection of Waterfront Drive and I Streets.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Broadway/Highway 101 and
Washington Street; and then
         •   continuing east on Washington Street to the intersection with C
Street; and then
         •   continuing north on C Street to the intersection with 8th Street;
and then
         •   continuing east on 8th Street to the intersection with D Street;
and then
         •   continuing south on D Street approximately 145 feet; and then
         •   extending east, parallel with 8th Street to an intersection with E
Street; and then
         •   continuing south on E Street to the intersection of 9th Street;
and then
         •   continuing east on 9th Street to the intersection of 9th and G
Streets; and then
         •   continuing North on G Street to the intersection with 8th Street;
and then
         •   continuing east on 8th Street to the intersection with I Street.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Broadway/Highway 101 and 2nd
Street; and then
         •   continuing south along Broadway/Highway 101 to the intersection of
Broadway/Highway 101 and Washington Street.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 8th and I Streets; and then
         •   continuing North on I Street to the intersection with Waterfront
Drive.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (2)   The Northern Gateway Business District A, defined as described
below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6889.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Waterfront Drive and M Street;
and then
         •   continuing in a northeasterly direction along Waterfront Drive to
the intersection with T Street; and then
         •   continuing East along a line from the eastern end of Waterfront
Drive, to the railroad right-of-way, and then in a southeasterly direction
along the railroad right-of-way to the shoreline of Humboldt Bay.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 7th and M Streets; and then
         •   continuing east on 7th Street to the intersection with P Street;
and then
         •   continuing north along P Street to the intersection with 6th
Street; and then
         •   continuing east along 6th Street to the intersection with Myrtle
Avenue; and then
         •   continuing southeasterly along Myrtle Avenue to the intersection
with 7th Street; and then
         •   extending northeasterly to an intersection with 6th and T Streets;
and then
         •   continuing east along 6th Street, approximately 290 feet, to an
intersection with the southerly extension of U Street; and then
         •   extending northeasterly on a diagonal to the intersection of 5th
Street/Highway 101 and V Street; and then
         •   continuing east along 5th Street/Highway 101 approximately 905
feet to an intersection with the southerly extension of Y Street; and then
         •   extending north, parallel with T Street to the intersection of 4th
Street/Highway 101 and Y Street; and then
         •   continuing east and northeasterly along 4th Street/Highway 101 to
an intersection with the west shoreline of Eureka Slough.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 7th and M Streets; and then
         •   Continuing north along M Street to the intersection with
Waterfront Drive.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning on the west shoreline of the Eureka Slough at the
railroad bridge; and then
         •   extending along the west shoreline of Eureka Slough southeasterly
to an intersection with 4th Street/Highway 101.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (3)   The Northern Gateway Business District B, defined as described
below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6893.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the west shore of Eureka Slough at the intersection
with 5th Street/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly along 5th Street/Highway 101
approximately 865 feet to the unnamed access road leading to the easterly end
of 6th Street, south of 5th Street/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing southeasterly along the unnamed access road to the
intersection with 6th Street; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly along 6th Street approximately 510 feet
to a point north of the westerly property line of the commercial parcel, east
of the apartment buildings.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Tydd Street approximately 490 feet
northeasterly of the intersection of Myrtle and West Avenues; and then
         •   extending easterly along the south property line of the commercial
property located north of Tydd Street and south of 6th Street, approximately
850 feet to the overhead power lines that run east/west.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at the northerly end of Tydd Street; and then
         •   continuing north at an approximate 90 degree angle along the
westerly property line of the commercial parcel, east of the apartment
buildings, approximately 435 fee to an intersection with 6th Street.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning on the west shoreline of the Eureka Slough at the
intersection of the Slough and 5th Street/Highway 101; and then
         •   extending southwesterly to the easterly property line of the
commercial parcel located north of Tydd Street and south of 6th Street; and
then
         •   continuing southwesterly to the overhead power lines that run
east/west near the southeast corner of the commercial parcel.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (4)   The Northern Gateway Business District C, defined as described
below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6895.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the west shore of Eureka Slough at the intersection
with 5th Street/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing in an easterly direction along the south line of 5th
Street/Highway 101 to the intersection of 5th Street/Highway 101 and Jacobs
Avenue.
         Westerly and South Boundary
         •   Beginning on the east shoreline of Eureka Slough at the
intersection of 5th Street/Highway 101; and then
         •   Extending in an easterly direction along the north shoreline of
Eureka Slough to an intersection with Airport Road.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 5th Street/Highway 101 and Jacobs
Avenue; and then
         •   continuing southeasterly on Airport Road approximately 770 feet to
a point northeasterly of the north shoreline of Eureka Slough.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (5)   The Northern Gateway Business District D, defined as described
below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6897.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Highway 101 North and the access
road on the south of the Highway with the bridge leading to the commercial auto
sales parcel; and then
         •   continuing west along Highway 101 North approximately 730 feet to
a point north of the northwest corner of the commercial auto sales business.
       South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point approximately 990 feet southeast of the
intersection of Highway 101 North and the access road on the south of the
Highway with the bridge leading to the commercial auto sales parcel; and then
         •   extending in a southwesterly direction at right angles
approximately 730 feet to a point southwest of the southwestern corner of the
commercial auto sales parcel.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Highway 101 and the access road
on the south of the Highway with the bridge leading to the commercial auto
sales parcel; and then
         •   continuing southeasterly at right angle to Highway 101 North,
approximately 990 feet to a point northeast of the southeast corner of the
commercial auto sales parcel.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Highway 101 North approximately 730 feet
southwest of the intersection of Highway 101 North and the access road on the
south of the Highway with the bridge leading to the commercial auto sales
parcel; and then
         •   continuing southeasterly at right angles to Highway 101 North,
approximately 990 feet to a point southwest of the southwest corner of the
commercial auto sales parcel.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
   (6)   The Northern Gateway Business District E, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6899.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Highway 101 North and Indianola
Cutoff; and then
         •   continuing westerly along Highway 101 North approximately 915
feet.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Indianola Cutoff approximately 1340 feet
southeast of the intersection of Highway 101 North and Indianola Cutoff; and
then
         •   Extending southwesterly at an approximate right angle to Indianola
Cutoff and approximately parallel with Highway 101 North, approximately 915
feet.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Highway 101 North and Indianola
Cutoff; and then
         •   continuing at an approximate right angle to Highway 101 North
southeasterly along Indianola Cutoff approximately 1340 feet.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Highway 101 North approximately 915 feet
westerly of the intersection of Highway 101 North and Indianola Cutoff; and
then
         •   extending southeasterly at an approximate right angle to Highway
101 North, and approximately parallel with Indianola Cutoff approximately 1340
feet.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (7)   The Bayshore Mall Business District, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6901.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Railroad Avenue and the Railroad
Right-of-way; and then
         •   continuing East to the intersection of Del Norte and Felt Street;
and then
         •   continuing south along Felt Street through the intersection of
Felt and Hawthorne Street; and then
         •   extending approximately 435 feet south of the intersection of Felt
and Hawthorne Street to a point adjacent to the south line of the commercial
development on the east; and then
         •   extending east to Broadway/Highway 101, approximately parallel
with Hawthorne Street, approximately 985 feet, on the boundary between the
commercial development on the North and the vegetative area on the South; and
then
         •   continuing to a point northeasterly along Broadway/Highway 101
approximately 75 feet.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Truesdale and Howell Streets; and
then
         •   continuing easterly along Truesdale Street to the intersection
with Broadway/Highway 101.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 405
feet south of the intersection of Hawthorne Street and Broadway/Highway 101;
and then
         •   extending southeasterly at right angles to Broadway toward
Progress Avenue approximately 95 feet; and then
         •   extending southwesterly, parallel to Broadway/Highway 101
approximately 120 feet; and then
         •   extending southeasterly at right angles to Broadway/Highway 101 to
an intersection with Progress Avenue; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly on Progress Avenue to the south end of
Progress Avenue, approximately 520 feet; and then
         •   extending southwesterly, approximately parallel with Broadway/
Highway 101 approximately 470 feet; and then
         •   extending west to an intersection with Broadway/Highway 101
approximately 285 feet; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly along Broadway/Highway 101 approximately
520 feet to a point northwesterly of the north line of the commercial motel
property located on the northeast corner of Broadway/Highway 101 and Henderson
Street; and then
         •   extending southwesterly at right angles to Broadway/Highway 101
toward Fairfield Street, approximately 280 feet to the northeast corner of the
commercial motel property located on the northeast corner of Broadway/Highway
101 and Henderson Street; and then
         •   extending southwesterly, approximately parallel with Broadway/
Highway 101 and Fairfield Street, approximately 300 feet; and then
         •   extending northwesterly, at right angles to Broadway/Highway 101
approximately 280 feet to an intersection with Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly along Broadway/Highway 101 approximately
740 feet, and then
         •   extending southeasterly along a line approximately parallel with
Broadway/Highway 101 toward Fairfield Street, approximately 265 feet to the
alley; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly along the alley between Harris and
Henderson Streets and Fairfield Street and Broadway/Highway 101 to an
intersection with Harris Street; and then
         •   continuing west along a westerly extension of Harris Street to an
intersection with Broadway/Highway 101, approximately 275 feet; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly along Broadway/highway 101 approximately
2,365 feet to the intersection of Broadway/Highway 101 and Truesdale Street.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Truesdale and Howell Streets; and
then
         •   extending north on Howell Street to the Railroad Right-of-Way; and
then
         •   extending north along the Railroad Right-of-Way to the
intersection of Del Norte Street and Railroad Avenue, approximately 5787 feet.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (8)   The Henderson Center Business District, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6903.jpg]
 
         North Boundary:
         •   Beginning on D Street, approximately 160 feet south of the
intersection of Dollison and D Streets and extending easterly, parallel with
Dollison Street, to the intersection of Hayes and F Streets; and then,
         •   continuing easterly to the intersection of Hayes and G Streets.
         South Boundary:
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Everding and D Streets and
extending easterly along Everding to the intersection of Everding and G
Streets.
         East Boundary:
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Hayes and G Streets; and then,
         •   extending south on G Street to the intersection of Henderson and G
Streets; and then,
         •   continuing East on Russ Street to the intersection of Russ and I
Streets; and then,
         •   extending South on I Street to the intersection of Wood and I
Streets; and then,
         •   continuing East on Wood Street to the intersection of Wood and J
Streets; and then,
         •   extending South on J Street to the intersection of Everding and J
Streets.
          West Boundary:
         •   D Street, between Hayes and Everding Streets.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (9)   The Myrtle Avenue Business District A, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6905.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the overhead power lines located southwesterly of the
easterly property line of the commercial property located between Tydd and 6th
Streets; and then
         •   extending westerly to the easterly end of Tydd Street,
approximately 810 feet; and then
         •   extending west to an intersection with West Avenue/Sixth Street,
approximately 760 feet.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 8th Street and Myrtle Avenue; and
then
         •   continuing southeasterly along Myrtle Avenue approximately 755
feet to the intersection of Myrtle Avenue and Cousins Street; and then
         •   continuing south along Cousins Street approximately 250 feet to a
point adjacent to the southwest corner of the Fire Station property; and then
         •   extending west at an approximate right angle to Cousins Street
along the south property line of the Fire Station parcel to the southeast
corner of the parcel; and then
         •   extending south approximately parallel with Cousins Street
approximately 55 feet to the southwest corner of the commercial property
located at the southwest intersection of Myrtle and West Avenues; and then
         •   extending east to an intersection with West Avenue approximately
120 feet; and then
         •   continuing north along West Avenue to the intersection with Myrtle
Avenue, approximately 135 feet; and then
         •   continuing southeasterly along Myrtle Avenue to the intersection
of Myrtle Avenue and Hill Street, approximately 320 feet.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on West Avenue approximately 270 feet south
of the intersection of West Avenue and 6th Street; and then
         •   extending in a southwesterly direction to the intersection of
Myrtle Avenue and 8th Street.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Myrtle Avenue and Hill Street;
and then
         •   continuing northeasterly on Hill Street, approximately 440 feet
through the intersection of Hill and Searles Street; and then
         •   extending northeasterly to the overhead power lines located
southwesterly of the easterly property line of the commercial parcel located
north of Tydd Street and south of 6th Street.
   The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be
within the restricted area.
   (10)   The Myrtle Avenue Business District B, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6907.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Myrtle and Sunny Avenues; and
then
         •   continuing along Myrtle Avenue approximately 440 feet to a point
just south of the east bank of Second Slough; and then
         •   extending north along the east bank of Second Slough approximately
185 feet; and then
         •   extending east, approximately parallel to Myrtle Avenue,
approximately 410 feet to the northeast corner on the north property line of
the commercial office located on the north side of Myrtle Avenue.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Sunny Avenue approximately 155 feet south
of the intersection of Myrtle and Sunny Avenues; and then
         •   extending southeasterly approximately parallel with Myrtle Avenue
through an intersection with McFarland Street that is approximately 155 feet
south of Myrtle Avenue; and then
         •   extending southeasterly approximately parallel with Myrtle Avenue
to an intersection with Dean Street that is approximately 155 feet south of the
intersection of Myrtle and Dean Streets.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Myrtle and Sunny Avenues; and
then
         •   extending in a southwesterly direction on Sunny Avenue
approximately 155 feet.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Dean Street approximately 155 feet south
of the intersection of Myrtle Avenue and Dean Street; and then
         •   continuing north on Dean Street approximately 155 feet to the
intersection with Myrtle Avenue; and then
         •   continuing westerly on Myrtle Avenue approximately 95 feet to a
point south of the easterly property line of a commercial office on the north
side of Myrtle Avenue and then
         •   extending north along the east property line of a commercial
office on the north side of Myrtle Avenue approximately 185 feet to the north
property line of said office.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (11)   The Waterfront Business District, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6909.jpg]
 
         North and Northwest Boundary
         •   Beginning on the west shoreline of the Eureka Slough at the
railroad bridge; and then
         •   extending along the west shoreline of Eureka Slough northwesterly
to Humboldt Bay; and then
         •   extending southwesterly and south along the shoreline of Humboldt
Bay to a point on the shoreline directly west of an extension of the east/west
portion of Pound Road.
         South and Southeasterly Boundary
         •   Beginning on the shoreline of Humboldt Bay directly west of the
east/west portion of Pound Road and extending on a line easterly toward Pound
Road to the railroad right-of-way; and then
         •   continuing north and northeasterly along the railroad right-of-way
through the intersection with Truesdale Street and over Howell Street to the
intersection of Del Norte Street and Railroad Avenue; and then
         •   continuing in a northeasterly direction on Railroad Avenue to the
intersection with Waterfront Drive and Washington Street; and then
         •   continuing in a northeasterly and easterly direction on Waterfront
Drive to the intersection with First and C Streets; and then
         •   continuing easterly on First Street to H Street; and then
         •   continuing in a northeasterly direction to the easterly portion of
Waterfront Drive; and then
         •   continuing East along a line from the eastern end of Waterfront
Drive, parallel to 2nd Street, to the railroad right-of-way, and then in a
southeasterly direction along the railroad right-of-way to the shoreline of
Humboldt Bay at the railroad bridge crossing Eureka Slough.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (12)   The Broadway Business District A, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6911.jpg]
 
         North and West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point approximately 435 feet South of the
intersection of Hawthorne and Felt Streets; and then
         •   Extending North through the intersection of Felt and Hawthorne
Street to the intersection of Felt and Del Norte Streets; and then
         •   Continuing West to the intersection of Del Norte Street and
Railroad Avenue; and then
         •   Continuing North along Railroad Avenue to the intersection with
Washington Street and Waterfront Drive; and then
         •   Continuing in a northeasterly direction on Waterfront Drive
through the intersection of Waterfront Drive and Commercial Streets to a point
approximately 575 feet northeasterly of the intersection of Commercial Street
and Waterfront Drive.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point approximately 435 feet South of the
intersection of Hawthorne and Felt Streets; and then
         •   extending East to Broadway/Highway 101 approximately parallel with
Hawthorne Street, approximately 985 feet, on the boundary between the
commercial development on the North and the vegetative area on the South.
         East and Southeast Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point approximately 575 feet northeast of the
intersection of Commercial Street and Waterfront Drive; and then
         •   Extending South to 2nd Street, parallel with Commercial Street,
approximately 285 feet; and then
         •   Continuing westerly along 2nd Street to the intersection of 2nd
Street and Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   Continuing South on Broadway/Highway 101 to the intersection of
Broadway/Highway 101 and Washington Streets; and then
         •   Continuing East on Washington Street to the intersection of
Washington and Pine Streets; and then
         •   Continuing South on Pine Street to the intersection of Pine and
Simpson Streets; and then
         •   Continuing West on Simpson to the intersection of Simpson and
Summer Streets; and then
         •   Continuing South on Summer to the intersection of Summer and 14th
Streets; and then
         •   Continuing east on 14th Street to the intersection of Pine and
14th Streets; and then
         •   Continuing south on Pine to the intersection of Pine and 15th
Streets; and then
         •   Continuing west on 15th Street to the intersection of Summer and
15th Streets; and then
         •   continuing south on Summer Street to the intersection of Summer
and Church Streets; and then
         •   continuing east on Church Street to the intersection of Church and
C Streets; and then
         •   continuing south on C Street to the intersection of Del Norte and
C Streets; and then
         •   continuing west on Del Norte Street to the intersection of Del
Norte and Spring Streets; and then
         •   continuing south on Spring Street to the intersection of Sonoma
and Spring Streets; and then
         •   continuing west on Sonoma Street to the intersection of Fairfield
and Sonoma Streets; and then
         •   continuing south on Fairfield Street to a point approximately 140
feet southwesterly of the intersection of Hawthorne and Fairfield Streets; and
then
         •   extending east approximately 455 feet, parallel with Hawthorne
Street to Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing southwesterly on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 331
feet to a point adjacent to and east of the boundary between the commercial
development on the North and the vegetative area on the South.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
   (13)   The Broadway Business District B, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6913.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Truesdale and Howell Streets; and
then
         •   continuing easterly along Truesdale Street to the intersection
with Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   extending North on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 80 feet; and
then
         •   continuing East, parallel to Highland Avenue to Fort Street.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 425
feet south of the intersection of Broadway/Highway 101 and Sunset and
approximately 85 feet north of the north driveway entrance to the cemetery; and
then
         •   extending West approximately 750 feet at an approximately right
angle to Broadway/Highway 101 to the railroad right-of-way.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning on Fort Street approximately 170 feet north of the
intersection of Fort Street with Highland Avenue; and then
         •   continuing South on Fort Street to the intersection with Highland
Avenue; and then
         •   continuing West along Highland Avenue approximately 85 feet to a
point approximately 320 feet east of the intersection of Broadway/Highway 101;
and then
         •   extending South approximately 250 feet to the alley bounded on the
north and south by Highland and McCullens Avenue and the east and west by
Broadway/Highway 101 and Iowa Street; and then
         •   extending West along the alley toward Broadway/Highway 101
approximately 200 feet to a point located approximately 160 feet west of
Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   extending South to McCullens Avenue; and then
         •   continuing West to Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing South on Broadway/Highway 101 to a point approximately
450 feet north of the Pierson traffic signal, and approximately 660 feet south
of the intersection with Hilfiker Lane; and then
         •   extending easterly along the north property line of the adjacent
parcel to the rear property line, approximately 370 feet; and then
         •   extending South to an intersection with Sunset at a point
approximately 400 feet east of Broadway/Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing West on Sunset to the intersection with Broadway/
Highway 101; and then
         •   continuing South on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 425 feet to
a point approximately 85 feet north of the north driveway entrance to the
cemetery.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 85 feet
north of the north driveway entrance to the cemetery; and then
         •   extending West along a line between the car lot on the north and a
vegetative area on the south, approximately 750 feet to the railroad right-of-
way.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (14)   The Broadway Business District C, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6915.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 190
feet north of the K-Mart traffic signal; and then
         •   extending East on a line along the boundary between the cemetery
on the North and the commercial development on the South approximately 1,065
feet to a point north of the most easterly paved area on the south commercial
parcel.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 550
feet south of the K-Mart traffic signal; and then
         •   extending East approximately 940 feet to a point south of the most
easterly paved area on the south commercial parcel.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point approximately 190 feet north of the K-Mart
traffic signal and 1,065 feet East of Broadway/Highway 101 and north of the
most easterly paved area on the south commercial parcel; and then
         •   extending South approximately 665 feet to a point south of the
most easterly paved area on the south commercial parcel.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 190
feet north of the K-Mart traffic signal; and then
         •   continuing South on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 730 feet in
line with the south property line of the south commercial parcel.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
   (15)   The Broadway Business District D, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6917.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 945
feet south of the K-Mart traffic signal; and then
         •   extending West on a line approximately parallel with the east/west
portion of Pound Road to the railroad right-of-way.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on the railroad right-of-way directly west of
the east/west portion of Pound Road; and then
         •   extending on a line easterly across the east/west portion of Pound
Road to Broadway/Highway 101 at a point approximately 1,990 feet south of the
K-Mart traffic signal and approximately 480 feet north of the Herrick Avenue
overpass.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 945
feet south of the K-Mart traffic signal; and then
         •   continuing South on Broadway/Highway 101 approximately 1,045 feet
to a point approximately 1,990 feet south of the K-Mart intersection on
Broadway/Highway 101 and approximately 215 feet east of the easterly end of the
east/west portion of Pound Road.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at a point on the railroad right-of-way approximately
445 feet West of westerly end of the east/west portion of Pound Road; and then
         •   extending North along the railroad right-of-way approximately
1,045 feet.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (16)    The Eureka Mall Business District, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6919.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Henderson Street, between Ocean Avenue and Spring Street.
         South Boundary
         •   Harris Street, between Ocean and Spring Street.
         East Boundary
         •   Spring Street, between Henderson and Harris Streets.
         West Boundary
         •   Ocean Avenue, between Henderson and Harris Streets.
The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be within
the restricted area.
      (17)   The Harris Street Business District, defined as described below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6921.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning on Albee Street, approximately 200 feet north of the
westerly intersection of Harris and Albee Streets, and extending easterly,
parallel with Harris Street, to California Street.
         South Boundary:
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Albee and Everding Streets, and
extending easterly parallel with Harris Street to an intersection with
California Street.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning on California Street, approximately 175 feet north of
the westerly intersection of Harris and California Streets and extending South
to the westerly intersection of Harris and California Streets, approximately
175 feet; and then,
         •   continuing East on Harris Street approximately 55 feet to the
easterly intersection of Harris and California Streets; and then,
         •   extending South, approximately 250 feet, on California Street from
the easterly intersection of Harris and California Streets.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning on Albee Street, approximately 175 feet north of the
westerly intersection of Harris and Albee Streets and extending South to the
westerly intersection of Harris and Albee Streets, approximately 175 feet; and
then,
         •   continuing East on Harris Street approximately 55 feet to the
easterly intersection of Harris and Albee Streets; and then,
         •   extending South on Albee Street approximately 250 feet to the
intersection of Albee and Everding Streets.
      (18)    The City Hall/Courthou se Business District, defined as described
below:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6923.jpg]
 
         North Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Waterfront Drive and I Street;
and then
         •   continuing east to the intersection of Waterfront Drive and M
Street.
         South Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 8th and I Streets; and then
         •   continuing east on 8th Street to the intersection with M Street.
         East Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of Waterfront Drive and M Street;
and then
         •   continuing south along M Street to the intersection with 8th
Street.
         West Boundary
         •   Beginning at the intersection of 8th and I Streets; and then
         •   Continuing north on I Street to the intersection of Waterfront
Drive.
   The bordering streets and their adjacent sidewalks are considered to be
within the restricted area.
   (B)   Exceptions. The prohibitions of subsection (A) shall not apply to any
person or persons:
      (1)   Who is sitting or lying down on a public sidewalk due to a medical
emergency.
      (2)   Who, as the result of a disability, utilizes a wheelchair, walker,
or similar devise to move about the public sidewalk.
      (3)   Who is standing or sitting on the curb or portion of any sidewalk
or street while attending or viewing any parade, festival, performance, rally,
demonstration, meeting or similar event conducted in accordance with this code
or for which an appropriate permit has been duly issued by the city.
      (4)   Who is sitting on a chair or bench located on the public sidewalk
which is supplied by a public agency or by the abutting private property owner
pursuant to a permit.
      (5)   Who is sitting on a public sidewalk within a bus stop zone while
waiting for public or private transportation.
      Nothing in any of these exceptions shall be construed to permit any
conduct which obstructs movement in public ways as prohibited in §
130.13.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person, after having been informed by law enforcement
that the conduct violates this section and given an opportunity to stop the
conduct, shall be charged with an infraction for the first violation, subject
to either a fine or community service. Subsequent violations shall be charged
as an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of the City Attorney. Each
violation shall constitute a separate charge.
   (D)   Severability. The provisions of this section are declared to be
separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or portion of this section, or the invalidity of the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder of this section, or the validity of its application to other
persons or circumstances.
   (E)   Non-exclusivity. Nothing in this section shall limit or preclude the
enforcement of other applicable laws.
(Ord. 789-C.S., passed 10-16-12)
§ 130.13 OBSTRUCTION OF MOVEMENT IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   Prohibition. No person shall occupy any portion of a public street,
sidewalk, curb or other public place so as to obstruct or interfere with the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon, whether such person does so
alone or together with one or more persons, or with equipment or personal
property of any nature, and whether such person does so by standing, sitting,
lying, or in any other manner.
   (B)   Penalty. Any person, after having been informed by law enforcement
that the conduct violates this section and given an opportunity to stop the
conduct, shall be charged with an infraction for the first violation subject to
either a fine or community service. Subsequent violations shall be charged as
an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of the City Attorney. Each
violation shall constitute a separate charge.
   (C)   Severability. The provisions of this section are declared to be
separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph,
subdivision, section or portion of this section, or the invalidity of the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity
of the remainder of this section, or the validity of its application to other
persons or circumstances.
   (D)   Non-exclusivity. Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the
enforcement of other applicable laws.
(Ord. 789-C.S., passed 10-16-12)
§ 130.14 STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Declaration of legislative intent - purpose. Public areas should be
accessible and available to residents and the public at large for their
intended uses. The unauthorized use of public areas for the storage of personal
property interferes with the rights of other members of the public to use
public areas for their intended purposes and can create a public health or
safety hazard that adversely affects residential and commercial areas. The
purpose of this section is to maintain public areas in clean, sanitary and
accessible condition to prevent the misappropriation of public areas for
personal use, and to promote the public health and safety by ensuring that
public areas remain readily accessible for their intended uses.
   (B)   Definitions. The definitions contained in this section shall govern
the construction, meaning and application of words phrases used in this
section.
      ALLEY. Any highway having a roadway not exceeding 25 feet in width which
is primarily for access to the rear or side entrances of abutting property.
      BIKEWAY. All facilities that provide primarily for, and promote, bicycle
travel.
      BULKY ITEM or BULKY ITEMS. Any item, with the exception of a rent, that
is too large to fit in one of the city's 60 gallon trash containers with the
lid closed, including but not limited to a mattress, couch, chair or other
furniture or appliance.
      HIGHWAY. A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open
to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
      PARKWAY. The area of the street between the back of the curb and the
sidewalk that typically is planted and landscaped.
      PERSON. Any individual, group, business, business trust, company,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, entity,
association, club or organization composed of two or more individuals (or
manager, lessee, agent servant, officer or employee).
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Any and all tangible property, and includes, but is
not limited to, goods, materials, merchandise, tents, tarpaulins, bedding,
sleeping bags, hammocks, personal items such as luggage, backpacks, clothing,
documents and medication, and household items.
      PUBLIC AREA or PUBLIC AREAS. All property that is owned, managed or
maintained by the city, including all property under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Parks and Recreation, and shall include, but not be limited to
any street, medial strip, space, ground, building or structure.
      ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel.
      SIDEWALK. That portion of a highway, other than the roadway, set apart by
curbs, barriers, markings or other delineation, for pedestrian travel.
      STORE, STORED OR STORING. To put aside or accumulate for use when needed,
to put for safekeeping, and/or to place or leave in a location.
      STREET. Includes every highway, avenue, lane, alley, court, place,
square, sidewalk, parkway, curbs, bikeway or other public way in this city
which has been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such
other public property so designated in any law of this state.
      TENT. Any tarp, cover, structure or shelter, made of any material that is
not open on all sides and which hinders an unobstructed view behind or into the
area surrounded by the tarp, cover, structure or shelter.
      TRAIL. A path, track or unpaved lane or road whether used for working,
cycling, horseback riding or vehicle traffic.
   (C)   Impoundment of stored personal property; discard of stored personal
property.
      (1)   No person shall store personal property in public areas.
      (2)   All stored personal property in public areas may be impounded by
the city.
      (3)   Personal property placed in public areas shall be deemed to be
stored personal property if it has not been removed from public areas within 24
hours of service of written notice, requiring such removal. Moving personal
property to another location in a public area or returning personal property to
the same block on a daily or regular basis shall not be considered to be
removing the personal property from a public area. The city may remove and
impound such stored personal property after providing 24 hours written notice.
This section shall not apply to personal property that, pursuant to statute,
ordinance, permit, regulation or other authorization by the city or state, is
stored on property that is owned or controlled by the city.
      (4)   Personal property placed in public areas within ten feet of any
operational and utilizable entrance, exit, driveway or loading dock may be
removed and impounded at any time without prior notice. Post-removal notice
shall be provided as set forth in division (D)(2) below.
      (5)   Personal property placed in a public area which has a clearly
posted closure time may be removed and impounded after the closure time,
without prior notice. Post-removal notice shall be provided as set forth in
division (D)(2) below.
      (6)   In the event personal property placed in a public area poses an
immediate threat to the health or safety of the public, it may be removed
without prior notice and discarded.
      (7)   Bulky items placed in a public area may be removed without prior
notice and discarded.
      (8)   Evidence of a crime or contraband may be removed from a public area
without prior notice.
   (D)   Notice.
      (1)   Pre-removal notice.  The written notice required by division (C)(3)
shall be deemed to have been served if a written notice is served on the person
storing the personal property, or is posted conspicuously on or near the
personal property. The written notice shall contain the following:
         (a)   A general description of the personal property to be removed.
         (b)   The location from which the personal property will be removed.
         (c)   The date and time the notice was posted.
         (d)   A statement that the personal property has been stored in
violation of division (C)(1).
         (e)   A statement that the personal property will be impounded if not
removed from public areas within 24 hours.
         (f)   A statement that moving stored personal property to another
location in a public area shall not be considered to be removing personal
property from a public area.
         (g)   The location where the removed personal property will be stored,
including a telephone number and the internet website of the city through which
a person may receive information as to impounded personal property as well as
information as to voluntary storage location(s).
         (h)   A statement that impounded personal property may be discarded if
not claimed within 90 days after impoundment.
      (2)   Post-removal notice. Upon removal of stored personal property,
written notice shall be conspicuously placed in the area from which the
personal property was removed. The written notice shall contain the following:
         (a)   A general description of the personal property removed.
         (b)   The date and approximate time the personal property was removed.
         (c)   A statement that the personal property was stored in a public
area in violation of division (C)(3).
         (d)   The location where the removed personal property will be
located, including a telephone number and internet website of the city through
which a person may receive information as to impounded personal property.
         (e)   A statement that impounded personal property may be discarded if
not claimed within 90 days after impoundment.
   (E)   Failure to remove attended personal property. It shall be unlawful to
fail to remove attended stored personal property within 24 hours of receiving
written notice pursuant to division (C)(3).
   (F)   Storage and disposal.
      (1)   Except as specified herein, impounded personal property shall be
moved to a place of storage.
      (2)   Except as specified herein, impounded personal property shall be
stored by the city for 90 days pursuant to Eureka Police Department Policy 804,
after which time, if not claimed, it may be discarded. The city shall not be
required to undertake any search for, or return, any impounded personal
property stored for longer than 90 days.
      (3)   The city shall maintain a record of the date any impounded personal
property was discarded.
   (G)   Repossession. The owner or any other person entitled to the impounded
personal property may repossess the personal property prior to its disposal
upon submitting satisfactory proof of ownership. A person may establish proof
of ownership by, among other methods, describing the location and date when the
personal property was impounded from a public area, and providing a reasonably
specific and detailed description of the personal property. Valid, government-
issued identification is not required to claim impounded personal property.
   (H)   Illegal dumping, littering or unlawful disposal. Nothing herein
precludes the enforcement of any law prohibiting illegal dumping, littering, or
unlawful disposal, including but not limited to Cal. Penal Code § 374.3, and
Eureka Municipal Code §
51.41, or any successor statutes proscribing illegal dumping, littering, or
unlawful disposal.
   (I)   Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall
be subject to the provisions of §
10.99 and may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of
the City Attorney.
(Ord. 844-C.S., passed 8-2-16)
§ 130.15 - 130.29 [RESERVED]
ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS
§ 130.30 ABANDONED AND DERELICT SHOPPING CARTS; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Purpose and findings of fact.
      (1)   The accumulation of abandoned carts, sometimes wrecked and/or
dismantled on public and private property, tends to create conditions that
reduce property values, and promote blight and deterioration and result in a
public nuisance. Abandoned carts also create potential hazards to the health
and safety of the public, and interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (2)   This section is intended to ensure that measures are taken by the
owners of shopping carts to prevent the removal of the shopping carts from the
cart owner's business premises, to make removal of the cart a violation of the
Code, and to facilitate the retrieval of abandoned and derelict shopping carts
in a manner consistent with state law and to use an administrative citation
program to establish appropriate fines intended to act as a reasonable
deterrent in preventing violations.
   (B)   Definitions. The definitions set forth in this section shall govern
the application and interpretation of this section.
      ABANDONED CART or ABANDONED SHOPPING CART. Any cart that has been
removed, without the written consent of the cart owner, from the business
premises or parking area of the retail establishment of which the cart owner's
business premises are located and is located on either public or private
property.
      BUSINESS PREMISES. The interior of a cart owner's commercial
establishment, adjacent walkways, any loading area, and the parking area, as
defined herein. The cart owner's BUSINESS PREMISES may include a multi-store
shopping center with shared areas of parking and public access.
      CART or SHOPPING CART. A basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar
device generally used in a retail or commercial establishment by a customer for
the purpose of transporting goods of any kind, including a basket used in a
laundromat or similar business. A CART sold by a commercial establishment to a
retail customer for that customer's personal use is not a shopping cart for the
purposes of this section.
      CART IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign or engraved surface which is permanently
affixed to a shopping cart containing all of the information specified in
division (D)(1) below.
      CART OWNER. The owner or operator of a commercial establishment that
provides carts for use by its customers for the purpose of transporting goods
of any kind.
      CITY. The City of Eureka, its officials, employees or agents.
      DERELICT CART. A cart in a very poor condition as a result of disuse,
neglect or vandalism.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works or his or her designee or such
other person or entity designated by the City Manager to administer this
section.
      OFF-SITE. Outside business premises.
      ON-SITE CART CONTAINMENT PROGRAM. One or more of the following measures:
         (a)   Placement of disabling devices on all shopping carts which
prevent them from being removed from the business premises by locking the
wheels or otherwise impeding the movement of the carts.
         (b)   An on-site security guard to deter customers who attempt to
remove carts from the business premises.
         (c)   Posts and chains or similar barriers around the business
premises to prevent cart removal, if permitted by the applicable zoning and the
site plan, and if approved by the Fire Marshal.
         (d)   Obtaining a security deposit from customers for the on-site use
of shopping carts.
         (e)   The rental or sale of carts that can be temporarily or
permanently used for the transport of goods.
         (f)   Any other measure approved by the city as a means to contain
carts on the business premises.
      PARKING AREA. A parking lot or other property provided by a commercial
establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle.
In a multi-store complex or shopping center, PARKING AREA includes the entire
parking area used by or controlled by the complex or center.
      RECYCLING CENTER. Any facility that is used in the process of collecting,
sorting, cleansing, treating, processing, reconstituting, or storing materials
that would otherwise become solid waste and returning them to the economic
mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted
products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the
marketplace.
   (C)   Unlawful possession and abandonment of carts. Any person who violates
any prohibition of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section does
not apply to carts removed as authorized by the cart owner, pursuant to Cal.
Business and Professions Code § 22435.4, including for the purposes of
maintenance, repair or disposal. It is unlawful to do any of the following
acts, if a cart has a cart indemnification sign:
      (1)   To remove a cart from the business premises of a retail or
commercial establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive
the cart owner of possession of the cart.
      (2)   To be in possession of any cart that has been removed from the
business premises of a retail or commercial establishment with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner of possession of the cart.
      (3)   To be in possession of any cart with serial numbers removed,
obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive
the cart owner of possession of the cart.
      (4)   To leave or abandon a cart at a location other than the business
premises of the retail or commercial establishment with the intent to
temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner of possession of the cart.
      (5)   To alter, convert, or tamper with a cart or to remove any part or
portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart,
with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner or
retailer of the possession of the cart.
      (6)   To be in possession of any cart while that cart is not located on
the business premises of the retail or commercial establishment that owns the
cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the cart owner or
retailer of possession of the cart.
      (7)   To remove any markings from the cart that would show true ownership
of the cart (plastic seats, handlebars, and the like).
   (D)   Cart owner requirements. All owners of carts shall comply with the
requirements of this division.
      (1)   Cart identification required. All carts must have a permanently
affixed or attached sign identifying the owner of the cart, the owner's address
and a contact phone number maintained by the owner. All owners of carts,
including but not limited to commercial cart owners, shall be responsible for
complying with this section and continuously maintaining, or causing to be
maintained, the cart identification sign so that all information is accurate
and clearly legible. In addition, all cart owners are responsible for providing
their contact information to the city or its agent.
      (2)   Daily cart retrieval. All cart owners, regardless of the number of
carts owned, must retrieve all carts daily to ensure the carts are secured from
public access after close of business hours.
      (3)   Violations. Violation of any provision of this section is unlawful
and a nuisance and the city may pursue any available remedy provided under the
Eureka Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, the issuance of an
administrative citation under §
10.39(A) or the filing of a misdemeanor charge under §
10.99 at the discretion of the City Attorney. Each instance of an abandoned or
derelict cart retrieved by the city is considered a separate offence.
   (E)   City retrieval of carts. The city may retrieve an abandoned or
derelict cart from public property (or private property with the consent of the
property owner) in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Where the location of the shopping cart will impede emergency
services.
      (2)   When the city or its agent has determined that the cart appears to
be obviously abandoned or possessed by a person other than the owner of the
cart while off-site.
   (F)   Immediate impound by city of abandoned or derelict carts.
Notwithstanding any other division of this section, the city may immediately
impound and dispose of all carts determined by the city to be abandoned or
derelict and located off-site. The city may charge a fee, established by
resolution, for the impound and either return of carts to the businesses from
which they came or disposal of these carts.
   (G)   Property in abandoned or derelict carts.
      (1)   Any personal property found in a cart must be retained by the city
or its agent for 24 hours in order to determine if it is abandoned property.
Trash or waste must be discarded as appropriate or required by law.
      (2)   Once a determination is made, abandoned property found in a cart is
subject to the property procedures set forth in Policy 804 of the Eureka Police
Department Policy Manual, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   (H)   Possession of carts by recycling centers. Any recycling center that
comes into possession of a cart may not sell or use the cart for any purpose
and must destroy or dispose of abandoned or derelict shopping carts in a manner
that prevents the carts from becoming a public nuisance.
(Ord. 805-C.S., passed 9-16-14; Am. Ord. 929-C.S., passed 12-7-21; Am. Ord.
963-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the provisions of §
10.99 and may be charged with an infraction or misdemeanor at the discretion of
the City Attorney.
   (B)   Any person who violates §
130.08 shall be subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   In addition to all other penalties set forth in this section, the
parent or guardian of the minor shall be held civilly responsible for the
damages caused by the commission of any delinquent act within the city.
      (2)   Upon the first conviction of a violation of §
130.08, the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250, nor more
than $500.
      (3)   Upon the second conviction, the parent shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $500, nor more than $1,000, and in addition, shall be
sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent participate in,
through completion, a court approved community based treatment program (such as
parenting skills, family services, employment and training, and the like).
      (4)   Upon the third or subsequent violation and conviction, the parent
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and up to six months in
jail.
(Ord. 611-C.S., passed 9-17-96; Am. Ord. 785 -C.S., passed 7-17-12)
CHAPTER 131: PROPERTY OFFENSES
Section
General Regulations
   
131.01   [Reserved]
   
131.02   Dropping objects from aircraft; exceptions
Graffiti Control Regulations
   
131.10   Purpose
   
131.11   Definitions
   
131.12   Violation
   
131.13   Removal of graffiti
   
131.14   Removal at owner's expense
   
131.15   Notice to remove graffiti
   
131.16   Form of notice to remove graffiti
   
131.17   Service of notice
   
131.18   Physical removal of graffiti
   
131.19   Recovery of city costs
   
131.20   Lien procedure
   
131.21   Recording of lien
   
131.22   Satisfaction of lien
   
131.23   Community service
   
131.24   Remedies cumulative
   
131.25   Suspension or delay of driving privileges
Private Property
   
131.30   Trespass on private property prohibited
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 131.01 [RESERVED]
§ 131.02 DROPPING OBJECTS FROM AIRCRAFT; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Dropping objects from aircraft. No person in any aircraft flying
within or over the city shall cause or permit to be thrown, discharged, or
dropped within the city any object or thing except when such action is
absolutely essential to the safety of the occupants of the aircraft, or except
when such action is by authority of the federal government or the state.
('63 Code, § 4-1.01)
   (B)   Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to public
aircraft of the federal government, the state, or a political subdivision of
the state.
('63 Code, § 4-1.02)
(Ord. 2866, passed 6-6-61)
Penalty, see § 10.99
GRAFFITI CONTROL REGULATIONS
§ 131.10 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide a program for removal of
graffiti from walls and structures on both public and private property and to
provide regulations designed to prevent and control the further spread of
graffiti in the city. The increase of graffiti on both public and private
buildings, structures and places is creating a condition of blight within the
city which results in a deterioration of property and business values for
adjacent and surrounding properties all to the detriment of the city. Allowing
graffiti to remain increases the likelihood of additional graffiti being placed
on the property. Graffiti constitutes not only unattractive blight but also
increases the likelihood of criminal activity when left in place.
   (B)   The City Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a
public nuisance which must be abated so as to avoid the detrimental impact of
such graffiti on the city and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.
   (C)   The City Council further finds that substantial amounts of graffiti
are created by minors; that parents and guardians should be made responsible
for the avoidance and removal of graffiti created by minors; and that penalties
and requirements are needed to ensure that parents exercise appropriate control
over and assume responsibility for the actions of minors under their control.
While the property is a victim of the graffiti, where the responsible party
fails to correct the defacing graffiti, it is always the duty of the property
owner to remove graffiti as soon as reasonably possible.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.11 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. The unauthorized spraying of paint or marking or placing of ink,
chalk, dye, wax, epoxy, gum, glue or other similar substances on public and
private buildings, structures, places and vehicles.
   GRAFFITI NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property upon which graffiti has not been abated
after the date established pursuant to §
131.15
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. Any parent, guardian or other adult having
responsibility, custody or control of an individual under the age of 18 years.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. An owner, entity, or person acting as an agent for an
owner by agreement, who has authority over the property or is responsible for
the property's maintenance or management.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.12 VIOLATION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk, or otherwise apply
graffiti on public or privately owned permanent structures signs, areas, or
surfaces located on public or privately owned real property within the city.
   (B)   It is a violation of this subchapter to allow a property to become a
graffiti nuisance property and to not remove graffiti from the property within
the time period provided in the Notice to Remove Graffiti.
   (C)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter shall be a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.13 REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   Any person applying graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove
the same within 24 hours after notice by the city or the public or private
owner of the property involved. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti
shall constitute an additional violation of this subchapter. Where graffiti is
applied by juveniles, the parent or parents, or responsible adult or adults,
shall be responsible for such removal and for the payment of all costs of any
kind, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in affecting the removal of such
graffiti.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.14 REMOVAL AT OWNER'S EXPENSE.
   Graffiti located on privately owned structures on privately owned real
property within the city so as to be capable of being viewed by a person
utilizing any public right-of-way or walkway open to the public in this city
may be removed by the city at the owner's expense as a public nuisance pursuant
to the provisions of §§
131.16 to
131.20
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.15 NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
   Whenever the Chief of Police or designee is apprized of the presence of
graffiti located on privately owned real property within the city, the Chief of
Police or designee may cause a written notice to be served upon the owner/
responsible party of the affected premises as such owner's name and address
appears on the last equalized assessment roll by depositing a copy of the
notice in the U.S. Postal Service enclosed in a sealed envelope and with the
postage thereon fully pre-paid. The mail shall be registered or certified and
addressed to said owner at the last known address of said owner, and if there
is no known address, then in care of the property address. The service is
complete at the time of such deposit. As an alternative to mailing the notice a
copy of the notice may be personally served on the owner/responsible party.
OWNER as used herein means any person in possession and also any person having
or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in said premises as
described by a preliminary title search from any accredited title company. The
failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of
any proceeding hereunder. The property owner shall have seven days after the
date of the notice to remove the graffiti or be subject to city removal of the
graffiti and assessment of the costs of such removal as a lien on the subject
property.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.16 FORM OF NOTICE TO REMOVE GRAFFITI.
   (A)   The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
Date:       
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to remove or paint
over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as                  ,
Eureka, CA, which is visible to public view, within seven (7) days after the
date of this notice; or, if you fail to do so, then City employees or private
City contractors will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by
removal or painting over of the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City
employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and
such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.
All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters are hereby
notified to submit any objections or comments to the Chief of Police for the
City or their designee within seven (7) days from the date of this notice. At
the conclusion of this seven (7) day period the City may proceed with the
abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without
further notice.
   (B)   Where the city has made reasonable efforts to provide notice in
substantial compliance with this section, minor defects, omissions and/or
inconsistencies in the form or language of the notice shall not invalidate the
notice.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.17 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   The service of this notice shall be made on the day the notice is dated and
by affidavit filed with the City Clerk. The notice shall also be posted at a
conspicuous place on the premises upon which the graffiti is inscribed. The
posting of this notice shall be made on the day the notice is dated and by
affidavit filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.18 PHYSICAL REMOVAL OF GRAFFITI.
   If the owner, responsible party, responsible minor or adult fails to remove
or cause the graffiti to be removed by the designated date, or such continued
date thereafter as the Chief of Police or designee approves, then the Chief of
Police or designee shall so notify the City Manager and the City Manager shall
have the authority to cause the graffiti to be abated by city forces or private
contract, and the city or its private contractor is expressly authorized to
enter upon the premises for such purpose, and the City Manager or designee
shall be authorized to obtain an abatement warrant and/or other appropriate
order from a court of competent jurisdiction authorizing the city to affect
such removal.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.19 RECOVERY OF CITY COSTS.
   Should the city be required to abate the graffiti as a public nuisance, it
shall be entitled to recover, from any person or persons responsible for
placing the graffiti, from any property owner or owners on which the graffiti
is located; and from any responsible party, any and all costs, direct or
indirect, incurred by the city in affecting the removal of graffiti.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.20 LIEN PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the cost of graffiti removal has not been paid in full within
90 calendar days from the date upon which such payment became due and payable,
the finance officer may initiate proceedings to establish and record a lien
against the property.
   (B)   Prior to the recording of the lien, the finance officer shall prepare
and file with the City Clerk a report stating, for each property for which a
lien is proposed, the amount of the delinquent abatement cost, any applicable
penalties and interest, and an administrative fee established by resolution of
the City Council to recover the administrative costs incurred in recording the
lien and carrying out the lien procedures of this subchapter.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing by the
City Council of the report and any protests or objections thereto.
   (D)   The finance officer shall cause written notice to be served on the
owner of each affected property not less than ten days prior to the time set
for the hearing. Such notice shall set forth the amount of the delinquent
abatement cost and any penalties and interest which are due. Such notice shall
be delivered by first-class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to each owner of
such property to be assessed as that owner's address appears on the last
equalized assessment roll or supplemental roll of the County of Humboldt,
whichever is more current. Service by mail as provided for herein shall be
effective on the date of mailing, and the failure of any person to actually
receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the notice.
   (E)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council may adopt a
resolution confirming, discharging, or modifying the amount of the lien
proposed for each affected property and order that the amount not discharged as
to any property be reduced to a lien against that property.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.21 RECORDING OF LIEN.
   Within 30 days following the adoption of a resolution by the city council
imposing a lien, the Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the office
of the county recorder for the County of Humboldt, California.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.22 SATISFACTION OF LIEN.
   Once payment in full is received by the city for outstanding administrative
fines, penalties, interest, and administrative fees, the finance officer shall
provide the property owner or concerned escrow company or financial institution
with a notice of satisfaction of lien for recordation with the office of the
County Recorder. Recordation of the notice of satisfaction shall cancel the
city's lien.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.23 COMMUNITY SERVICE.
   (A)   Upon conviction of any person for violation of any provision of this
subchapter, or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with a
graffiti implement, the city may petition the sentencing court to impose
community service time, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 640.6. The sentencing
court may require the performance of community service within the city in
addition to any monetary penalties imposed. In the event the sentencing court
approves community service, in addition to any other community service time
ordered by the court, the city may request any adult or emancipated minor
convicted of vandalism, as defined by Cal. Penal Code § 594(a)(1) to complete a
minimum of 24 hours, but not more than 48 hours, of community services cleaning
up, removing and repairing property damaged by graffiti for the first
conviction; and complete 48 hours, but no more than 96 hours, of community
services cleaning up, removing and repairing property damaged by graffiti for
each subsequent conviction.
   (B)   Any person who is under the age of 18 when he or she violates any
provision of this subchapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of
property with a graffiti implement, and is found to be a person described in
Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code § 602 by reason of the commission of vandalism, may be
required to perform community service time pursuant to Cal. Welf. & Inst. Code
§ 728. For any minor adjudicated guilty of vandalism, the city may petition the
juvenile court and the court may, in addition to any other penalties imposed by
the city, require the unemancipated minor to provide the necessary labor to
clean up, repair, or replace defaced, damaged or destroyed property, or
otherwise make restitution to the property owner.
   (C)   If a minor is personally unable to pay any fine levied for violating
any provision of this subchapter or is otherwise unable to make restitution for
damages, the minor's parent or legal guardian shall be liable for payment of
the fine or restitution. If the parent or legal guardian cannot make
restitution, the sentencing court may waive payment of the fine or community
service time by the parent or legal guardian upon finding of good cause. If the
sentencing court waives payment of the fine by the parent or legal guardian,
the city shall petition the sentencing court, and the court, at the court's
option, may order the parent or legal guardian to provide the necessary labor,
equal to the number of hours assigned to the minor adjudicated guilty of
violating any provision of this subchapter to clean up, repair, or replace
property damage by the unemancipated minor.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.24 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The remedies provided in this subchapter shall be cumulative and in addition
to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of applicable
ordinances of the city and the laws of the state.
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
§ 131.25 SUSPENSION OR DELAY OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES.
   For each conviction of a person aged 13 to 21 for violation of any provision
of this subchapter or any state law pertaining to vandalism of property with
paint, ink, or dye from an aerosol container, or with graffiti, the city may
petition the sentencing court to suspend driving privileges or delay the
issuance of driving privileges in accordance with Cal. Veh. Code § 13202.6
(Ord. 639-C.S., passed 2-6-01)
PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 131.30 TRESPASS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person may remain upon any private property or business premises
after being notified by the owner or lessee or other person in charge thereof
to leave the premises.
   (B)   No person, without the express or implied permission of the owner, the
owner's agent, or the lessee, the lessee's agent, or other person in charge of
private property or business premises, may re-enter any private property or
business premises after having been notified by the owner, the owner's agent,
or the lessee, the lessee's agent, or other person in charge thereof to keep
off or keep away therefrom.
   (C)   This section does not apply in any of the following instances:
      (1)   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act
prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating
to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of that person's
membership in a protected class, as defined in state or federal law;
      (2)   Where its application results in or is coupled with an act
prohibited by Penal Code § 365 or any other provision of law relating to duties
of innkeepers and common carriers;
      (3)   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful activities;
      (4)   Where more than 365 days have elapsed since the original
notification to leave the premises or to keep off or keep away therefrom;
      (5)   Where its application would result in an interference with or
inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of
freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of
political or religious opinions, not involving obstruction of a street,
sidewalk, or other public area or disturbing the peace in violation of Penal
Code § 415; or
      (6)   Where the person who is upon another's private property or business
premises is present under a claim of legal right in any of the following
situations:
         (a)   Marital and post-marital disputes;
         (b)   Child custody or visitation disputes;
         (c)   Disputes regarding title to or rights in real property;
         (d)   Landlord-tenant disputes;
         (e)   Disputes between members of the same family or between persons
residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute;
         (f)   Employer-employee disputes;
         (g)   Business-type disputes such as those between partners;
         (h)   Debtor-creditor disputes; and
         (i)   Instances wherein the person claims rights to be present
pursuant to order, decree or process of a court.
(Ord. 883-C.S., passed 12-4-18)
CHAPTER 132: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
Loitering for Drug-Related Activities at Certain Locations
   
132.15   Definitions
   
132.16   Prohibited conduct
   
132.17   Method of enforcement and probable cause
   
132.18   Remedies
LOITERING FOR DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITIES AT CERTAIN LOCATIONS
§ 132.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. Both sides of a city street that begins at the intersection with one
cross street and ends at the intersection with the next cross street.
   BUSINESS. All types of businesses including professions.
   ILLEGAL DRUGS. All controlled substances or precursor or analog thereof, as
defined in Cal. Health & Safety Code Division 10-10.1.
   LOITER. To delay, linger, or to idle about with an unlawful purpose.
   PARK. All public lands defined as a public park or public open space in the
city.
   RECREATION CENTER. The premises of all buildings primarily used for
recreational activity.
   RESIDENCE. Any person's dwelling place, or place of habitation.
   SCHOOL. Any high school, junior high school, elementary school, or pre-
school.
('63 Code, § 4-18.01) (Ord. 575-C.S., passed 8-4-94)
§ 132.16 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter at any of the following
locations, or within the same or adjacent block thereof, with the intent to
buy, sell, transfer or use illegal drugs, after being asked to leave by any
peace officer:
      (1)   Parks;
      (2)   Schools;
      (3)   Recreation centers;
      (4)   Businesses;
      (5)   Residences;
      (6)   Any public street, alley, or parking lot.
   (B)   Loitering on private property that is not open to the public is
excluded from the scope of this chapter, except for private property that is
part of the premises on which there is a private school.
('63 Code, § 4-18.02) (Ord. 575-C.S., passed 8-4-94)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 132.17 METHOD OF ENFORCEMENT AND PROBABLE CAUSE.
   (A)   Whenever a peace officer has probable cause to believe that a person
is loitering with the intent to buy, sell, transfer, or use illegal drugs in
any of the above-specified locations, the officer must first require the person
to leave the designated location. Only if the person refuses to leave the
designated location upon request of a peace officer shall the person be subject
to arrest.
   (B)   For the purposes of enforcing this chapter only, probable cause that a
person has the intent to buy, sell, use, or transfer illegal drugs shall be
confined to the following circumstances:
      (1)   When the enforcing officer has information that the individual has
repeatedly been involved in illegal drug activity at the same location in the
past by virtue of the officer's own experience or that of other officers; or,
      (2)   When a reliable informant has given the enforcing officer
information that the individual intends to engage in illegal drug activity at
that location; or,
      (3)   When the enforcing officer has received complaints from citizens
that the individual is engaging in illegal drug activity at that location; and,
      (4)   The enforcing officer's personal observation of the individual's
behavior at the location is consistent with the information known or received
under subsections (1), (2), or (3) of this division (B).
('63 Code, § 4-18.03) (Ord. 575-C.S., passed 8-4-94)
§ 132.18 REMEDIES.
   (A)   The remedies provided under this chapter are in addition to any other
remedies that may exist under applicable laws.
   (B)   Violation of this chapter shall be misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 4-18.04) (Ord. 575-C.S., passed 8-4-94)
CHAPTER 133: WEAPONS OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Loitering while concealing dangerous or deadly weapons
   
133.03   Fighting while concealing dangerous or deadly weapons
   
133.04   Exceptions
   
133.05   Sale, transfer, and possession of dangerous or deadly weapons
   
133.06   Discharging firearms
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOW AND ARROW. Any device commonly known as a bow and arrow designed for or
which can be used for hunting purposes or making an assault upon persons or
property.
   DANGEROUS or DEADLY WEAPON. Any knife with a blade three inches or more in
length, any spring-blade, switchblade, or snap-blade knife or other similar
type knife, any knife, any blade of which is automatically released by a spring
mechanism or other mechanical device, any ice pick or similar sharp, stabbing
tool, any straight-edge razor or any razor blade fitted to a handle, or any
cutting, stabbing, or bludgeoning weapon or device capable of inflicting
grievous bodily harm.
('63 Code, § 3-9.01) (Ord. 2673, passed 10-24-56; Am. Ord. 2681, passed 11-20-
56)
§ 133.02 LOITERING WHILE CONCEALING DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, to carry concealed upon his person any
dangerous or deadly weapon or to carry any dangerous or deadly weapon upon or
about any place where intoxicating liquors are sold.
('63 Code, § 3-9.02) (Ord. 2673, passed 10-24-56)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.03 FIGHTING WHILE CONCEALING DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who has concealed upon his person or who
has in his immediate physical possession any dangerous or deadly weapon to
engage in any fight or to participate in any rough or disorderly conduct upon
any public place or way or upon the premises of another.
('63 Code, § 3-9.03) (Ord. 2673, passed 10-24-56)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   Sections
133.01 through
133.03 of this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit the carrying of ordinary
tools or equipment carried in good faith for uses in honest work, trade, or
business or for the purpose of legitimate recreation.
('63 Code, § 3-9.04) (Ord. 2673, passed 10-24-56)
§ 133.05 SALE, TRANSFER, AND POSSESSION OF DANGEROUS OR DEADLY WEAPONS.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, expose for sale, keep, carry, possess,
loan, transfer, or give to any other person any spring-blade, snap-blade knife,
or other similar type knife, or any knife any blade of which is automatically
released by a spring mechanism or other mechanical device.
('63 Code, § 3-9.05) (Ord. 2673, passed 10-24-56)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 133.06 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm,
slingshot, air gun, or bow and arrow within the city; provided, however, it
shall be lawful to explode firearms within the city not to exceed a 22 caliber
rifle, pistol, or revolver using ammunition of velocity and fire power not
greater than the 22 caliber shot in a gallery or shooting range provided
suitable and proper background shall be provided to prevent bullets or missiles
from endangering public safety and provided a permit shall have been issued by
the Council for such gallery or shooting range. The Council shall not grant
such permit until the Chief of Police shall have inspected the premises wherein
such range shall be established and shall have reported thereon to the Council.
No permit shall be granted for any gallery or shooting range where intoxicating
liquors are dispensed, sold, or stored on the premises.
   (B)   Any such gallery or rifle being of a nonprofit nature or character
shall receive a license without charge therefor. All shooting galleries
operated or maintained for a profit shall pay the license provided for by the
provision of
Chapter 110 of this code. Any police or governmental range shall be and is
hereby exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 3-9.06) (Ord. 2681, passed 11-20-56; Am. Ord. 345-C.S., passed 8-
4-81)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 134: ABATEMENT OF CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
Section
   
134.01   Short title
   
134.02   Purpose
   
134.03   Definitions
   
134.04   Scope of application
   
134.05   Authority
   
134.06   Chronic nuisances prohibited
   
134.07   Violation
   
134.08   Warning notice
   
134.09   Chronic nuisance designation
   
134.10   Voluntary abatement plan
   
134.11   Commencement of action
   
134.12   Summary closure
   
134.13   Severability
§ 134.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the "City of Eureka Chronic Nuisance Property
Ordinance."
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.02 PURPOSE.
   Chronic nuisance properties present grave health, safety and quality of life
concerns where the persons responsible for such properties have failed to take
corrective action to abate the nuisance condition. Chronic nuisance properties
have a tremendous negative impact upon the quality of life, safety and health
of the neighborhoods where they are located. This chapter is enacted to remedy
nuisance activities that are particularly disruptive to quality of life and
repeatedly occur or exist at properties by providing a process for abatement.
This remedy is not an exclusive remedy available under any state or local laws
and may be used in conjunction with such other laws.
   Also, chronic nuisance properties are a financial burden to the city by the
repeated calls for service to the properties because of the nuisance activities
that repeatedly occur or exist on such property. This chapter is a means to
ameliorate those conditions and hold accountable those persons responsible for
such property.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the
meaning prescribed below:
   ABATE means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy a
condition, which constitutes a violation of this chapter by such means and in
such a manner and to such an extent as the applicable city department director
or designee(s) determines is necessary in the interest of the general health,
safety and welfare of the community.
   CONTROL means the ability to regulate, manage, restrain, dominate,
counteract or govern property, or conduct that occurs on a property.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY means property on which nuisance activities
exceeding the threshold amount occur or exist during any 12-month period.
   DRUG-RELATED ACTIVITY means any unlawful activity at a property which
consists of the manufacture, delivery, sale, storage, possession, or giving
away of any controlled substance as defined by state law.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITY means the occurrence of any of the following
classifications of activities, behaviors, or conduct whenever engaged in by a
responsible person on or at property owned, occupied or controlled by that
person:
      (1)   Class I. (1 Point)
         (a)   Disturbing the peace in violation of Cal. Penal Code § 415.
         (b)   Making, causing or suffering any unnecessary noises or sounds in
violation of EMC §
94.02.
         (c)   The occurrence or attempted occurrence of any gang-related
crime.
         (d)   Arrests for outstanding warrants.
      (2)   Class II. (2 Points)
         (a)   Arrests for possession of stolen property.
         (b)   Any form of assault or battery, as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§
240 and 242, respectively.
         (c)   Unlawfully discharging a firearm, whether a handgun, long gun,
and/or shotgun, within the city.
         (d)   Parties or gatherings at which alcohol or controlled substances
are illegally consumed or used by minors.
         (e)   The occurrence or attempted occurrence of any other criminal
activity that threatens the life, health, safety, or welfare of residents of
the property, the neighborhood, or the public as determined by the Chief.
         (f)   Anything that is injurious to health, or is indecent, or
offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so
as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by an entire
community or neighborhood, or by any considerable number of persons, as
provided in Cal. Penal Code §§ 370 and 371.
         (g)   Any public nuisance as specified in EMC §
150.163:
            1.   If multiple nuisance violations are present, all such
violations shall collectively be considered a single nuisance activity at the
time of discovery.
            2.   If after proper notice the responsible party does not fully
correct the violations, the continued presence of violations shall collectively
count as an additional nuisance activity for the purposes of this chapter.
      (3)   Class III. (3 Points)
            1.   The commission or attempted commission of any serious felony
or violent felony as defined in Cal. Penal Code §§ 1192.7(c) and 667.5(c),
respectively.
            2.   The manufacture, cultivation, sale, use, or possession of a
controlled substance in violation of the Uniform Controlled Substances Act
(Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.), or in violation of federal law.
            3.   The commission or attempted commission of any act of
prostitution as defined in Cal. Penal Code § 647(b).
            4.   The manufacture, sale, possession, or use of a firearm in
violation of the Dangerous Weapons Control Law (Cal. Penal Code §§ 12000 et
seq.).
      (4)   For purposes of this chapter, NUISANCE ACTIVITY shall not include
conduct where the person responsible is the victim of a crime and had no
control over the criminal act.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY and RESPONSIBLE PERSONS means, unless otherwise defined,
any person who has titled ownership of the property or structure which is
subject to this chapter, an occupant in control of the property or structure
which is subject to this chapter, a developer, builder, or business operator or
owner who is developing, building or operating a business on the property or in
a structure which is subject to this chapter and/or any person who has control
over the property and allows a violation of this chapter to continue.
   PERSON means natural person, joint venture, partnership, association, club,
company, corporation, business trust, organization, or the manager, lessee,
agent, officer or employee of any of them.
   POINT shall mean a point that is counted against the threshold amount, with
points assigned to the classifications of nuisance activities as set forth in
the definition of “nuisance activity.”
   PREMISES and PROPERTY may be used by this chapter interchangeably and means
and public or private building, lot, parcel, dwelling, rental unit, real estate
or land or portion thereof including property used as a residential or
commercial property.
   RENTAL UNIT means any structure or that part of a structure, including but
not limited to single-family home, room or apartment, which is rented to
another and used as a home residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons.
   THRESHOLD shall be five points.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.04 SCOPE OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all real property,
whether residential, commercial, industrial, improved, or unimproved, within
the boundary of the city.
   (B)   A criminal conviction is not required for establishing the occurrence
of nuisance activity pursuant to this chapter. The occurrence of nuisance
activity may be established by documented evidence that the nuisance activity
was witnessed or responded to by a peace officer or other witness willing to
testify.
   (C)   The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative and additional
to any and all other legal remedies available whether set forth elsewhere in
the Eureka Municipal Code, or in state or federal laws, regulations, or case
law.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.05 AUTHORITY.
   The Chief of Police shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to
designate employees as enforcement officers in conformance with this chapter to
assist with enforcement responsibilities of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, the issuance of administrative citations.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.06 CHRONIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to cause or allow any real
property owned, leased, rented, occupied or controlled by them to generate or
be the subject of greater than the threshold amount of nuisance activity during
any 12-month period.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.07 VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any property within the city which is a chronic nuisance property is
in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies including summary
closure; and
   (B)   Any responsible party who permits property to be a chronic nuisance
property shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies
including any other available remedy such as administrative and civil fines and
criminal prosecution pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.08 WARNING NOTICE.
   When the Chief of Police, or his or her designee(s), receives documentation
that the city has responded to nuisance activities that qualify for at least
three points within a 12-month period, the Chief of Police or his or her
designee(s), may review such documentation to determine whether it describes
the nuisance activities enumerated in the definition of “Nuisance activity” in
§
134.03. Upon such a finding, the Chief of Police, or his or her designee(s),
shall serve or cause to be served written notice upon the responsible parties.
The warning notice shall:
   (A)   Identify the type and specific location of the nuisance activity;
   (B)   Summarize the evidence of the nuisance activity occurring on the
property (including the documented observations of the peace officer or a
witness willing to testify), and (if the property is occupied by a tenant who
is a responsible party) information necessary to prosecute an eviction of that
tenant;
   (C)   Provide the dates on which the nuisance activity was reported to the
city and the dates of any prior responses by the city to nuisance activity on
the property; and
   (D)   Notify all responsible parties of the required corrective actions, if
any, and the date by which such corrective actions must be completed; and
   (E)   Warn the responsible parties that future nuisance activity on or at
the property may cause the city to institute enforcement proceedings to abate
the nuisance activities occurring on the property, and/or impose administrative
fines on any or all responsible parties; and
   (F)   Include a statement describing that if declared a Chronic Nuisance,
the property could be subject to closure for up to one year and civil penalties
and/or fines assessed up to $1,000 per day.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.09 CHRONIC NUISANCE DESIGNATION.
   (A)   When the Chief of Police determines that the threshold amount of
nuisance activity has occurred on any single property within any 12-month
period, a written notice shall be issued to all responsible parties.
   (B)   The notice of designation required by this chapter shall:
      (1)   State that the property constitutes a chronic nuisance property in
violation of this chapter because the threshold amount of nuisance activity has
occurred on the responsible person's property within a 12-month period;
      (2)   Identify the type and specific location of the nuisance activity;
      (3)   Summarize the evidence of the nuisance activity occurring on the
property (including the documented observations of the peace officer or a
witness willing to testify), and (if the property is occupied by a tenant who
is a responsible person) information necessary to prosecute an eviction of that
tenant;
      (4)   Provide the dates on which the nuisance activity was reported to
the Police Department and the dates of any prior responses by the Police
Department to nuisance activity on the property;
      (5)   Notify all responsible persons that they may contact the Chief
within ten days of the date of the notice to schedule a meeting within 30 days
of the date of the notice to develop a plan for voluntary abatement of nuisance
activities at the property;
      (6)   Notify all responsible persons that failure to respond within the
allotted time will result in the property being designated as a Chronic
Nuisance property and that administrative fines will be imposed by the city
pursuant to §
10.36.
   (C)   If the person responsible fails to respond to the notice within the
time prescribed, the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s) may:
      (1)   Issue the person responsible an administrative citation and fine
pursuant to §
10.36, punishable by a fine as adopted by resolution of the City Council. Fines
shall recur with each and every subsequent instance of Chronic Nuisance
Activity at the property; and
      (2)   Refer the matter to the City Attorney for civil or criminal
prosecution and abatement.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.10 VOLUNTARY ABATEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   If the person responsible requests a meeting with the Chief and agrees
to abate the nuisance activity, the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s),
and the person responsible, may negotiate an agreed-upon course of action which
would abate the nuisance activity. This Voluntary Abatement Plan shall be
signed by both parties and shall include:
      (1)   Specific corrective measures to abate nuisance activities at the
property;
      (2)   A reasonable timeframe for completion of corrective measures;
      (3)   Language stating that if all corrective measures are not completed
within the agreed-upon timeframe, or are ineffective at eliminating and
preventing nuisance activities at the property, that the property may at any
time be designated a Chronic Nuisance property subject to fines and/or
abatement. Corrective measures include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Management changes such as hiring an on-site or off-site
property manager, eviction of problem tenants, and adoption of strict
background checks for new occupants;
         (b)   Improvements such as security lighting, cameras, fencing, locked
gates, removal of vegetation, posting of signage and other physical changes
intended to abate nuisance activity;
         (c)   Repair of broken windows, painting, landscaping, removal of junk
and debris, increasing the size and/or frequency of garbage collection service
removal of inoperable vehicles and any other measures intended to correct and
prevent nuisance activities at the property.
   (B)   If a voluntary abatement plan cannot be negotiated, or if the measures
are ineffective at eliminating nuisance activity at the property, the property
shall be designated a Chronic Nuisance property and the matter shall be
forwarded to the City Attorney for enforcement action. Provided, that in the
event the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s) or the City Attorney
determines that the person responsible has taken reasonable steps to abate the
nuisance activity, the City Attorney shall not commence an enforcement action
under this chapter, notwithstanding the continuance of the nuisance activity.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.11 COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION.
   (A)   Once the matter is referred to the City Attorney, the City Attorney
shall immediately review and make a determination to initiate legal action
authorized under this chapter or state statute, or may seek alternative forms
of abatement of the nuisance activity. The City Attorney may initiate legal
action on the chronic nuisance property and seek civil penalties and costs in
court for the abatement of the nuisance.
   (B)   In determining whether a property shall be deemed a chronic nuisance
property and subject to the court's jurisdiction, the city shall have the
initial burden of proof to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the
property is a chronic nuisance property. The city may submit official police
reports and other affidavits outlining the information that led to arrest(s),
and other chronic nuisance activity occurring or existing at the property. The
failure to prosecute an individual, or the fact no one has been convicted of a
crime is not a defense to a chronic nuisance action.
   (C)   Once a court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance, the
court may impose a civil penalty against any or all of the persons responsible
for the property, and may order any other relief deemed appropriate. A civil
penalty may be assessed for no less than $500 and no more than $1,000 per day
for each day the nuisance activity continued to occur following the date of the
original warning by the Chief of Police or his or her designee(s), as described
in §
134.08. In assessing the civil penalty, the court may consider the following
factors, citing to those found applicable:
      (1)   The actions taken by the person responsible to mitigate or correct
the nuisance activity;
      (2)   The repeated or continuous nature of the nuisance activity;
      (3)   The statements of the neighbors or those affected by the nuisance
activity; and
      (4)   Any other factor deemed relevant by the court.
   (D)   The court which determined the property to be a chronic nuisance
property shall also assess costs against the person responsible in the amount
it costs the city to abate, or attempt to abate, the nuisance property.
   (E)   The court shall have jurisdiction of all civil infractions issued
pursuant to this chapter.
   (F)   If the court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the court shall order the property closed and secured against all
unauthorized access, use and occupancy pursuant to §
134.12 below.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.12 SUMMARY CLOSURE.
   (A)   If the court determines the property to be a chronic nuisance
property, the court shall:
      (1)   Order the property closed and secured against all unauthorized
access, use and occupancy for a period of not less than six months and up to
one year, and may impose a civil penalty and costs.
      (2)   Order the property posted with a notice stating that occupants have
30 days to remove belongings prior to the property being closed. The notice
shall state the reasons for the closure and shall give the approximate time and
date of the closure.
      (3)   Authorize the city and its contractors to abate the nuisance by
physically securing the premises against entry. Any abatement costs, civil
penalty and/or costs awarded to the city may be filed as a lien or special
assessment on the property. The city shall file a formal lis pendens notice
when an action for abatement is filed in the court.
      (4)   The court shall retain jurisdiction during any period of closure or
abatement of the property. If necessary, the court may authorize the city and
its contractors to perform additional work as necessary to secure the property
and prevent unauthorized access during the closure period. The costs of any
such activity shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the city from taking any emergency
action for the summary closure of such property when it is necessary to avoid
an immediate threat to public welfare and safety as provided for in this code,
the California Health and Safety Code, California Building Code, or other
applicable laws.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
§ 134.13 SEVERABILITY.
   (A)   If any portion of this chapter, or its application to any person or
circumstances, is held invalid, the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any
other portion thereof, or the application of the provisions to other persons or
circumstances is not affected.
   (B)   If any one or more sections, subsection, or sentences of this chapter
are held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this chapter and the same shall remain in
full force and effect.
   (C)   Finally, that any Ordinance or Resolution or part thereof conflicting
with the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed so far as the same
affects this chapter.
(Ord. 817-C.S., passed 10-20-15)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   AIRPORT ZONING
         
152.   PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATION
         
153.   FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
         
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
         
155.   ZONING REGULATIONS
         
156.   COASTAL ZONING REGULATIONS
         
157.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION
         
158.   CANNABIS
         
159.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Housing Authority
   
150.002   Lot and house numbering
Adoption of Codes
   
150.015   Construction codes adopted
   
150.016   California Building Code adopted
   
150.017   California Residential Code adopted
   
150.018   California Electrical Code adopted
   
150.019   California Mechanical Code adopted
   
150.020   California Plumbing Code adopted
   
150.021   California Energy Code adopted
   
150.022   Reserved
   
150.023   California Historical Building Code adopted
   
150.024   California Fire Code adopted
   
150.025   California Existing Building Code adopted
   
150.026   California Green Building Code adopted
   
150.027   Uniform Housing Code adopted
   
150.028   Permit fees
   
150.029   Board of Appeals
   
150.030   Continuity of previous information
Earthquake Hazard Reduction in Existing Buildings
   
150.065   Purpose
   
150.066   Scope
   
150.067   Definitions
   
150.068   Seismic hazard classification
   
150.069   General requirements
   
150.070   Time limits
   
150.071   Permits
   
150.072   Administration
   
150.073   Adoption of Building Conservation Code
   
150.074   Analysis and design
   
150.075   Review period
   
150.076   Abatement, rehabilitation or demolition
   
150.077   Appeals
   
150.078   Violations; penalty
   
150.079   Severability
Post-Disaster Safety Assessment
   
150.085   Intent
   
150.086   Application of provisions
   
150.087   Definitions
   
150.088   Placards; procedure
   
150.089   Removal or tampering with placard prohibited
   
150.090   Rehabilitation
   
150.091   Duration
Vacant and/or Boarded Buildings
   
150.095   Findings and purpose
   
150.096   Definitions
   
150.097   Owner responsibilities
   
150.098   Monitoring program; purpose and operation
   
150.099   Civil remedy
   
150.100   Appeal
Construction Regulations for the Conversion of Buildings to Live/Work
Occupancies
   
150.105   Purpose and scope
   
150.106   Building permit; certificate of occupancy
   
150.107   Change of occupancy
   
150.108   Mixed occupancy buildings
   
150.109   Occupancy separations
   
150.110   Hazardous materials and operations
   
150.111   Occupant load
   
150.112   Exiting and emergency egress
   
150.113   Stairways
   
150.114   Accessibility for persons with disabilities
   
150.115   Light and ventilation
   
150.116   Smoke detectors and fire protection systems
   
150.117   Uniform and concentrated loads
   
150.118   Mezzanine construction
   
150.119   Sound transmission control
   
150.120   Energy conservation
   
150.121   Plumbing, mechanical and electrical requirements
   
150.122   Unreinforced masonry buildings (URM)
Unsafe Structures; Abatement of Nuisances
   
150.140   Purpose
   
150.141   Findings
   
150.142   Definitions
   
150.143   Application
   
150.144   Code requirements
   
150.145   Responsibility for proper property maintenance
   
150.146   Inspections; right of entry
   
150.147   Authority to issue notice to appear and release citations; arrest
   
150.148   Abatement, repair and demolition fund
   
150.149   Recovery of attorneys’ fees in nuisance abatement actions
   
150.150   Civil actions; private parties
   
150.151   Violations
   
150.152   Immediately dangerous condition; summary abatement authorized
   
150.153   Immediately dangerous condition; definition
   
150.154   Immediately dangerous condition; summary abatement procedure
   
150.155   Immediately dangerous condition; abatement cost recovery
   
150.156   Immediately dangerous building; summary abatement authorized
   
150.157   Immediately dangerous building; definition
   
150.158   Immediately dangerous building; summary abatement procedure
   
150.159   Immediately dangerous building; abatement cost recovery
   
150.160   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; abatement authorized
   
150.161   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; general definitions
   
150.162   Substandard buildings and conditions specified
   
150.163   Public nuisances specified
   
150.164   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; hearing notice
   
150.165   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; service and method of
service of hearing notice
   
150.166   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; filing of hearing notice
   
150.167   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; abatement standards
   
150.168   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; hearings; generally
   
150.169   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; conduct of hearing
   
150.170   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; inspection of property
   
150.171   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; form and contents of
decision; decision final
   
150.172   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; service of the final
decision and order
   
150.173   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; compliance with decision
and order
   
150.174   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; extension of time
   
150.175   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; interference with work
prohibited
   
150.176   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; performance of work
   
150.177   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; liability for costs of
abatement
   
150.178   Substandard buildings and public nuisances; sale of materials
   
150.179   Cost recovery; account of expenses; filing of report; contents
   
150.180   Cost recovery; service of the report and notice of hearing
   
150.181   Cost recovery; making of protests or objections
   
150.182   Cost recovery; nature of protests to be heard
   
150.183   Cost recovery; hearing of protests and confirmation, rejection or
modification of report
   
150.184   Cost recovery; order of abatement hearing officer
   
150.185   Cost recovery; final decision and order; service
   
150.186   Cost recovery; personal obligation
   
150.187   Cost recovery; lien against the property
   
150.188   Cost recovery; special assessment as alternative
   
150.189   Cost recovery; effect of failure to receive notice
   
150.190   Treble costs of abatement
Construction Site Erosion Control
   
150.200   Purpose and intent
   
150.201   Definitions
   
150.202   Applicability
   
150.203   Responsibility for administration
   
150.204   Severability
   
150.205   Regulatory consistency
   
150.206   Ultimate responsibility of discharger
   
150.207   Clearing, grading, excavating, filling
   
150.208   Exemptions
   
150.209   Submission of erosion control permit
   
150.210   Erosion/sediment control devices
   
150.211   Wet season work
   
150.212   Violations
   
150.213   Authority to inspect
   
150.214   Notice of violation
   
150.215   Appeal
   
150.216   Abatement by city
   
150.217   Charging costs of abatements/liens
   
150.218   Acts potentially resulting in a violation of the Clean Water Act and/
or California Porter-Cologne Act
Operation of Hotels and Motels
   
150.300   Purpose
   
150.301   Findings
   
150.302   Applicability
   
150.303   Severability
   
150.304   Definitions
   
150.305   Lodging permit to operate
   
150.306   Classification of hotels by CFS room ratio
   
150.307   Lodging permit; grounds for denial
   
150.308   Appeal process
   
150.309   Lodging permit; revocation
   
150.310   Requirements
   
150.311   Maintenance and housekeeping
   
150.312   Enforcement
Expedited Permit Processing for Electrical Vehicle Charging Stations
   
150.401   Authority
   
150.402   Definitions
   
150.403   Expedited permit processing
   
150.404   Permit application processing
   
150.405   Electronic submittal of permit applications
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Created. A Commission of Housing Authority for the city to supervise,
direct, control, and do all lawful things under the laws of the state for the
erection, maintenance, and destruction of temporary houses to relieve housing
shortages in the city is hereby created to be known as the Housing Authority.
The members of the Housing Authority shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the Council.
('63 Code, § 9-4.01)
   (B)   Membership terms; organization. The members of the Housing Authority
shall be five in number, the first appointments to be as follows: one member
shall serve for one year, one member shall serve for two years, one member
shall serve for three years, and two members shall serve for four years. Their
successors, except those filling unexpired terms, shall be appointed for a term
of four years. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by the expiration of
term, it shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term. The Mayor shall
name the chairperson of the organization upon appointment of the Housing
Authority. The Housing Authority shall organize itself in accordance with
federal and state laws providing for its existence and prescribing its
authority and duties.
('63 Code, § 9-4.02)
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Housing Authority shall have all the powers
granted it by the state and as provided by the laws of the United States and
shall do and perform each and every act prescribed by such laws.
('63 Code, § 9-4.03)
(Ord. 2351, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2428, passed 5-18-48)
§ 150.002 LOT AND HOUSE NUMBERING.
   (A)   Numbering system. All lots and houses in the city shall be numbered.
The Building Inspector shall project the numbers from two base lines. The north
and south base line shall be First Street, and the east and west base line
shall be A Street.
      (1)   Streets intersecting First Street. All streets intersecting First
Street shall be numbered as follows:
   Commencing at the south line of First Street at the point of intersection
with No. 100 on the west side thereof and 101 on the east side thereof, and
numbering thence south, allowing 100 numbers to each block, odd numbers to be
on the east side and even numbers on the west side thereof, numbering one
number for each 12 lineal feet, using numbers from 100 through 199 in the first
block, numbers 200 through 299 in the second block, and so on consecutively
from said base line south to the boundaries of the city. Streets shall be
numbered from the north line of First Street to the water front, commencing
with 99 on the east side thereof and 98 on the west side thereof and decreasing
toward Humboldt Bay, allowing 12 lineal feet for each number.
      (2)   Streets intersecting A Street. All streets intersecting A Street
shall be numbered as follows:
   Commencing at the east line of A Street, at the point of intersection with
No. 1 on the north side thereof and No. 2 on the south side thereof, and
numbering thence east, allowing 100 numbers to each block, odd numbers to be on
the north side and even numbers on the south side thereof, numbering one number
for each 12 lineal feet, using numbers from 1 through 99 in the first block,
numbers 100 through 199 in the second block, and so on consecutively from said
base line east to the boundaries of the city. Streets shall be numbered on the
west side of A Street, running west to the boundary line of the city in the
same manner as on the east side thereof, using even numbers on the north side
and odd numbers on the south side, all numbers on streets east of A Street to
be designated, for example, as No. 41 Grant Street, and all numbers on streets
west of A Street to be designated, for example, as No. 41 W. Grant Street.
      (3)   Other streets.  All other streets shall be numbered in the manner
designated on the official map of numbers, and on all such streets east of A
Street, the even numbers shall be on the west and south sides thereof, and the
odd numbers shall be on the north and east sides thereof, allowing 12 lineal
feet for each number.
(‘63 Code, § 9-5.01)
   (B)   Size of numbers. For other than one- and two-family dwellings and
individual mobile homes, address numbers shall be a minimum of six inches in
height and minimum 3/8 inch stroke width, and for one- and two-family dwellings
in accordance with California Residential Code Section R319.1. Where buildings
are set back from the street, larger numbers may be required. (‘63 Code, § 9-
5.02)
   (C)   Failure to comply with provisions.  Any owner or occupant of any lot
refusing to place the number of the lot over the main entrance of any building
erected thereon, after any owner or occupant has been informed of such number
by the Building Inspector, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (‘63 Code, § 9-
5.03)
(Ord. 220, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2336, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2449, passed 12-7-
48; Am. Ord. 801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am.
Ord. 890-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22) Penalty, see
§
150.999
ADOPTION OF CODES
§ 150.015 CONSTRUCTION CODES ADOPTED.
   An ordinance of the City adopting by reference the 2022 editions of the
California Building Standards Code and related model codes with appendices as
specified, providing minimum standards for the erection, construction,
enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion,
occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, location, design, quality of
materials, operation, installation, replacement, and maintenance of all
buildings, and/or structures; heating, ventilation, cooling, refrigeration
systems; electrical systems; plumbing and drainage systems; signs and solar
energy systems in the city; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor, providing penalties for the violation thereof, as
amended, deleted and/or added to by the provisions of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 9-1.101) (Ord. 347-C.S., passed 11-5-81; Am. Ord. 411-C.S., passed
8-21-84; Am. Ord. 479-C.S., passed 11-3-88; Am. Ord. 511-C.S., passed 5-3-90;
Am. Ord. 549-C.S., passed 9-3-92; Am. Ord. 560-C.S., passed 10-7-93; Am. Ord.
603-C.S., passed 1-16-96; Am. Ord. 605-C.S., passed 3-5-96; Am. Ord. 617-C.S.,
passed 6-3-97; Am. Ord. 630-C.S., passed 6-15-99; Am. Ord. 640-C.S., passed 3-
6-01; Am. Ord. 662-C.S., passed 10-15-02; Am. Ord. 685-C.S., passed 2-2-05; Am.
Ord. 699-C.S., passed 8-16-05; Am. Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761,
passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852- C.S., passed 1-
17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, those certain building codes known
and designated as the California Building Code, 2022 Edition, (Part 2 of Title
24) Volumes 1 and 2, including Chapter 1 Division II Administration and
Appendix J Grading, based on the 2021 International Building Code as published
by the International Code Council, shall become the building codes of the City
of Eureka for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use,
height, area and maintenance of all buildings and/or structures in the city,
except those classified one and two family dwellings or townhouses and
structures accessory thereto. The California Building Code and its appendices
shall be on file for public examination in the office of the Building Official.
   (B)   Amendments to the California Building Code. The California Building
Code is hereby amended as follows:
      Section 502.1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      § 502.1 Address identification. For other than one and two family
dwellings, new and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address
numbers or letters. Each character shall be a minimum 6 inches (152.4 mm) high
and a minimum of 0.5 inches (12.7 mm) wide. They shall be installed on a
contrasting background and be plainly visible from the street or road fronting
the property. Where access is by means of a private road and the building
address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole, or other
approved sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.
      Exception: Existing legible identification.
      Section 502.2 is hereby added to read as follows:
      § 502.2 Address identification for multi-tenant buildings. In multi-
tenant buildings, individual tenant spaces shall be identified with characters
a minimum of 2 inches in height located on the entry door or on the wall at the
strike side of the entry door.
      Exception: Existing legible identification.
      Section 1208.4 is hereby amended to read as follows:
      § 1208.4 Efficiency Dwelling Units.
      1.   The unit shall have a total floor area of not less than 150 square
feet as allowed by HSC Sec. 17958.1. An additional 100 square feet of floor
area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two.
      2.   The unit must have a separate closet.
      3.   The unit must have a kitchen including at least the following: a
sink, food preparation counter, and storage cabinets.
      4.   The unit must have a separate bathroom containing at least the
following: a water closet and bathtub or shower.
      Section 1808.1.4 is hereby added to Chapter 18 to read as follows:
      § 1808.1.4 Minimum floor elevation and site grading requirements. The
ground floor level of all buildings, building enlargements, or extensions of
structures shall be at a minimum elevation of twelve and one-half feet (12.50')
based on City of Eureka Datum. In addition, the site shall be graded to drain
to the adjacent design finish grade of streets or alleyways.
      EXCEPTIONS:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to general areas
protected by dikes, if approved by the Director of Public Works or to areas
where the existing ground elevation exceeds twelve and one-half feet (12.50')
based upon city datum. This section shall not be construed to be applicable to
dikes for individual properties.
      2.   In areas where a setback from property lines is not required and is
not proposed, the ground floor level of all buildings, building enlargements or
extensions of structures may be reduced upon documentation that flooding to the
building and adjacent property as a result of the development will not occur as
prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer and approved by the Director of Public
Works. In no event, however, will the ground floor level be less than an
elevation of eleven feet (11.00') based upon city datum.
      3.   Exceptions may be granted upon documentation of adequate measures to
preclude flooding to the subject property and adjacent properties.
Documentation shall be provided by a Registered Civil Engineer and approved by
the Director of Public Works.
      (Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord.
801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S.,
passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 906-C.S., passed 10-20-20; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed
12-6-22; Am. Ord. 945-C.S., passed 4-4-23)
§ 150.017 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, those certain building codes known
and designated as the California Residential Code, 2022 Edition, (Part 2.5 of
Title 24), including Appendix AH Patio Covers and Appendix AQ Tiny Houses, and
Appendix AZ based on the 2021 International Residential Code as published by
the International Code Council, shall become the building codes of the City of
Eureka for regulating the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use,
height, area and maintenance of all one and two family dwellings or townhouses
and structures accessory thereto in the city. The California Residential Code
and its appendices shall be on file for public examination in the office of the
Building Official.
   (B)   Amendments to the California Residential Code. The California
Residential Code is hereby amended as follows:
      Subsection R401.2.1 is hereby added to Chapter 4 to read as follows:
      § R401.2.1 Minimum Floor Elevation and Site Grading Requirements.  The
ground floor level of all buildings, building enlargements, or extensions of
structures shall be at a minimum elevation of twelve and one-half feet (12.50')
based on City of Eureka Datum. In addition, the site shall be graded to drain
to the adjacent design finish grade of streets or alleyways.
      EXCEPTIONS:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall not apply to general areas
protected by dikes, if approved by the Director of Public Works or to areas
where the existing ground elevation exceeds twelve and one-half feet (12.50')
based upon city datum. This section shall not be construed to be applicable to
dikes for individual properties.
      2.   In areas where a setback from property lines is not required and is
not proposed, the ground floor level of all buildings, building enlargements or
extensions of structures may be reduced upon documentation that flooding to the
building and adjacent property as a result of the development will not occur as
prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer and approved by the Director of Public
Works. In no event, however, will the ground floor level be less than an
elevation of eleven feet (11.00') based upon city datum.
      3.   Exceptions may be granted upon documentation of adequate measures to
preclude flooding to the subject property and adjacent properties.
Documentation shall be provided by a Registered Civil Engineer and approved by
the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S.,
passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 906-C.S., passed
10-20-20; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.018 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Electrical Code, 2022
Edition, (Part 3 of Title 24) based on the 2020 National Electrical Code as
published by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), shall be and
become the Electrical Code of the City of Eureka, regulating all installation,
arrangement, alteration, repair, use and other operation of electrical wiring,
connections, fixtures and other electrical appliances on premises within the
city. The California Electrical Code shall be on file for public examination in
the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.019 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Mechanical Code, 2022
Edition, (Part 4 Title 24) based on the 2021 Uniform Mechanical Code as
published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials
(IAPMO), shall be and become the Mechanical Code of the City of Eureka,
regulating and controlling the design, construction, installation, quality of
materials, location, operation and maintenance of heating, ventilating,
cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators and other miscellaneous heat
producing appliances. The California Mechanical Code shall be on file for
public examination in the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.020 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Plumbing Code, 2022
Edition, (Part 5 of Title 24) based on the 2021 Uniform Plumbing Code as
published by IAPMO, shall be and become the Plumbing Code of the City of
Eureka, regulating erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation,
replacement, maintenance or use of plumbing systems within the city. The
California Plumbing Code shall be on file for public examination in the office
of the Building Official.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.021 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Energy Code, (Part 6 of
Title 24) 2022 Edition, is hereby adopted to provide regulations for energy
efficiency in all structures within the City of Eureka, including additions and
alterations thereto. The California Energy Code shall be on file for public
examination in the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S.,
passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed
12-6-22)
§ 150.022 RESERVED.
§ 150.023 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Historical Building Code,
(Part 8 of Title 24) 2022 Edition, contained in California Building Code Volume
2, is hereby adopted to provide regulations for the preservation, restoration,
rehabilitation, relocation or reconstruction of buildings or properties
designated as qualified historical buildings for properties within the City of
Eureka. The California Historical Building Code shall be on file for public
examination in the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.024 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Fire Code, 2022
Edition, (Part 9 of Title 24) based on the 2018 International Fire Code as
published by the International Code Council, shall be and become the Fire Code
of the City of Eureka, to establish the minimum requirements consistent with
nationally recognized good practices to safeguard the public health, safety and
general welfare from the hazards of fire, explosion or dangerous conditions in
the new and existing buildings, structures, and premises, and to provide safety
and assistance to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency
operations. The California Fire Code shall be on file for public examination in
the office of the Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Amendments to the California Fire Code. Amendments to the 2019
California Fire Code are found and listed in § 92.02.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.025 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the 2022 California Existing Building
Code (Part 10 of Title 24) based on the 2021 International Existing Building
Code as published by the International Code Council, shall become the Existing
Building Code of the City of Eureka. Regulations for the seismic retrofit of
existing buildings in the city shall be as found in Appendix A of the Existing
Building Code. The California Existing Building Code shall be on file for
public examination in the office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed 12-6-22)
§ 150.026 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE ADOPTED.
   Except as provided in this chapter, the California Green Building Standards
Code (CALGreen), (Part 11 of Title 24) 2022 Edition, is hereby adopted to
provide regulations for the preservation, restoration, rehabilitation,
relocation or reconstruction of buildings in the City of Eureka. The California
Green Building Standards Code shall be on file for public examination in the
office of the Building Official.
(Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S.,
passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed 12-3-19; Am. Ord. 940-C.S., passed
12-6-22)
§ 150.027 UNIFORM HOUSING CODE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Housing Code of the International Conference of Building
Officials, 1997 edition, is hereby adopted by reference, with the exception of
any provisions of that Code that conflict with or are less stringent than any
section or sections of the Eureka Municipal Code.
(Ord. 736-C.S., passed 2-3-09; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19)
§ 150.028 PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees are adopted by resolution.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19)
§ 150.029 BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   A Board of Appeals shall be established consisting of five members,
three of whom shall be qualified by experience and training in matters
pertaining to building construction and two of whom that need not be qualified
in matters pertaining to building construction. The members of the Board of
Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The
Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting
its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to
the appellant, with a duplicate copy to the Building Official, and may
recommend to the Council such new legislation as is consistent therewith. The
Building Official, or designee, shall be the Executive Secretary of the Board
of Appeals, except when matters pertaining to an appeal from the provisions of
the California Fire Code are being considered, the Fire Chief of the Humboldt
Bay Fire Joint Powers Authority, or designee, shall serve as the Executive
Secretary of the Board.
   (B)   Any person shall have the right to appeal an action (notice, order,
decision) of the Building or Fire Official to the Board. An application for
appeal of an action of the Building or Fire Official shall be based on a claim
that the intent of this chapter or the rules legally adopted hereunder have
been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply,
or an equally good or better method of construction is proposed. Appeals shall
be filed with the Building Official within 30 days of the action being
appealed. Upon receiving an appeal, the Building Official shall set a date,
place, and time for a hearing on the appeal. This date shall be not less than
ten days and not more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed. The
Building Official shall provide written notice of the time and place of the
hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing to each appellant either by
personal delivery, mail, or email. The Board shall recommend that an appeal or
proposal be granted, modified, or denied within 30 days following the
conclusion of the hearing.
   (C)   Limitations of authority. The Board of Appeals shall have no authority
relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of this Code nor
shall the Board be empowered to waive requirements of this Code.
   (D)   The Board of Appeals shall review triennially the various construction
codes listed in this chapter and the California Fire Code listed in
Chapter 92 of the Eureka Municipal Code together with the later editions and
revisions of these codes as they become available and shall recommend to the
City Council the adoption of such editions or amendments as the Board deems
necessary.
(Ord. 719-C.S., passed 1-15-08; Am. Ord. 761, passed 1-4-11; Am. Ord. 801-C.S.,
passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord. 890-C.S., passed
12-3-19; Am. Ord. 946-C.S., passed 6-6-23)
§ 150.030 CONTINUITY OF PREVIOUS INFORMATION.
   Publications, handouts, applications, notices, or other documents provided
by the city referencing previous editions of codes adopted by the city shall be
deemed to refer to the pertinent section(s) of current editions of the adopted
code.
(Ord. 801-C.S., passed 12-3-13; Am. Ord. 852-C.S., passed 1-17-17; Am. Ord.
890-C.S., passed 12-3-19)
EARTHQUAKE HAZARD REDUCTION IN EXISTING BUILDINGS
§ 150.065 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote public safety and welfare
by reducing the risk of death and injury resulting from the effects of
earthquakes on unreinforced masonry buildings constructed prior to the adoption
and enforcement of Building Codes requiring earthquake resistant design. Such
buildings are widely recognized for sustaining life-hazardous damage, including
partial or complete collapse during moderate to strong earthquakes.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter are intended as minimum standards
for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of
injury and loss of life. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily
entirely prevent injury or loss of life or prevent earthquake damage to
rehabilitated buildings. This subchapter does not require alteration of
existing electrical, plumbing, mechanical or fire safety systems unless they
constitute a hazard to life or property.
   (C)   This subchapter provides systematic procedures and standards for
identification and classification of hazards in unreinforced masonry buildings
based on their present use and condition. Priorities, time periods and
standards are also established under which these buildings are required to be
structurally analyzed and strengthened or demolished.
('63 Code, § 9-7.101) (Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89)
§ 150.066 SCOPE.
   (A)   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to all buildings
constructed or under construction prior to the adoption and enforcement of
earthquake resistant code requirements, or for which a building permit was
issued prior to January 1, 1940, which have unreinforced masonry walls,
foundations, piers or other structural elements.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any solely residential building
containing five or fewer dwelling units; to structures used solely as
warehouses or similar purposes not for human habitation; or to buildings owned
by the state or federal governments.
   (C)   Structures which come within the scope of this subchapter, not
identified and included in the original survey report made as a part of SB547
implementation, shall comply with the requirements of this subchapter. For
these buildings, applicable time limits in accordance with §
150.070 of this subchapter shall begin on the date of notification of the
owner, by the Building Official.
('63 Code, § 9-7.102) (Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89)
§ 150.067 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in this section. Words used in the
singular include the plural, and vice versa. For terms, and the like not
defined herein, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within the
context used in accordance with applicable sections of this chapter.
   COMPLETE/COMPLETION. Successful accomplishment and approval by the Building
Official.
   ESSENTIAL BUILDING. Any building housing a hospital or other medical
facility having surgical or medical treatment areas, fire or police stations,
municipal government public safety or disaster operations or communications
centers.
   HIGH HAZARD BUILDING. Refer to §
150.068.
   LOW HAZARD BUILDING. Refer to §
150.068.
   MEDIUM HAZARD. Refer to §
150.068.
   OCCUPANT LOAD. The occupant load for the entire structure as determined in
accordance with UBC 1002, regardless of degree of actual use.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm, corporation or other entity having legal or
equitable interest in the property, as listed in the records of the Humboldt
County Tax Assessor on the date of adoption of this chapter.
   UBC. The Uniform Building Code (ICBO), as adopted in this code.
   UCBC. The Uniform Code for Building Conservation (ICBO publication #231S00),
as adopted herein.
   UNREINFORCED MASONRY. A masonry element which lacks steel reinforcement.
('63 Code, § 9-7.103) (Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96)
§ 150.068 SEISMIC HAZARD CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   General. The seismic hazard classifications in this section are hereby
established. Each building within the scope of this subchapter shall be placed
in one such classification by the Building Official.
('63 Code, § 9-7.104.1)
   (B)   High hazard building. Any unreinforced masonry building having one or
more of the following conditions present:
      (1)   An occupant load of 300 or more.
      (2)   A foundation, all or part, of unreinforced masonry, including
footings, piers, stemwalls, and the like, which places any part of the mudsill
(or equivalent) of the building 12 inches or more above interior or exterior
grade at any point. All measurements shall be vertical.
      (3)   Wall(s) constructed of unreinforced masonry and 15 feet or more in
height, all or part, measured vertically from the bottom surface of the wall
base (equivalent to sole plate) to the top surface of the wall (equivalent to
top plate).
      (4)   Parapet wall(s) constructed of unreinforced masonry; and 24 inches
or more in height, all or part, measured vertically from the uppermost part of
the parapet to the top surface of the contiguous subroof deck; or in
deteriorated and/or unstable condition, regardless of wall height, as
determined by the Building Official.
      (5)   More than one story in height as determined in accordance with UBC
Section 220.25, including buildings otherwise classified as Low Hazard or
Medium Hazard Buildings.
      (6)   In a physical condition, as determined by the Building Official, or
by the responsible engineer or architect with the concurrence of the Building
Official, to be a hazardous building and dangerous to human life as defined by
UBC 102.
      (7)   An essential building.
('63 Code, § 9-7.104.2)
   (C)   Medium board building. Any one-story unreinforced masonry building,
not classified as a high hazard building, having an occupant load between 100
and 299.
('63 Code, § 9-7.104.3)
   (D)   Low hazard building. Any one-story unreinforced masonry building, not
classified as a high or medium hazard building, having an occupant load of less
than 100.
('63 Code, § 9-7.104.4)
(Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96)
§ 150.069 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Structural analysis of building. Before January 1, 1991, the owner of
each building within the scope of this subchapter shall cause to be submitted
to the Building Department a structural analysis of the building completed by a
civil or structural engineer or architect licensed by the state. Using this
structural analysis as the basis for design, the owner shall obtain the
required permit(s) and shall cause the building to be structurally altered in
accordance with the requirements and time periods of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 9-7.105.1)
   (B)   Change in type of occupancy or use of building.
      (1)   Change in the type of occupancy or use of a building, or portion of
a building, within the scope of this subchapter shall conform to the
requirements established elsewhere in this code.
      (2)   If such change causes the structure to come under a different
seismic hazard classification, the time limits for compliance for that new
classification shall apply, but the date on which the time limits begin shall
not change.
      (3)   If such change causes the structure to come under a seismic hazard
classification for which a time limit has already expired, the application for
permits for the work of the change shall be denied by the Building Official. If
such work is in progress without the benefit of the required permits the
Building Official shall complete enforcement action as specified elsewhere in
this code.
('63 Code, § 9-7.105.2)
(Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 651-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 150.070 TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   Engineering analysis. Owners of each building within the scope of this
subchapter who have not completed an engineering analysis in accordance with §
150.069 of the Eureka Municipal Code shall prepare and submit an engineering
analysis to the Building Department by January 1, 2003.
   (B)   Construction plans and permits. By January 1, 2004, owners of each
building within the scope of this subchapter shall prepare seismic retrofit
construction plans in conformance with the provisions of the 1997 Uniform Code
for Building Conservation and this subchapter, and obtain a seismic retrofit
building permit. Work authorized by the seismic retrofit permit shall be
completed and the permit finaled by January 1, 2005.
   (C)   Progress reports. Building owners shall submit a progress report to
the Building Official no later than January 1, 2003 and annually thereafter.
The report shall include name and phone number of contact person, name and
phone number of architect or engineer of record, proposed project schedule, and
description of work completed to date.
   (D)   Placards. Within 30 days of notification by the Building Official,
building owners who have not complied with any of the time limits established
in §
150.070 shall post a notice in a conspicuous location at each entrance
acceptable to the Building Official. The notice must state the following in
clear bold face type with 36 point minimum size letters:
   WARNING
   This is an unreinforced masonry building.
   This building may be unsafe in the
   event of a major earthquake.
   (E)   Time extension. Any person having record title, equitable or legal
interest in the subject building may request, before the City Council, an
extension of the time limits set forth herein. The City Council may, at its
sole discretion, extend the time required for preparation of upgrading design
or completion of required upgrading work for any period deemed reasonable
provided the following conditions are first met: The circumstances dictating
the need for a time extension and a commitment to complete the required work by
a specified date shall be provided in writing to the City Council by the owner.
(Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 564-C.S., passed 1-6-94; Am. Ord.
651-C.S., passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 687-C.S., passed 5-3-05)
§ 150.071 PERMITS.
   The building owner or his or her agent shall obtain the required permit(s)
prior to commencement of work in accordance with the requirements established
elsewhere in the code, whether the building is to be demolished or altered for
compliance.
('63 Code, § 9-7.107) (Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89)
§ 150.072 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Responsibility. The Building Officials shall be responsible for the
administration of this subchapter. Other city departments shall cooperate
within the extent of their jurisdiction.
('63 Code, § 9-7.108.1)
   (B)   Service of order. The Building Official shall issue a notice and order
to the owner of each building within the scope of this subchapter within 90
days of the adoption of this subchapter. The notice and order shall be served
either personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown in
the records of the Humboldt County Tax Assessor on the date of the adoption of
this subchapter. Proof of normal attempts to deliver such mail, successful or
not, shall be deemed to meet this service requirement.
('63 Code, § 9-7.108.2)
   (C)   Contents of order. The notice and order shall be in writing and shall
specify that the subject building has been determined by the Building Official
to be within the scope of this subchapter; and therefore, is required to comply
with the requirements of this subchapter. The notice and order shall specify
the seismic hazard classification of the building; the owner's alternatives;
the time limits for compliance; and the financial hardship appeals procedure.
('63 Code, § 9-7.108.3)
   (D)   Relief from order. The owner or his/her agent may obtain relief from
the notice and order by submitting to the Building Official proof that the
building is not within the scope of this subchapter. The Building Official
shall verify such proof based on the use of the building. Where such proof is
concerned with the physical structure of the building, the investigative method
shall be described in detail, and such proof shall be certified by a civil or
structural engineer or architect licensed by the state, shall be contained on
the certifier's company letterhead and shall contain the registry stamp and
signature of the certifier. The Building Official shall review such submittals,
and may require additional information to substantiate the relief or exemption.
Interpretations may be appealed in accordance with § 150.017 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 9-7.108.4)
   (E)   Recordation.
      (1)   At the time that the notice and order is served, the Building
Official shall file with the office of the Humboldt County Recorder a
certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this
subchapter, and that the owner thereof has been ordered to have the building
structurally analyzed and altered to comply with this subchapter or demolish
the building.
      (2)   If the building is found not to be within the scope of this
subchapter, or as a result of structural analysis and alteration is found to
comply with this subchapter, or is demolished, the Building Official shall,
within 30 days of this determination, file with the Office of the Humboldt
County Recorder a certificate terminating the status of the subject building or
property as being classified within the scope of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 9-7.108.5)
(Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89)
§ 150.073 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CONSERVATION CODE.
   As published by the International Conference of Building Officials, the
Uniform Code for Building Conservation, Second Printing, copyright 1987, and
subsequent editions of the Uniform Code for Building Conservation, as adopted
by the city, including the Appendix and Guidelines sections, hereinafter called
UCBC, is hereby adopted for use with this subchapter, as amended:
   (A)   Amendment 1. UCBC Chapter 6 is hereby deleted. Qualified Historical
Buildings within the scope of this subchapter may comply with the State
Historical Building Code (SHBC) established under Cal. Admin. Code, Part 8,
Title 24. If this option is chosen, the owner shall provide written notice to
the Building Official prior to accompanying submittal of permit application.
('63 Code, § 9-7.109) (Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 564-C.S.,
passed 1-6-94; Am. Ord. 651-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 150.074 ANALYSIS AND DESIGN.
   (A)   General. Every building within the scope of this subchapter shall be
analyzed and altered to resist seismic forces in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 9-7.110.1)
   (B)   Information required on plans.
      (1)   General. The owner shall cause to be submitted to the Building
Department the necessary number of complete sets of plans and supporting
documentation from the work proposed in accordance with requirements of this
subchapter. In addition to the required seismic structural analysis, the
licensed engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the
building shall determine and record on the submitted plans the information
required by this subchapter, and shall include his or her state registry seal
(engineers) or number (architects) and signature in accordance with the State
Business and Professional Code.
      (2)   Existing construction. The following information shall be included
on or with the submitted plans, for all structural elements related to the
seismic retrofit:
         (a)   An overall description of the subject structure, listing and
describing specific conditions which constitute or contribute to structural
hazards, problems, questions, and the like, and in each case, details of the
necessary repairs and alterations.
         (b)   The type(s), description, dimensions and condition of the
existing foundation of the building, and necessary repairs and alterations.
         (c)   The type(s), description and dimensions of existing walls, and
necessary repairs and alterations.
         (d)   The size(s), spacing(s) and span(s) of floor and roof members,
and necessary repairs and alterations.
         (e)   The extent, type and condition of existing wall anchorage to
floors and roof, and necessary repairs and alterations.
         (f)   The extent, type and condition of parapet walls and their
connection to walls and roof, and necessary repairs and alterations.
         (g)   Completed accurately dimensioned floor plans showing the use of
all affected rooms and spaces.
         (h)   Masonry wall elevations with dimensioned openings, corbels,
piers, wall thickness(es) and height(s).
         (i)   Extent, type, size, condition and adequacy of headers, lintels,
and the like, over openings in masonry bearing walls, and necessary repairs and
alterations.
         (j)   The location and extent of cracks or damaged portions of masonry
walls, parapets, and the like, and necessary repairs and alterations.
         (k)   The condition of mortar joints throughout, whether pointing is
required, and the extent of this need.
         (l)   Where use of existing materials is proposed in the structural
design, and established design values acceptable to the Building Official do
not exist, in-plate testing of such materials shall be performed by an approved
special inspector in accordance with UBC Section 1701. The methodology and
results of such tests shall be submitted as part of a special inspection report
with the permit application. The Building Official shall approve in advance the
number and location of such tests.
('63 Code, § 9-7.110.2)
(Ord. 504-C.S., passed 11-21-89; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96)
§ 150.075 REVIEW PERIOD.
   Council shall review this subchapter on January 1, 2003 and every two years
thereafter, to ascertain whether the subchapter is in compliance with current
state law, and to verify that the mandates of the chapter are being complied
with by the owners of unreinforced masonry buildings subject to this
subchapter.
('63 Code, § 9-7.111) (Ord. 564-C.S., passed 1-6-94; Am. Ord. 651-C.S., passed
2-5-02)
§ 150.076 ABATEMENT, REHABILITATION OR DEMOLITION.
   (A)   Generally. Buildings subject to the requirements of this subchapter,
which do not meet the requirements of this subchapter, shall be abated by
rehabilitation, repair or demolition in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Rehabilitation. Designated historical structures, when rehabilitated,
remodeled, repaired or upgraded, shall comply with the provisions of the State
Historical Building Code and the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the
Treatment of Historic Properties.
   (C)   Demolition. Buildings subject to the requirements of this subchapter,
which do not meet the requirements of this subchapter, may be abated by
demolition. Prior to obtaining a demolition permit for the demolition of a
designated historic structure and/or a structure that qualifies for inclusion
on the California Register of Historic Resources, the owner/applicant must
comply with all local, state and federal rules, regulations and policies
pertaining to the demolition of a historic resource, including, but not limited
to: City of Eureka Municipal Code; California Environmental Quality Act; and
the California Coastal Act. The owner/applicant may need to demonstrate, to the
city's satisfaction, that a structure to be demolished is not a historic
resource and/or a structure that qualifies for inclusion on the California
Register of Historic Resources.
   (D)   Substandard buildings, hazardous and dangerous conditions. Substandard
buildings, hazardous and dangerous conditions which are not abated within the
time limits set forth in EMC §
150.070 shall be considered a public nuisance and a dangerous building and
shall be vacated and/or abated in accordance with the provisions of EMC §
150.043. In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the City Council may
cause any building not abated within the time limits set forth in EMC § 150.070
to be vacated, strengthened, repaired, rehabilitated, remodeled, demolished or
upgraded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and place a lien on
the property for all costs incurred in accordance with the provisions of the
EMC §§
150.046 through
150.049.
(Ord. 651-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 150.077 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person having record title, equitable or legal interest in the
subject building may appeal any notice, order, decision, determination or
action made in the administration of this subchapter to the City Council;
provided, that the appeal is made in writing and filed with the Building
Official with 60 days from the date of service of the notice, order, decision,
determination or action by the Building Officer. However, if the building or
structure is in such a condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the
life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is
ordered vacated and is properly posted, such appeal shall be filed within ten
days from the date of service of the notice and order that the building or
structure presents an immediate danger.
   (B)   The written appeal shall contain the following:
      (1)   A heading in the words: "To the City Council of the City of
Eureka";
      (2)   The names of the appellants named in the appeal;
      (3)   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of the
appellants in the land and/or building involved;
      (4)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific
order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support
the contentions of the appellants;
      (5)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief
sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should
be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside;
      (6)   The submittal of any documents, sworn statements or other written
material claimed to have value on the contentions made in support of the
appeal;
      (7)   The signature of all parties named as appellants and their mailing
addresses;
      (8)   The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at
least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
   (C)   Upon receipt of an appeal filed pursuant to the above requirements,
the Building Official shall present it a regular meeting of the City Council
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the appeal or other reasonable time
as determined by the Building Official. Failure to appeal will constitute a
waiver of all rights to an administrative hearing and determination of the
matter.
(Ord. 651-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 150.078 VIOLATION, PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who or which violates any provision of this
subchapter, or any lawful order thereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Such
misdemeanors are punishable as provided by the general law of this state. The
city may seek injunctive relief on behalf of the public to enjoin a building
owner in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 651-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 150.079 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this
subchapter is for any reason held to be invalid and/or unconstitutional by a
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of this subchapter. The City Council hereby declares
that it would have passed and adopted this subchapter and each of the
provisions thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the
provisions be declared invalid and/or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 651-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
POST-DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT
§ 150.085 INTENT.
   This subchapter establishes standard placards and procedures to be used to
indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural
or manmade disaster. This subchapter further authorizes the Building
Department, Engineering Department, and the Department of Public Works,
authorized representatives of those departments, and volunteer Registered
Disaster Service Workers to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to
a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
§ 150.086 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter are applicable to all buildings and
structures of all occupancies regulated by the city following the declaration
of a local emergency by the City Council following any natural or manmade
disaster. The City Council may extend the provisions as necessary.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
§ 150.087 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED DISASTER SERVICE WORKER. A person registered with either the
California Building Officials (CALBO) or the State Office of Emergency Services
(OES), having completed training in the procedures of ATC-20, “PROCEDURES FOR
POST EARTHQUAKE SAFETY EVALUATION OF BUILDINGS,” as developed by the Structural
Engineers Association of California (SEAOC).
   SAFETY ASSESSMENT. A visual, nondestructive examination of a building or
structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy
following a natural or manmade disaster.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
§ 150.088 PLACARDS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Placards. The following are verbal descriptions of the official
jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued
occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached.
      (1)   “INSPECTED - Lawful Occupancy Permitted” to be posted on any
building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found.
This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or
structure.
      (2)   “RESTRICTED USE - Entry, Occupancy and Lawful Use Restricted as
Noted Below” is to be posted on each building or structure that has been
damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the
continued occupancy.
      (3)   “UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building
or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat
to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be
entered under any circumstance unless authorized by the Building Official. This
placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual
who posts this placard will note, in general terms, the type of damage
encountered.
      (4)   “AREA UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy Area Posted” is to be posted
at the perimeter of an area where existing particular physical conditions
within an immediate area of a building or structure are deemed unsafe by the
observations of qualified personnel. “AREA UNSAFE” placards may be supplemented
with red, “CAUTION - DO NOT CROSS” flagging placed to cordon off the area of
concern.
      (5)   A “Rapid Evaluation Assessment Form” is to be used for the initial,
immediate and rapid evaluation of all required structures within the
jurisdiction of the city.
      (6)   A “Detailed Evaluation Assessment Form” is to be employed when
either the complexity of a building or structure, or the inability at the time
of the rapid evaluation to fully assess all potential life-safety damage,
requires a more thorough evaluation of the building or structure.
   (B)   Procedure. This ordinance number, the name of the department, the
address of the department and the telephone number shall be permanently affixed
to each placard.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
§ 150.089 REMOVAL OR TAMPERING WITH PLACARD PROHIBITED.
   Once attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed,
altered, or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the
department or upon written notification from the department.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.090 REHABILITATION.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the building or structure owner to
submit plans to the Building Department for the repair or rehabilitation of
damage caused by a disaster. These plans are to be submitted within 30 days of
notification by the department that rehabilitation is required.
   (B)   Plans submitted for buildings or structures other than single-family
residential, shall require the signature and stamp of an engineer registered
and licensed to practice in the state.
   (C)   During the 30-day period following notification, building permits and
plan check fees shall be waived for repair or rehabilitation of those buildings
or structures stated in the notification. Submittal for permits after the 30-
day period shall be subject to all fees applicable at the time.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
§ 150.091 DURATION.
   (A)   All repairs or rehabilitations for which a no fee permit is issued
shall be completed within 180 days from the date of the permit was issued.
   (B)   Failure to comply with the time frame indicated may cause the building
or structure to be classified as hazardous and therefore a nuisance, and abated
as such.
(Ord. 586-C.S., passed 2-7-95)
Penalty, see § 150.999
VACANT AND/OR BOARDED BUILDINGS
§ 150.095 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds as follows: Vacant buildings are a major cause and
source of blight in residential and nonresidential neighborhoods, especially
when the owner of the building fails to actively maintain and manage the
building to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood.
Vacant buildings, substandard or unkempt buildings, and long-term vacancies
discourage economic development and dampen the appreciation of property values.
Vacant buildings are potential fire hazards that can jeopardize the ability of
owners of neighboring property to secure or maintain affordable fire insurance.
It is the responsibility of property ownership to prevent owned property from
becoming a burden to the neighborhood and community and a threat to the public
health, safety, or welfare. One vacant building that is not actively maintained
and managed can be the cause of spreading blight. Vacant buildings are also a
potential source of much needed housing, and the City Council encourages
property owners to return vacant buildings to useful purposes whenever
possible. It is the purpose and intent of the City Council, through the
adoption of this ordinance, to define the responsibilities of owners of, and to
establish registration and monitoring programs for, vacant commercial,
industrial and residential buildings and properties.
(Ord. 956-C.S., passed 9-3-24)
§ 150.096 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VACANT BUILDING. A building, structure, unit, or space intended for lawful
occupancy but which is without a lawful resident or occupant or which is not
being put to a lawful commercial, residential or industrial use, and which may
be unoccupied and unsecured; unlawfully occupied and/or occupied and secured by
boarding or other similar means; unoccupied and a dangerous structure; or
unoccupied, with city municipal code or nuisance violations extant.
(Ord. 956-C.S., passed 9-3-24)
§ 150.097 OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The owner of a vacant building must actively maintain and monitor the
building. Active maintenance and monitoring must include:
      (1)   Maintenance and appropriate watering and care of landscaping and
plant materials;
      (2)   Maintenance of the exterior of the building, including but not
limited to, paint and finishes, in good condition;
      (3)   Regular removal of all trash, debris, and graffiti;
      (4)   Maintenance of the building or structure in continuing compliance
with applicable codes and regulations.
   (B)   No person may allow a building or structure they own or control that
is designed for human, industrial, or commercial use or occupancy to stand
vacant for more than ninety days unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair
or rehabilitation, or a permit for demolition, and the owner is progressing
diligently to complete the repair, rehabilitation, or demolition, as evidenced
by commencement and continuation of permitted work and related inspections;
      (2)   The building is being actively maintained and monitored as required
by division (A) above, and is actively, and in good faith, being offered for
sale, lease, or rent.
   (C)   Owners experiencing exceptional, demonstrable, and specific hardships
or circumstances may present written evidence of such, in the form of a
declaration by the owner of owner's representative, to the Public Works
Director or designee. If such circumstances or hardships are convincingly
demonstrated, the owner may be granted up to a one-time, six-month stay of
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Ord. 956-C.S., passed 9-3-24)
§ 150.098 MONITORING PROGRAM; PURPOSE AND OPERATION.
   (A)   Because of the potential economic and public health, welfare, and
safety problems caused by vacant buildings, the city needs to monitor vacant
buildings, so that these buildings do not become attractive nuisances, are not
used by trespassers, are properly maintained both inside and out, and do not
become a blighting influence in the neighborhood.
   (B)   There is a substantial cost to the city for monitoring vacant
buildings and that cost should be borne by the owners of the vacant buildings.
   (C)   The Public Works Director or designee is responsible for administering
a program for identifying and monitoring the maintenance of all vacant
buildings or structures in the city.
   (D)   The purpose of the monitoring program is:
      (1)   To promptly identify buildings that become vacant.
      (2)   To order vacant buildings that are open and accessible to be
secured against unlawful entry.
      (3)   To initiate appropriate proceedings against any vacant building
owners to prevent buildings from becoming or remaining substandard or a public
nuisance.
      (4)   To ensure and encourage buildings be used for the highest and best
purpose and to promote a flourishing community.
   (E)   Notice of vacant building:
      (1)   Upon discovery of a potential vacant building by a code enforcement
officer or receipt of a complaint about a vacant or boarded building from any
source, the city may, after inspection, determine that the building or
structure should be classified as a vacant building.
      (2)   If the city determines that a building or portion of a building may
be classified as a vacant building under this subchapter, the city will
ascertain the identity of, and contact the owner or agent of the owner, and
advise the owner in writing that the building or structure is vacant and advise
as to which measures must be taken to secure and maintain the vacant building.
      (3)   If the city determines that a building or structure is vacant it
may cause a "Notice of Vacant Building" to be recorded in the chain of the
title to the property, which notice will reference the provisions of this
subchapter and disclose that administrative penalties and costs may likewise be
assessed against the owner and property if the building or structure is allowed
to remain in a vacant condition. Upon correction of any unlawful vacancy
conditions on the property and satisfaction of any penalties or assessments on
the property, the city will record a rescission or cancellation of the Notice
of Vacant Building.
      (4)   If the owner fails to respond within sixty days of the written
notice, the vacant building will constitute a nuisance, and the city may,
without further notice, and by any lawful means, abate the nuisance.
      (5)   The owner will be liable for the costs incurred by the city for
inspections or to secure the building or structure, including costs incurred to
ascertain ownership of the property and obtain title information, prepare
notices, and any and all administrative costs together with actual labor or
material cost or expense incurred by the city to secure the vacant building and
otherwise abate the nuisance. If the owner does not reimburse the city within
60 days of being billed therefore, the city will pursue a lien against the
property for all the expenses incurred by the city.
   (F)   Vacant building plan and timetable:
      (1)   The owner of any vacant building must submit to the city for
approval a vacant building plan. The vacant building plan and timetable must
include, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   A description of the premises, including the address thereof;
         (b)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of all owners with a
right of control over the vacant building or structure;
         (c)   The names and addresses of all known lien holders and other
parties with an ownership interest in the vacant building or structure;
         (d)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner's property
manager or agent, and stating whether the property manager or agent has the
authority to act independently on the owner's behalf to repair or maintain the
property;
         (e)   The period of time the building is expected to remain vacant;
         (f)   If the owner plans on demolishing the building, the date the
building is scheduled for demolition, and whether or not all permits have been
issued for the demolition;
         (g)   If the owner plans on returning the building to a lawful
occupancy and use, the estimated date for returning the building to a lawful
occupancy and use, and a list of improvements necessary to return the vacant
building to a lawful occupancy and use, and a timeline for obtaining all
necessary permits to affect the listed improvements;
         (h)   A plan for regular inspection and maintenance of the building
during the period of vacancy;
         (i)   Measures the owner will employ to secure the building to prevent
access by trespassers, including, at a minimum, the installation and/or repair
and maintenance of adequate windows and doors, as well as at least one of the
following:
            1.   Installation and maintenance of adequate locks for windows and
doors.
            2.   Employment of security officers to the satisfaction of the
city.
            3.   Installation, operation, and monitoring of an electronic
security system, which monitors doors and windows by glass breakage or motion
sensors, and a method of responding to alarms from the electronic security
system, other than sole reliance on the City's Police Department.
            4.   Any other methods as specified by the city.
         (j)   Measures the owner will employ to monitor and inspect the
property on a weekly basis. The weekly monitoring and inspection must be
performed by the owner, property manager, or agent of the owner with full
authority to maintain and make repairs to the property on a weekly basis.
         (k)   Measures the owner will take to ensure that the building returns
to the market as either livable or commercial space as soon as practicable.
      (2)   Any and all repairs required to implement the plan and timetable
must comply with all applicable City of Eureka ordinances, codes, and
regulations. The owner will be required to notify the city in writing of any
changes in information supplied within ten days of the change.
      (3)   In the event that the owner fails to comply with the vacant
building plan and timetable, the city will notify the owner or authorized agent
in writing of its intent to institute appropriate administrative, civil or
other legal action to secure compliance with this subchapter.
   (G)   Monitoring fee imposed. Any vacant building, as defined in this
subchapter will be subject to a quarterly monitoring fee to recover the city's
regulatory costs to monitor the status of the vacant building. The monitoring
fee will be set by resolution of the City Council. The monitoring fee will be
assessed until such time as the building or structure is no longer vacant and
will likewise be applicable even when a vacant building plan and timetable are
in effect. The monitoring fee will be imposed upon the initial determination
that the building is vacant. The fee will thereafter be billed to the owner on
a quarterly basis until such time as the building or structure is no longer
vacant or boarded.
   (H)   Code enforcement response fee. In addition to the monthly monitoring
fee imposed under this section, the city also establishes a further and
separate enforcement response fee for actual costs incurred by the city to
respond to or abate substandard or blighted conditions existing in or about the
property upon which the vacant building is located. Such costs may include, but
not be limited to, personnel costs involved with inspecting or responding to
calls for service at the property, personnel costs involved in abating the
substandard or blighted conditions existing on the property, costs of any
materials or supplies either purchased or supplied by the city in connection
with the abatement of any substandard or blighted condition in or about the
property, costs of any contracted services, including the costs of materials,
supplies, and labor provided by the city's contractor, if any, costs of
procuring title or ownership information concerning or related to the property,
as well as any other incidental enforcement costs incurred by the city in
connection with remedying the substandard or blighted conditions existing on
the property. The amount of the code enforcement response fee will be based on
actual personnel, materials, and contract costs plus a 10% administrative fee.
(Ord. 956-C.S., passed 9-3-24)
§ 150.099 CIVIL REMEDY.
   (A)   Administrative costs and penalties.
      (1)   Any owner of a vacant building which remains vacant in violation of
this subchapter for more than 60 days will be liable for an administrative
penalty of $1,000 per month per building.
      (2)   If an owner remains in violation of this subchapter for more than a
year, the monthly administrative penalty imposed upon any owner pursuant to
this section will be $5,000 per month per building.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   If the property is specially assessed, the assessment may be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property
taxes are collected and will be subject to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale as in the case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real
property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of
real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment.
      (2)   The city may also cause a notice of nuisance abatement lien to be
recorded against the property. The notice must, at a minimum, identify the
record owner or possessor of the property and set forth the last known address
of the record owner or possessor, the date on which the penalty was imposed, a
description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount of the
penalty or costs assessed against the property.
(Ord. 956-C.S., passed 9-3-24)
§ 150.100 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person receiving a Notice of Vacant Building under §
150.098 may appeal the determination of the Public Works Director or designee
to the City Manager. A notice of appeal must be received by the City Manager
within 30 calendar days from the date of the Notice of Vacant Building. Hearing
on the appeal before the City Manager or designee will take place within 15
days from the date of the city's receipt of the notice of appeal. A decision
after appeal will be in writing and delivered via first class mail within ten
days of the hearing.
   (B)   An owner aggrieved by the decision of the of the City Manager may
appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 15 days after the service or mailing of the determination of the City
Manager after the hearing described above. The City Clerk will fix the time and
place for a public hearing before the City Council and promptly notify the
owner in writing at the address indicated on the notice of appeal.
(Ord. 956-C.S., passed 9-3-24)
CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS FOR THE CONVERSION OF BUILDINGS TO LIVE/WORK
OCCUPANCIES
§ 150.105 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide alternative standards to the
model codes, pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17958.11, that will
allow for the conversion of buildings or portions thereof to joint living and
working quarters (R/B) for artists, artisans and similarly situated
individuals, and to assure that the safety of individuals and property are
protected by the addition of certain safety features, and restricting the types
of work activities performed within the units.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.106 BUILDING PERMIT; CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Building permit.
      (1)   Plans for the conversion of existing buildings to live/work
occupancies shall be submitted to the city for review. Each plan shall show, in
addition to the work area, a kitchen in each live/work unit with a range or
stove, and a kitchen sink with hot and cold running water. A bathroom with a
water closet, lavatory and tub or shower shall also be shown.
      (2)   The Building Official shall review plans for compliance with all
currently adopted codes except for those items specifically addressed by this
subchapter. Such plans may also be reviewed by other departments within the
city for verification of compliance with other codes and laws. If the Building
Official finds that the plans comply with adopted codes and other laws and
ordinances, and the fees have been paid, the Building Official shall issue a
permit therefor to the applicant.
   (B)   Certificate of occupancy. After a final inspection has been performed
and the Building Official has approved the project for occupancy, a certificate
of occupancy shall be issued containing the occupant's name, the unit address
and/or number and the type of activity that will take place in the unit.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95)
§ 150.107 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The conversion of a building or a portion of a building to live/work
occupancies shall not be considered a change of use for the purpose of
determining allowable height, number of stories or floor area of a building,
providing the outer envelope of the building is not enlarged.
   (B)   The conversion of a building or a portion of a building to live/work
occupancies shall be considered a change of use for all other purposes.
   (C)   The conversion of a building from live/work to other occupancies shall
be reviewed by the Building Official prior to such conversion. These types of
conversions shall comply with the adopted codes for the types of occupancies
desired.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95)
§ 150.108 MIXED OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   In mixed occupancy buildings that contain live/work occupancies, the
area and height limitations shall be determined as for B occupancies from
Tables 504.3 and 506.2 of the currently adopted edition of the California
Building Code.
   (B)   A, B-1, E-1, E-2, H, or I occupancies shall not be allowed as a part
of a live/work occupancy.
   (C)   A-3 assembly areas for between 50 and 300 people, shall be allowed in
buildings that contain live/work areas, providing the A-3 is separated from the
live/work by a two-hour fire-resistive occupancy separation, and the A-3 has
direct access to a street or public way, or to a stair enclosure or horizontal
exit way, that leads to a street or public way.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord.
964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.109 OCCUPANCY SEPARATIONS.
   Live/work occupancies shall be separated from other occupancies including B
and R, as set forth in the currently adopted edition of the California Building
Code Table 508.4 for B or R-1, whichever is more restrictive. Live/work
occupancies shall be separated from other live/work occupancies. No occupancy
separation shall have less than a one hour fire-resistive rating. An occupancy
separation need not be provided within individual live/work units.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord.
964-C.S., passed 8-19-25) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.110 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND OPERATIONS.
   (A)   If open flame is permitted to be used for art work by the Fire
Marshal, no more than two, one-quart DOT cylinders of compressed gas or
flammable liquid may be stored in the live/work unit. Exempt amounts of
hazardous materials may be stored in control areas per Table 5003.1.1(1) of the
currently adopted edition of the California Fire Code. No more than two control
areas will be allowed in any live/work unit. These control areas shall be
approved as to the construction and location by the Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Flammable liquids, welding, open flame work or similar hazardous
operations are not permitted in live/work occupancies without the express
written approval of the Fire Marshal. Where this type of activity is allowed,
the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be required.
Installation of sprinklers shall be per Section 903 of the currently adopted
California Fire Code and NFPA 13.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord.
964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.111 OCCUPANT LOAD.
   (A)   The occupant load for individual live/work occupancies shall be the
same as for dwellings. The maximum occupant load for live/work units shall be
49 people and shall be posted as such.
   (B)   The occupant load for buildings containing live/work as well as other
occupancies shall be determined by adding the occupant loads of the various
occupancies.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25) Penalty, see
§
150.999
§ 150.112 EXITING AND EMERGENCY EGRESS.
   (A)   The occupant load factor for purposes of establishing exit
requirements from live/work units shall not exceed 300 square feet per person.
If the unit is 3,000 square feet or more in area, at least two exits are
required. The location of each live/work unit in a multi-unit structure in an
LW, Live Work Combining Zone (refer to planning codes) shall be marked by a
plaque, diagram or other device visible to emergency personnel from the
exterior of the structure containing the unit(s). The location of the plaque,
or the like, shall be approved by the Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Emergency egress shall be provided from the sleeping area of the live/
work unit as per Section 1031 of the currently adopted California Building
Code.
   (C)   Exiting from other occupancies and from the building shall be as
required by the California Building Code.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord.
964-C.S., passed 8-19-25) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.113 STAIRWAYS.
   Stairways within a live/work unit shall be as required by the California
Building Code for dwellings; however, where a mezzanine area is less than 400
square feet, the stairway incline may be a maximum of 60°. A ladder is
acceptable. Stairways shall be provided with handrails in accordance to the
California Building Code. Stairways other than within the live/work units shall
meet all the requirements of the California Building Code for other than
dwelling units.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.114 ACCESSIBILITY FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   Accessibility for the disabled to buildings and units shall be provided in
accordance with California State Building Regulations, Title 24.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95)
§ 150.115 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   Natural light shall be provided to a live/work unit by means of
exterior glazed openings with an area equal to 8% of the floor space of the
living area. Ventilation shall be provided by operable exterior openings with
and area equal to 4% of the floor area.
   (B)   The work area of the live/work unit shall be provided with light and
ventilation as per the California Building Code for B Occupancies and may
include mechanical ventilation.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.116 SMOKE DETECTORS AND FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Live/work occupancies shall be provided with smoke and carbon monoxide
detectors per the currently adopted edition of the California Building Code
Sections 907 and 915 and the State Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Approved automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be required in
buildings newly constructed live/work buildings.
   (C)   Approved manual and automatic fire alarm systems shall be required in
all newly constructed live/work buildings.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 608-C.S., passed 6-18-96; Am. Ord.
964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.117 UNIFORM AND CONCENTRATED LOADS.
   (A)   Floor loads shall not exceed design loads and in no case exceeds 50
pounds per square foot (PSF) with a concentrated load of 2,000 pounds. All
buildings shall have a structural analysis to comply with Section 1604 of the
currently adopted edition of the California Building Code for building
conservation prepared by a licensed engineer or architect and submitted to the
Building Official. Mezzanines are to be considered in the analysis of the
loads.
   (B)   Testing of existing mezzanines, when required by the Building
Official, shall be performed at twice the live load plus the dead load for a
time period of at least 12 hours and the deflection shall not exceed that
permitted by the California Building Code.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.118 MEZZANINE CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The mezzanine area shall include any structure over 30 inches above
the floor and shall not exceed one-third of the floor area of the live/work
room in which it is placed. Habitable space above or below a mezzanine shall
have head room clearance of seven feet from the floor. Where exposed beam
ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches on center, ceiling height
shall be measured to the bottom of the members. Where exposed beam ceiling
members are spaced at 48 inches or more on center, ceiling height shall be
measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members, provided the
bottom of the members are not less than six feet eight inches above the floor.
   (B)   Existing and proposed mezzanines in live/work units shall be
constructed and supported in accordance with the structural requirements of the
California Building Code. A guardrail at least 42 inches in height shall be
provided. Guardrails for storage portions of the mezzanine may be removable for
access for only one portion not exceeding 48 inches in width. Mezzanines and
their supports (if not a separation wall), raised floors, raised platforms,
seating platforms, ladders, stairs, guardrails, posts, enclosures and
partitions may be wood construction and will not change the classification of
the building.
   (C)   Finish materials used on the mezzanine shall not exceed Class III
materials for flame spread and smoke density.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.119 SOUND TRANSMISSION CONTROL.
   Wall and floor ceiling assemblies separating live/work units from each other
and from public areas, shall provide airborne sound insulation to meet a sound
transmission class of STC 50 (45 if field tested), and floor-ceiling assemblies
shall be designed to meet impact insulation (IIC) of 50.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95)
§ 150.120 ENERGY CONSERVATION.
   Any changes in the building envelope or heating and lighting loads are
subject to compliance with the currently adopted Triennial Edition of Title 24
for energy conservation.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.121 PLUMBING, MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Plumbing requirements. All plumbing within live/work units shall
comply with the current adopted California Plumbing Code.
   (B)   Mechanical requirements.
      (1)   All heat producing appliances shall be installed as per the
currently adopted edition of the California Mechanical Code and according to
their listing.
      (2)   An approved heating appliance shall be provided in each live/work
unit capable of heating the interior of the unit to 68° at three feet above the
floor.
   (C)   Electrical requirements.
      (1)   The electric requirements for the live/work units shall be
calculated at four watts per square foot plus eight KW for an electric stove,
if one is to be installed.
      (2)   The use of hot plates for cooking purposes in lieu of a stove or
range, shall be at the discretion of the Fire Marshal. If so allowed, a 20-amp
circuit shall be provided with a single dedicated receptacle. This to be
installed adjacent to a metal shelf or table on which the hot plate will be
located. A metal wall guard shall be installed covered by not less than No. 28
US Standard gauge steel over 5/8-inch type X gypsum wallboard.
      (3)   In all new walls of live/work units receptacle outlets shall be
provided so that no point along the floor line in any wall space is more than
six feet measured horizontally from an outlet along the wall. All receptacles
in kitchens and bathrooms shall be protected by ground fault circuit
interrupters.
      (4)   Basic minimum power demand shall be based on a 30-ampere three-wire
120/240 volt feeder at 7200 watts with permitted diversities. Power
requirements exceeding the minimum shall meet the current adopted edition of
the California Electrical Code.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95; Am. Ord. 964-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 150.122 UNREINFORCED MASONRY BUILDINGS (URM).
   (A)   Buildings that are listed as being unreinforced masonry buildings and
have not been retrofitted, shall have permanent signs posted at all entrances
to the building stating:
   “This is an unreinforced masonry building, unreinforced masonry buildings
may be unsafe in the event of a major earthquake.”
   (B)   Retrofitting of unreinforced masonry buildings shall be accomplished
in the time frames and in the manner set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 595-C.S., passed 8-15-95)
UNSAFE STRUCTURES; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
§ 150.140 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted for the purpose of defining those conditions of
real property in the City which constitute nuisances; and for the further
purpose of establishing just, equitable and practicable methods for ordering
the abatement of a nuisance; authorizing City personnel to undertake the work
necessary to abate such nuisance in the event of noncompliance with such
abatement order; levying an assessment against the owner of the property on
which such nuisance abatement work was performed in the amount of City’s
abatement costs; and either causing a lien to be recorded against such property
in the amount of such assessment costs or causing such assessment to be added
to the county assessment rolls and collected at the same time and in the same
manner as property taxes.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.141 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds as follows:
   (A)   That there are numerous buildings, structures and other conditions on
or pertaining to real property located in the City which constitute nuisances
as defined in this subchapter;
   (B)   That the continued existence of such nuisances is injurious to the
public health, safety and welfare;
   (C)   That abatement of such nuisances in the manner provided by this
subchapter is a proper exercise of the City’s police powers and is specifically
authorized by Cal. Gov’t Code (§ 38771 et seq.); and
   (D)   That abatement of such nuisances in the manner provided by this
subchapter is reasonable and affords to the owner of the property on which the
nuisance is located all of the due process rights guaranteed by the federal and
state constitutions.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.142 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Eureka.
   CITY ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS. The employees of the City of Eureka who are
designated pursuant to this subchapter and the Eureka Municipal Code to enforce
the laws of the City.
   EMC. The Eureka Municipal Code.
(Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-2020)
§ 150.143 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this subchapter apply generally to all property throughout
the City wherein any of the conditions hereinafter specified are found to
exist; provided, however, that any condition which would constitute a violation
of this subchapter, but which is duly authorized under any city, state or
federal law, shall not be deemed to violate this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-2020)
§ 150.144 CODE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All buildings, structures, property or premises which are required to
be repaired, demolished, secured or otherwise abated under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be subject to the requirements and standards set forth in
the Eureka Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the City.
   (B)   All buildings, structures, property or premises within the scope of
this subchapter and all construction or work for which a permit is required
shall be subject to inspection in accordance with and in the manner provided by
applicable provisions of the Eureka Municipal Code or any other code adopted by
the City.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.145 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROPER PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   Every owner of real property within the City is required to maintain such
property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of the Eureka
Municipal Code or any other code adopted by the City, and such owner remains
liable for violations thereof, regardless of any contract or agreement with any
third party regarding such property.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.146 INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   City enforcement officials are authorized to enter upon any property or
premises to ascertain whether the provisions of the Eureka Municipal Code or
applicable state codes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations,
inspections and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their
enforcement duties. These may include the taking of photographs, samples or
other physical evidence. If an owner, occupant or agent refuses permission to
enter or inspect, the City may seek an inspection warrant pursuant to the
applicable state and local laws.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 709-C.S., passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. 904-
C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.147 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE NOTICE TO APPEAR AND RELEASE CITATIONS; ARREST.
   (A)    Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 836.5, certain
officers and employees of the City of Eureka are authorized to issue written
notice to appear and release citations for misdemeanors or infraction
violations of City ordinances which such officers or employees have the duty to
enforce.
      (1)   The following officers and employees of the City of Eureka ("City
enforcement officials") are hereby designated and authorized to issue said
citations:
         Police Department:
         (a)   Police chief;
         (b)   All sworn personnel;
         (c)   Community Service Officer; and
         (d)   Animal Control Officer.
         Public Works Department:
         (a)   Director of Public Works and his or her designees;
         (b)   Chief building official and his or her designees; and
         (c)   Code Enforcement Officer.
   (B)    City enforcement officials are authorized to arrest without a warrant
any person whenever the official has reasonable cause to believe that the
person has committed a violation of the Eureka Municipal Code or applicable
state codes in his or her presence. Pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 the
official, if not a peace officer, can only arrest a person by issuing a
misdemeanor field citation or by effecting a citizen's arrest with the
assistance of a sworn peace officer.
(Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.148 ABATEMENT, REPAIR AND DEMOLITION FUND
   (A)   General. The City Council shall establish a special revolving fund to
be designated as the Abatement, Repair and Demolition Fund. Payments shall be
made out of the fund upon the demand of the Building Official or responsible
official to defray the costs and expenses which may be incurred by the City in
doing or causing to be done the necessary work of abatement, repair, demolition
or securement pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Maintenance of fund. The City Council may at any time transfer to the
abatement, repair and demolition fund, out of any money in the general fund or
applicable enterprise fund of the City, such sums as it may deem necessary in
order to expedite the performance of the work of abatement, repair, demolition
or securement, and any sum so transferred shall be deemed a loan to the
abatement, repair and demolition fund and shall be repaid out of the proceeds
of the collections provided for in this subchapter. All funds collected under
the proceedings in this subchapter shall be paid to the City Finance
Department, who shall credit the same to the abatement, repair and demolition
fund.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.149 RECOVERY OF ATTORNEYS’ FEES IN NUISANCE ABATEMENT ACTIONS.
   In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to abate a
nuisance in which the City elects, at the initiation of the action or
proceeding, to seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees, the prevailing party in
the action or proceeding shall recover its attorneys’ fees incurred in the
action or proceeding. In no action, administrative proceeding or special
proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the
amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the action or
proceeding. “Prevailing party” shall not include a party who complies with a
notice of violation issued by the City or an order in any action,
administrative proceeding or special proceeding. Attorney fees shall include
fees for the services of the City Attorney or his or her assistant and
deputies, calculated based on the effective hourly rate of such attorney. Ref.
Government Code Section 38773.5.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.150 CIVIL ACTIONS; PRIVATE PARTIES.
   Any property owner or tenant of property within 500 feet of an immediately
dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building or
a substandard building or a public nuisance is declared to be damaged thereby.
   (A)   Any such party may institute a civil action against the property owner
or lessee, sublessee or occupant who creates or maintains an immediately
dangerous building, an immediately dangerous condition, a dangerous building, a
substandard building or a public nuisance, to obtain damages and/or require
compliance with the requirements of the Eureka Municipal Code or any other code
adopted by the City. Damages shall include actual damages, costs, attorney’s
fees and a civil penalty of up to $500 in addition thereto.
   (B)   Nothing in this provision shall be construed to limit any other right
or remedy otherwise available in law or equity to any party, nor shall this
provision in any way limit the City’s right to enforcement under any other
provision of this code, nor shall it create a duty or obligation on the part of
the City.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.151 VIOLATIONS.
   Any responsible person, whether owner, lessee, sublessor, sublessee or
occupant of any property or premises who violates the provisions of this
subchapter, consisting of §§
150.140 through
150.190, may be prosecuted pursuant to §
10.99 of this code for each day such violation continues. For purposes of §§
150.140 through
150.190, “person” includes individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint
ventures, receivers, limited liability company, trust, estate, cooperative,
association or any other entity. Any person violating the provisions of this
division or any other provision of §§
150.140 through
150.190 shall also be liable for civil penalties of not less than $250 or more
than $1,000 for each day the violation continues. The City Attorney may seek
civil penalties in any civil action brought to enforce any provision of §§
150.140 through
150.190.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.152 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS CONDITION; SUMMARY ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of this subchapter to the contrary, the
procedures for the abatement of an immediately dangerous condition, as defined,
shall be regulated by the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.153 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS CONDITION; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, an IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS CONDITION shall
be defined as a condition on any premises or property which, in the opinion of
the Building Official, Community Development Director or Fire Chief, is of such
a nature as to be imminently dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the
public, which, if abated according to the procedures of this code, would,
during the administrative proceedings, subject the public to potential harm of
a serious nature.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 709-C.S., passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. 904-
C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.154 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS CONDITION; SUMMARY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Official, Community Development Director or Fire
Chief has inspected or caused to be inspected any premises or property and has
found and determined that there exists on such premises or property an
immediately dangerous condition as defined in §
150.153, the same may be summarily abated and removed by the City without
compliance with the provisions of this code prior to such abatement.
   (B)   The Building Official, Community Development Director or Fire Chief
may abate the immediately dangerous condition in any reasonable manner which he
or she determines will eliminate the immediate threat to the health, safety or
welfare of the public. Reasonable means to abate the immediately dangerous
condition include, but are not limited to, demolition, repairing, boarding to
City specifications, securing the perimeter of the property with fencing, gates
or barricades, vacating and removal of junk and debris.
   (C)   No action shall be taken to summarily abate an immediately dangerous
condition without prior approval of the City Attorney or his or her authorized
representative.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 709-C.S., passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. 904-
C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.155 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS CONDITION; ABATEMENT COST RECOVERY.
   The cost of abatement, including all reasonable administrative and
engineering costs incurred by the City as a result of any action taken pursuant
to this subchapter, may be assessed as a lien or special assessment against the
premises or property upon which the immediately dangerous condition was
located, and may also be made a personal obligation of the property owner. The
recovery of such costs shall be governed by the procedures provided in §§
150.179 through
150.190.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.156 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDING; SUMMARY ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of this subchapter to the contrary, the
procedures for the abatement of an immediately dangerous building or structure
shall be regulated by the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.157 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDING; DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, an IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDING OR
STRUCTURE shall be defined as any building or structure which has been so
damaged by fire, infestation, seismic disturbance, or by any other cause,
including neglect, to the extent that its structural integrity is irreparably
damaged or destroyed and is in imminent danger of collapsing or where the
condition of the structure poses an immediate and present threat of life,
health or safety of the public.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.158 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDING; SUMMARY ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Official or Fire Chief has inspected or caused
to be inspected any building or structure and has found and determined that
such building or structure is an immediately dangerous building or structure as
defined in §
150.157, the same may be summarily abated and removed by the City without
compliance with the provisions of this code prior to such abatement.
   (B)   The Building Official or Fire Chief may summarily abate the
immediately dangerous building and/or the dangerous conditions in any
reasonable manner which he or she determines will eliminate the immediate
threat to the health, safety and welfare of the public. Reasonable means to
abate the immediately dangerous building and/or the dangerous conditions
include, but are not limited to, demolition, repairing, boarding to City
specifications, securing, fencing and vacating.
   (C)   No action shall be taken to summarily abate an immediately dangerous
building without prior approval of the City Attorney or his or her authorized
representative.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.159 IMMEDIATELY DANGEROUS BUILDING; ABATEMENT COST RECOVERY.
   The cost of abatement, including all reasonable administrative and
engineering costs incurred by the City as a result of any action taken pursuant
to this subchapter, may be assessed as a lien or special assessment against the
property upon which the immediately dangerous building or structure was
located, and may also be made a personal obligation of the property owner. The
recovery of such costs shall be governed by the procedures provided in §§
150.179 through
150.190.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.160 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; ABATEMENT AUTHORIZED.
   Notwithstanding any provisions of this subchapter to the contrary, the
procedures for the abatement of substandard buildings and public nuisances, as
defined, shall be regulated by the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.161 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words shall have the
following specified meanings:
   COMMON AREA. The entire common interest development as that term is defined
in Cal. Civ. Code § 1351, except the separate interests therein, or any area
defined as a COMMON AREA within a homeowners association’s declaration of
covenants, conditions and restrictions.
   JUNK. Any cast-off, damaged, discarded, junked, obsolete, salvaged,
scrapped, unusable, worn-out or wrecked object, thing or material composed in
whole or in part of asphalt, brick, carbon, cement, plastic or other synthetic
substance, fiber, glass, metal, paper, plaster, plaster of paris, rubber, terra
cotta, wool, cotton, cloth, canvas, organic matter or other substance, having
no substantial market value or requiring reconditioning in order to be used for
its original purpose.
   JUNK YARD. A site or portion of a site on which waste, discarded or salvaged
materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled or handled, including used furniture and household equipment
yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards and the like, except a site on
which such uses are conducted within a completely enclosed structure and except
scrap metal yards.
   OWNER. The owner of record of real property, occupant, lessee, sublessee,
interested holder in real property, or homeowners association, as the case may
be. For purposes of this subchapter, a homeowners association which exercises
management and/or control over a common area shall be deemed an OWNER of the
area over which such control is exercised. Exercising control includes but is
not limited to ownership, maintenance, easements and/or assessing fees on
property owners pursuant to agreements, deeds or recorded documents.
   PREMISES. Any real property and/or improvements thereon, as the case may be,
including but not limited to an area designated as a common area within a
condominium or similar project.
   PROPERTY. Any premises.
   RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL. The Building Official, Community Development Director
and Fire Chief or their respective designees, authorized to use the provisions
of this subchapter for violations of those ordinances for which their
respective departments have primary enforcement authority.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 709-C.S., passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. 885-
C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.162 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND CONDITIONS SPECIFIED.
   Any building or structure or any portion thereof, including any dwelling
unit, guest room, or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same is
located, in which there exists any of the following conditions to an extent
that endangers the life, limb, health, property, safety or welfare of the
public or the occupants thereof shall be deemed and hereby is declared to be a
substandard building and a public nuisance:
   (A)   Inadequate sanitation. Inadequate sanitation shall include but not be
limited to the following:
      (1)   Lack of or improper water closet, lavatory, bath tub or shower in a
dwelling unit, lodging house or congregate residence.
      (2)   Lack of or improper water closets, lavatories, and bath tubs or
showers per number of guests in a hotel.
      (3)   Lack of or improper kitchen sink.
      (4)   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a hotel.
      (5)   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a
dwelling unit.
      (6)   Lack of adequate heating facilities.
      (7)   Lack of or improper operation of required ventilating equipment.
      (8)   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required
by the Eureka Municipal Code, the California Building Code, or any other code
adopted by the City.
      (9)   Room and space dimension less than required by the Eureka Municipal
Code, the California Building Code, or any other code adopted by the City.
However, a condition which would require displacement of sound walls or
ceilings to meet height, length, or width requirements for ceilings, rooms and
dwelling units shall not by itself be considered sufficient existence of
dangerous conditions making a building a substandard building, unless the
building was constructed, altered, or converted in violation of such
requirements in effect at the time of construction, alteration or conversion.
      (10)   Lack of required electrical lighting.
      (11)   Dampness of habitable rooms.
      (12)   Infestation of insects, vermin, or rodents as determined by City
officials and/or the Health Officer.
      (13)   Visible mold growth, as determined by a health officer or a code
enforcement officer, as defined in Section 829.5 of the Penal Code, excluding
the presence of mold that is minor and found on surfaces that can accumulate
moisture as part of their properly functioning and intended use.
      (14)   General dilapidation or improper maintenance.
      (15)   Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system.
      (16)   Lack of adequate garbage and rubbish storage and removal
facilities as determined by City officials and/or the Health Officer.
   (B)   Structural hazards. Structural hazards shall include but not be
limited to the following:
      (1)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
      (2)   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
      (3)   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed
loads with safety.
      (4)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that split,
lean, list or buckle due to defective material or deterioration.
      (5)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
      (6)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split or buckle due to defective material or
deterioration.
      (7)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
      (8)   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle due to defective
material or deterioration.
      (9)   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength
to carry imposed loads with safety.
   (C)   Nuisances. Any nuisance as defined in this code, state law or common
law.
   (D)   Hazardous wiring. Hazardous wiring includes all wiring not installed,
maintained or used in conformance with the Eureka Municipal Code, the
California Building Code or any other code adopted by the City. Except as
provided in any federal, state or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter
enacted, hazardous wiring shall not include wiring which conformed with all
applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been
adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a safe
manner.
   (E)   Hazardous plumbing. Hazardous plumbing includes all plumbing not
installed, maintained or used in conformance with the Eureka Municipal Code,
the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the City. Except as
provided in any federal, state or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter
enacted, hazardous plumbing shall not include plumbing which conformed with all
applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been
adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and which is free of cross-
connections and siphonage between fixtures.
   (F)   Hazardous mechanical equipment. Hazardous mechanical equipment
includes all mechanical equipment, including vents, not installed, maintained
or used in conformance with the Eureka Municipal Code, the California Building
Code or any other code adopted by the City. Except as provided in any federal,
state or local law or ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, hazardous
mechanical equipment shall not include mechanical equipment which conformed
with all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has
been adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and is being used in a
safe manner.
   (G)   Faulty weather protection. Faulty weather protection, which shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Deteriorated, crumbling or loose plaster.
      (2)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows or doors.
      (3)   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall
coverings, including lack of paint or weathering due to lack of paint or other
approved protective covering.
      (4)   Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
   (H)   Fire hazard. Any building or portion thereof, device, apparatus,
equipment, combustible waste, vegetation, or act which, in the opinion of the
Building Official or Fire Chief, is in or creates such a condition as to
increase or which could cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire or
explosion, or provide a ready fuel to augment the spread and intensity of fire
or explosion, or any thing or act which could obstruct, delay, hinder or
interfere with the operations of the Fire Department or the egress of occupants
in the event of fire, shall be deemed a fire hazard.
   (I)   Faulty materials of construction. Faulty materials of construction
shall include all materials of construction except those which are specifically
allowed or approved by Eureka Municipal Code, the California Building Code and
any other code adopted by the City, and which have been adequately maintained
in good and safe condition.
   (J)   Hazardous or unsanitary premises. Hazardous or unsanitary premises
shall include those premises on which an accumulation of weeds, vegetation,
junk, dead organic matter, debris, garbage, offal, rat harborages, stagnant
water, combustible materials and similar materials or conditions exist which,
in the opinion of City officials or the Health Officer, constitute fire, health
or safety hazards.
   (K)   Unsafe building. Any building or portion thereof which is determined
to be an unsafe building due to inadequate maintenance or any other reason, in
accordance with the Eureka Municipal Code, the California Building Code, the
Uniform Fire Code or any other code adopted by the City.
   (L)   Inadequate exits.  
      (1)   Inadequate exits includes all buildings or portions thereof not
provided with adequate exit facilities as required by the Eureka Municipal
Code, the California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any other code
adopted by the City. Except as provided in any federal, state or local law or
ordinance now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate exits shall not include those
buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all
applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been
adequately maintained in a good and safe condition and increased in relation to
any increase in occupant load, alteration or addition, or any change in
occupancy.
      (2)   When an unsafe condition exists through lack of or improper
location of exits, additional exits may be required to be installed.
   (M)   Inadequate fire protection or firefighting equipment. Inadequate fire
protection or firefighting equipment includes all buildings or portions thereof
which are not provided with the fire resistive construction or fire
extinguishing systems or equipment required by the Eureka Municipal Code, the
California Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code or any other code adopted by
the City. Except as provided in any federal, state or local law or ordinance
now or hereinafter enacted, inadequate fire protection or fire fighting
equipment shall not include those buildings or portions thereof which conformed
with all applicable laws at the time of their construction and whose fire
resistive integrity and fire extinguishing systems or equipment have occupied
for living, sleeping, cooking or dining purposes which were not designed or
intended to be used for such occupancies.
   (N)   Inadequate structural resistance. Inadequate structural resistance
includes all buildings or portions thereof not constructed with adequate
structural resistance to horizontal forces as required by the Eureka Municipal
Code, the California Building Code or any other code adopted by the City.
Except as provided in any federal, state or local law or ordinance now or
hereinafter enacted, inadequate structural resistance shall not include any
building which conformed with all applicable laws at the time of its
construction and which has been adequately maintained in a good and safe
condition and is being used in a safe manner.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 709-C.S., passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. 865-
C.S., passed 10-17-17; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see §
150.151
§ 150.163 PUBLIC NUISANCES SPECIFIED.
   It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, subleasing,
occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in the City to
maintain such premises in such a manner that any one or more of the conditions
or activities described in the following subsections are found to exist:
   (A)   (1)   Unless properly stored behind a six-foot solid fence and
determined not to be a fire, health or safety hazard, the keeping, storage,
depositing, or accumulation on the premises of any personal property which is
within the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real property or the public
right-of-way when such personal property constitutes visual blight, reduces the
aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood, is offensive to the senses or is
detrimental to nearby property or property values. Personal property includes,
but is not limited to, junk as defined in §
150.161, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled automobiles and motorcycles;
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or not seaworthy boats or vessels; automotive
parts and equipment, appliances, furniture, containers, packing materials,
scrap metal, wood, building materials, rubbish and debris.
      (2)   Wood and building materials being used or to be used for a project
of repair or renovation for which an active building permit is in existence may
be stored for such period of time as is necessary to expeditiously complete the
project. Upon finalization, expiration or cancellation of the permit, the wood
and building materials of any nature for the project must be immediately
removed.
   (B)   The keeping, storage, depositing, or accumulation on the premises of
any dead grass, weeds, brush or rubbish of any kind likely to increase the
danger of fire, or any manure, dead animals, decayed vegetables, offal or other
similar matter which is in the view of persons on adjacent or nearby real
property or the public right-of-way when such items constitute visual blight, a
danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, reduce the aesthetic
appearance of the neighborhood, are offensive to the senses or are detrimental
to nearby property or property values.
   (C)   The keeping, storage, depositing or accumulation of dirt, sand,
gravel, concrete or other similar materials that constitutes visual blight or
reduces the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or is offensive to the
senses or is detrimental to nearby property or property values.
   (D)   The operation of a junk yard or automobile dismantling yard without a
properly issued permit from the City.
   (E)   Any dangerous, unsightly or blighted condition which is detrimental to
the health, safety or welfare of the public.
   (F)   Any condition in violation of
Chapter 90 of the Eureka Municipal Code, Abandoned Vehicles.
   (G)   Any condition in violation of
Chapter 94 of the Eureka Municipal Code, Health and Sanitation, or in violation
of the California Fire Code.
   (H)   Any condition in violation of this
Chapter 150 of the Eureka Municipal Code, Building Regulations, or in violation
of the California Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, the California
Electrical Code or the California Plumbing Code.
   (I)   Any condition in violation of
Chapter 155, Zoning Regulations or any chapter of Title XV, Land Usage, of the
Eureka Municipal Code.
   (J)   Any condition specified in the Eureka Municipal Code as a public
nuisance.
   (K)   Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public
nuisance.
   (L)   The maintenance of the exterior of any vacant or unoccupied building
or the interior of any such building which is readily visible from any public
street or adjacent parcel of property in a state of unsightliness so as to
constitute a blighted condition detrimental to the property values in the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
   (M)      The draining or allowing or suffering to be drained any sewage into
or onto the ground of any premises, whether or not occupied or improved, except
that sewage may be properly disposed of in an adequate private sewage disposal
system as otherwise permitted by law.
   (N)   Any unimproved real property or improved, but unoccupied real property
which has become a dumping ground for litter, garbage, junk, debris, discarded
vehicles, vehicle parts and/or vehicle hulks, and which real property has been
subject of two or more written requests by the City to remove litter, garbage,
junk, debris, discarded vehicles, vehicle parts and/or vehicle hulks from the
property within a 12-month time period, or which has been subject to abatement
action on one or more occasions by the City. Once proceedings have been
commenced pursuant to this subchapter to declare property a public nuisance
under this division, no such property shall be deemed to be in compliance with
this subchapter solely because such property thereafter becomes occupied.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.164 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; HEARING NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever the responsible official has inspected or caused to be
inspected any premises and has found and determined that such premises are in
violation of this subchapter, he or she may cause the owner of such property to
be served with a request to abate such nuisance prior to initiating any of the
nuisance abatement proceedings provided for by this subchapter, provided the
nuisance conditions are not determined to be immediately dangerous.
   (B)   In such written request, the responsible official or designee shall
describe the nuisance to be abated, set forth a reasonable time within which
work to abate the nuisance must be completed, and advise the property owner
that the property owner may be subject to the nuisance abatement proceedings
provided for by this subchapter in the event the nuisance is not abated within
the time prescribed in this subchapter.
   (C)   If the owner fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified in such
notice, the responsible official shall initiate nuisance abatement proceedings
and issue a notice directed to the record owner of the premises. The notice
shall contain:
      (1)   The street address and such other description as is required to
identify the premises.
      (2)   A statement that the Building Official has found the building or
structure to be substandard with a brief and concise description of the
conditions found to render the building or structure substandard under the
provisions of this subchapter and/or a statement that the responsible official
has found the premises constitutes a public nuisance with a brief and concise
description of the conditions which constitute the public nuisance.
      (3)   A statement advising that, in accordance with Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code
§§ 17274 and 24436.5, a tax deduction may not be allowed for interest, taxes,
depreciation or amortization paid or incurred in the taxable year.
      (4)   An order to the owner to appear before the Abatement Hearing
Officer at a stated time, but in no event less than 30 calendar days after
having mailed such notice, to show cause why the premises should not be
declared a substandard building and/or a public nuisance and the same abated in
accordance with this subchapter.
      (5)   A statement advising the owner that he or she has the option of
voluntarily abating the substandard building and/or public nuisance prior to
the date set for hearing. If the owner chooses voluntary abatement, such
abatement must be completed prior to the hearing date. The owner must advise
the responsible official in writing that he or she will voluntarily abate the
substandard building and/or public nuisance, and the proposed date of
completion. The responsible official will inspect the premises on the
completion date, and if the substandard building and/or public nuisance has
been abated, the hearing will be taken off calendar. The owner may request a
continuance of the hearing pursuant to §
150.168.
      (6)   A statement that the decision and order of the Abatement Hearing
Officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to
judicial review pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. § 1094.5.
      (7)   A statement that if, prior to compliance, the substandard building
or conditions in the building or on the property or the public nuisance becomes
an immediately dangerous building as defined in §
150.157 or an immediately dangerous condition as defined in §
150.153, the City may abate the immediately dangerous building as provided in §
150.158, or the City may abate the immediately dangerous condition as provided
in §
150.154.
      (8)   A statement advising the owner whether the City elects to seek its
attorneys’ fees in the abatement proceeding pursuant to §
150.149.
      (9)   A statement that every owner of property within the City is liable
to the City for the total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to
this subchapter on his or her property.
      (10)   A statement about how and where interested persons may contact the
responsible official or his or her designee about the hearing notice.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.165 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; SERVICE AND METHOD OF
SERVICE OF HEARING NOTICE.
   (A)   Service of hearing notice. The hearing notice, and any amended or
supplemental notice, shall be served upon the record owner, and posted on the
property, and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if
known to the responsible official or disclosed from official public records:
      (1)   The holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or
encumbrance of record;
      (2)   The owner or holder of any lease of record; and
      (3)   Any known tenants actually occupying the property or that portion
affected by the hearing notice.
   (B)   Method of service. Service of the hearing notice may be made upon all
persons entitled thereto, either by personal delivery or by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Service may be made upon the record owner at his, her
or their address as it appears on the latest equalized assessment roll of
Humboldt County, or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, or as
known to the responsible official. Service by certified mail in the manner
herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing. A copy of the
hearing notice and any amended or supplemental notice shall also be posted on
the premises. In lieu of personal service or service by certified mail, service
of the hearing notice and any amended or supplemental notice may be made as
follows:
      (1)   In the event that service by certified return receipt mail cannot
be effected or the recipient cannot be personally served, service may be made
by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows:
         (a)   By leaving a copy during usual business hours in the recipient’s
business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing
by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was
left; or
         (b)   By leaving a copy at the recipient’s dwelling or usual place of
abode in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter
mailing by first-class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the
copy was left.
      (2)   In the event the recipient refuses to accept certified return
receipt mail or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or
rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made as set
forth in division (B)(1) of this section upon the property manager or rental
agency.
      (3)   If the recipient lives out of state and will not accept certified
return receipt mail, then service may be made by first-class mail.
      (4)   If the recipient cannot be located or service cannot be effected as
set forth in this section, service may be made by publication in a Eureka
newspaper of general circulation which is most likely to give actual notice to
the owner. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant
to Cal. Gov’t Code § 6062.
   (C)   Failure to serve. The failure of the responsible official to serve any
person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings
hereunder as to any other persons duly served or relieve any such person from
any duty or obligation imposed on him by the provisions of this subchapter. The
failure of any person served pursuant to this section to receive such notice
and order shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this
section.
   (D)   Proof of service. Proof of service of the hearing notice shall be
certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of
perjury executed by the person effecting service, declaring the time, date and
manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt
returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail, shall be affixed to
the copy of the hearing notice retained by the responsible official.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.166 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; FILING OF HEARING NOTICE.
   (A)   Filing of notice. Concurrent with the service of the notice of
hearing, the responsible official shall record a notice legally describing the
property and certifying that the building or condition is substandard and that
the owner has been so notified. The notice shall include: the date of notice;
property owner’s name; mailing address; property address; parcel number; legal
description; and description of the substandard building or conditions.
   (B)   Recordation of a Notice of Compliance. The responsible official shall
record a Notice of Compliance within 15 days following the earlier of the
following dates: (1) the date the responsible official verifies both voluntary
compliance in abating the substandard building or condition and/or public
nuisance and payment of all accrued costs of abatement to which the City is
entitled pursuant to this title; or (2) the date of final resolution of the
administrative abatement action.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 709-C.S., passed 3-6-07; Am. Ord. 904-
C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.167 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; ABATEMENT STANDARDS.
   Any premises declared to be a substandard building or public nuisance under
this subchapter shall be abated by the owner in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the Eureka Municipal Code, the California Building Code or any
other code adopted by the City.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.168 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; HEARINGS; GENERALLY.
   (A)   The City Manager shall designate one or more persons qualified by
education and experience to serve as hearing officers for administrative
hearings conducted under this subchapter.
   (B)   Hearing by Abatement Hearing Officer. At the time fixed in the notice
required by §
150.164, the Abatement Hearing Officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of
the responsible official or designee and the testimony of the owner and other
competent persons, including members of the public, respecting the condition of
the building, structure and/or premises.
   (C)   Record. A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape
recording, or by any other means of permanent recording determined to be
appropriate by the Abatement Hearing Officer. If the owner or other competent
party seeks judicial review of the decision of the Abatement Hearing Officer,
preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by Cal. Civ. Proc.
§ 1094.5, as presently written or hereinafter amended.
   (D)   Reporting. The proceedings at the hearing may also be reported by a
certified shorthand reporter if such reporter is provided by the owner or other
competent party at his or her own expense.
   (E)   Continuances. The Abatement Hearing Officer may, upon request of the
owner, other competent party or the responsible official, grant continuances
from time to time for good cause shown, or upon his or her own motion.
   (F)   Reasonable dispatch. The Abatement Hearing Officer and his or her
representatives shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter
before him or her. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity
of any parties or their representatives.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 692-C.S., passed 7-7-05; Am. Ord. 904-
C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.169 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; CONDUCT OF HEARING.
   (A)   Rules. Hearings need not be conducted according to the technical rules
relating to evidence and witnesses.
   (B)   Exclusion of evidence. Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence
shall be excluded.
   (C)   Rights of parties. Each party shall have these rights, among others:
      (1)   To testify and call others to testify on any matter relevant to the
issues of the hearing;
      (2)   To introduce documentary and physical evidence;
      (3)   To rebut the evidence against him or her;
      (4)   To represent himself or herself or to be represented by anyone of
his or her choice.
      (5)   If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English
language, he or she may provide an interpreter, at the party’s own cost, to
translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in
the issues of the case prior to the hearing.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.170 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; INSPECTION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Abatement Hearing Officer may, with the owner(s)’ consent, or by
inspection warrant, inspect the building or premises involved in the hearing
prior to, during or after the hearing, provided that:
      (1)   Notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the
inspection is made;
      (2)   The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the
inspection;
      (3)   The Abatement Hearing Officer shall state for the record during the
hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the
hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed
and the conclusion drawn therefrom; and
      (4)   Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters
so stated by the Abatement Hearing Officer either for the record during the
hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the
hearing record.
   (B)   Neither inspection warrant nor the owner’s consent to inspect the
building and surrounding properties is required if such inspection can be made
from areas in which the general public has access or with permission of other
persons authorized to provide access to the property on which the building is
located.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.171 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; FORM AND CONTENTS OF
DECISION; DECISION FINAL.
   (A)   If it is shown by a preponderance of the evidence that the owner has
violated provisions of this subchapter, then the Abatement Hearing Officer
shall order the owner to commence abatement of the substandard building and/or
public nuisance not later than 15 calendar days after issuance of the decision.
The Abatement Hearing Officer shall further order the owner to complete the
abatement within such time as specified by the Abatement Hearing Officer, or in
the alternative, within the time specified by the responsible official. The
Abatement Hearing Officer shall also order that if the owner fails, refuses or
neglects to abate the substandard building and/or public nuisance within the
time set forth in its order that the City may abate the substandard building
and/or public nuisance in such a manner as may be ordered by the responsible
official pursuant to this subchapter or institute an action to compel
compliance with its order, and the expense thereof made a lien on the property.
   (B)   The decision of the Abatement Hearing Officer is a final decision,
subject only to judicial review pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. § 1094.5, and shall
be in the form of an order and shall contain findings of fact, a determination
of the issues presented, and the requirements with which the owner shall
comply. The order shall also inform the owner that the decision of the
abatement hearing officer is a final decision and that the time for judicial
review is governed by Cal. Civ. Proc. § 1094.6.
   (C)   The effective date of the decision and order and the period or periods
within which the owner must comply with the requirements of the decision shall
be as stated in the decision.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.172 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; SERVICE OF THE FINAL
DECISION AND ORDER.
   A copy of the final decision and order of the Abatement Hearing Officer
shall be served and posted in accordance with §
150.165.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.173 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; COMPLIANCE WITH DECISION
AND ORDER.
   (A)   General. After any decision and order of the Abatement Hearing Officer
made pursuant to this subchapter is final, no person to whom any such order is
directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order or decision. Any
such person who fails to comply with any such order or decision is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Failure to obey order. If, after the decision and order of the
Abatement Hearing Officer has become final, the person(s) to whom such order is
directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the responsible
official may: (1) cause such person to be prosecuted under division (A) of this
section; (2) institute any appropriate action to abate such substandard
building and/or public nuisance; or (3) abate the substandard building and/or
public nuisance in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter or as
provided in the order of the Abatement Hearing Officer. In any action brought
by the City to enforce the provisions of this subchapter, the prevailing party
shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorney’s fees and costs whether
or not the matter proceeds to judgment.
   (C)   Failure to commence or complete work. Whenever the required abatement
is not commenced or completed within the time limits prescribed in the final
decision and order of the Abatement Hearing Officer, the following shall apply:
      (1)   If the substandard building and/or public nuisance is in such
condition as to make the premises immediately dangerous to the life, limb,
property or safety of the public or its occupants, or if the Building Official
determines that abatement of the substandard building or public nuisance cannot
be accomplished without making it immediately dangerous to life, limb, property
or safety of the public or its occupants, the Building Official shall order the
building, structure or premises to be vacated pursuant to a notice to vacate as
provided in this division (C)(1).
         (a)   Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as
provided in §
150.165, be posted at or upon each exit of the building or upon any individual
unit to be vacated, and shall be in substantially the following form:
DANGEROUS BUILDING
DO NOT ENTER
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
You are hereby ordered and required to vacate this building/premises on or
before _____________. It is a misdemeanor pursuant to Eureka Municipal Code
Section 150.173 to occupy this building/premises on or after or to remove or
deface this notice.
Building Official City of Eureka
By                                               
 
         (b)   Whenever a notice to vacate is posted, the Building Official
shall specify in the notice and order to vacate the conditions which
necessitate an immediate notice to vacate.
         (c)   No person shall remain in or enter any building, structure or
premises which have been so posted, except that entry may be made to abate the
substandard building and/or public nuisance under permit without the consent of
the Building Official. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after
it is posted until the abatement required by the Abatement Hearing Officer has
been completed, and a certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to the
provisions of the Eureka Municipal Code and the California Building Code, if
necessary. Any person violating this division (C) shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
         (d)   The Building Official may permit occupancy of the building or
individual units if the owner corrects those problems which pose an immediate
danger to life, limb, property and safety of the public or occupants.
         (e)   Whenever a notice to vacate has been posted and served in
accordance with this division (C), the Building Official may order the
immediate disconnection of any utility services determined to be hazardous by
the Building Official. If the sewer service is ordered disconnected pursuant to
this section, City water service to such building shall also be disconnected in
order to prevent the accumulation of sewage on such premises. It shall be
unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail to disconnect utility
services when ordered to do so pursuant to the provisions of this division (C).
         (f)   Prior to issuing a notice to vacate, the Building Official shall
obtain approval of the City Attorney or his or her representative.
      (2)   To the extent allowed by law, the responsible official may, in
addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the substandard building
and/or public nuisance to be abated as set forth in the decision and order of
the Abatement Hearing Officer. Any such abatement shall be accomplished and the
cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this
subchapter.
      (3)   No action shall be taken by the responsible official to abate a
substandard building and/or public nuisance pursuant to this subchapter without
prior approval of the City Attorney’s office.
   (D)   Enforcement of the decision and order of the Abatement Hearing Officer
made pursuant to this subchapter shall be stayed during the pendency of a
properly and timely filed appeal therefrom to the superior court.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.174 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; EXTENSION OF TIME.
   Upon receipt of an application for an extension of time from the person
required to conform to the final decision and order; an agreement by such
person that he or she will comply with the order if allowed additional time;
and an application for any required permits accompanied by the required permit
fees, the responsible official may, in his or her discretion, grant an
extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to
complete the required abatement, if the responsible official determines that
such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently
dangerous to life or property. The responsible official’s authority to extend
time is limited to the physical abatement of the substandard building and/or
public nuisance and will not in any way affect or extend the time to appeal the
final decision and order or challenge any order of the Abatement Hearing
Officer.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.175 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; INTERFERENCE WITH WORK
PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to obstruct, impede or
interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative
of the City, or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any
substandard building and/or premises on which a public nuisance exists which
has been ordered abated and/or vacated under the provisions of this subchapter
whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of the
City, person having an interest or estate in such building premises, or
purchaser is engaged in the work of abating and/or vacating any such building
or premises, pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, or is performing
any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or
directed pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.176 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; PERFORMANCE OF WORK.
   (A)   Procedure. When any abatement work is to be done pursuant to §
150.173 by the City or its agents or contractors, the responsible official
shall provide the final order or decision to the Public Works Director and the
work shall be accomplished by City personnel or by private contract under the
direction of such Public Works Director and the responsible official. Plans and
specifications therefor may be prepared by such engineer, or he or she may
employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he
or she may deem reasonably necessary.
   (B)   Costs. The cost of such abatement work shall be paid from the
abatement repair and demolition fund, and may be made a lien against the
property involved, and may be made a personal obligation of the property owner,
as the Abatement Hearing Officer shall determine is appropriate pursuant to
this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.177 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF
ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Every owner of property within the City is liable to the City for the
total cost of abatement proceedings undertaken pursuant to this subchapter on
his or her property accrued to the date of final resolution of the proceedings,
including the recordation of liens pursuant to this subchapter, if any. Such
costs shall include, without limitation, costs of inspection, including
inspections which form the basis of the Building Official’s notice and order;
expenses associated with issuing and serving the Building Official’s notice and
order, and the final decision and order, if any; expenses associated with the
appeal of the Building Official’s notice and order, if any; attorneys’ fees
pursuant to §
150.149, if any; the cost of repair, securement, demolition or any other
abatement of the dangerous building or structure and/or nuisance; costs of
title reports, placing or removing liens and closing the file, and any other
related administrative costs.
   (B)   The Building Official or his or her designee, in his or her sole
discretion, may waive any portion of or all of the costs of abatement
proceedings in the event the owner of the property voluntarily complies with
the Building Official’s notice and order.
   (C)   All costs not otherwise paid by the owner or waived by the responsible
official with approval of the City Manager shall be collected pursuant to the
procedures set forth in this part of this subchapter.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20) Penalty, see
§
150.151
§ 150.178 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PUBLIC NUISANCES; SALE OF MATERIALS.
   (A)   In the event the City abates the substandard building and/or public
nuisance and the abatement consists in part of removal of materials or
demolition of a building or structure, the City may, at the City’s sole
discretion, sell the removed materials or materials contained in the demolished
building or structure at public sale to the highest responsible bidder. The
City shall notice the sale by publication at least five days prior to the date
of the sale. The notice shall be published twice in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City. The notice by publication may occur either before or
after the removal of the materials or demolition of the building or structure.
   (B)   Any moneys received from the sale of such removed materials or
materials contained in the demolished building or structure shall be deducted
from the expense of abatement.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.179 COST RECOVERY; ACCOUNT OF EXPENSES; FILING OF REPORT; CONTENTS.
   (A)   The responsible official shall keep an itemized account of all
expenses incurred by the City in the abatement of the substandard building and/
or public nuisance, including, without limitation, those costs and expenses set
forth in §
150.177.
   (B)   The responsible official shall keep an itemized account of all revenue
received by the City for any sale of materials pursuant to §
150.178.
   (C)   Upon the completion of the work, the responsible official shall
prepare a report, verified by the City official in charge of doing the work,
specifying the following information:
      (1)   The work done in abating the substandard building and/or public
nuisance, if any.
      (2)   The itemized and total cost of the abatement proceedings undertaken
pursuant to this subchapter, including, without limitation, those costs and
expenses set forth in §
150.177.
      (3)   The itemized and total revenue received from any sale of materials
pursuant to §
150.178.
      (4)   The net expense of the abatement (gross expenses less the revenue
from any sale of materials pursuant to §
150.178).
      (5)   A description of the real property upon which the building or
structure is or was located.
      (6)   The names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant
to §
150.165.
      (7)   Notice of the time, date and place when and where the Abatement
Hearing Officer will hear and pass upon the report, together with any
objections or protests which may be filed by any person interested in or
affected by the proposed charge, and shall confirm, reject or modify the report
and determine whether the charge shall be made a personal obligation of the
property owner(s) and charged as a lien against the property involved.
      (8)   A statement that the decision and order of the Abatement Hearing
Officer after the hearing is a final decision and order and is subject only to
judicial review pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. §
1094.5.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.180 COST RECOVERY; SERVICE OF THE REPORT AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   The responsible official’s report and notice of the hearing shall be
posted on the property and served by certified return receipt mail and first-
class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the persons entitled to notice
pursuant to §
150.165 as their names and addresses appear on the last equalized assessment
roll of the county or supplemental roll whichever is more current, if such so
appears, or as known to the responsible official.
   (B)   Service of the report and notice shall be made at least ten days prior
to the date set for hearing.
   (C)   All costs associated with service of the report and notice shall be
added to total expenses to be reviewed by the Abatement Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.181 COST RECOVERY; MAKING OF PROTESTS OR OBJECTIONS.
   Any person interested in or affected by the proposed charge may file written
protests or objections with the responsible official at any time prior to the
time set for the hearing on the report of the responsible official or may make
an oral protest at the hearing. Each written protest or objection must contain
a description of the property in which the signer thereof is interested and the
grounds of such protest or objection. The responsible official shall endorse on
every such protest or objection the date it was received by him or her. The
responsible official shall present such protests or objections to the abatement
hearing officer at the time set for the hearing, and no other written protests
or objections shall be considered.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.182 COST RECOVERY; NATURE OF PROTESTS TO BE HEARD.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the protests heard
by the Abatement Hearing Officer pursuant to §
150.183 shall relate only to the charge to be made for abatement, and no
protest concerning the action of the responsible official or the Abatement
Hearing Officer in ordering the abatement of the substandard building and/or
public nuisance shall be heard at this time.
   (B)   Where the charge to be made is the result of summary abatement
pursuant to §§
150.154 and
150.158, the Abatement Hearing Officer may determine whether or not the action
to summarily abate was proper, and may modify the charge or not as he or she
may deem proper.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.183 COST RECOVERY; HEARING OF PROTESTS AND CONFIRMATION, REJECTION OR
MODIFICATION OF REPORT.
   Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the Abatement Hearing Officer
shall hear and pass upon the report of the responsible official together with
any such objections or protests, and shall confirm, reject or modify the
report. The Abatement Hearing Officer may make such revision, correction or
modification of the report or the charge as he or she may deem just; and in the
event the Abatement Hearing Officer is satisfied with the correctness of the
charge, the responsible official’s report (as submitted or as revised,
corrected or modified) together with the charge, shall be confirmed or
rejected.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.184 COST RECOVERY; ORDER OF ABATEMENT HEARING OFFICER.
   The Abatement Hearing Officer may order that the charge be made a personal
obligation of each owner of the property and charged against the property
involved as a lien or special assessment.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.185 COST RECOVERY; FINAL DECISION AND ORDER; SERVICE.
   (A)   The decision and order of the Abatement Hearing Officer is a final
decision, subject only to judicial review pursuant to Cal. Civ. Proc. § 1094.6.
   (B)   A copy of the final decision and order of the Abatement Hearing
Officer shall be served in accordance with §
150.165.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.186 COST RECOVERY; PERSONAL OBLIGATION.
   If the Abatement Hearing Officer orders that a charge shall be a personal
obligation of the property owner, he or she shall direct the City Attorney or
the Finance Division to collect the same on behalf of the City by the use of
all appropriate legal remedies.
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 850-C.S., passed 11-1-16; Am. Ord.
904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.187 COST RECOVERY; LIEN AGAINST THE PROPERTY.
   (A)   If the Abatement Hearing Officer orders that the charge shall be
charged against the property as a lien, then in the event the charge confirmed
by the Abatement Hearing Officer is not paid within five days after service of
the decision of the Abatement Hearing Officer, the charge shall constitute a
lien on the property. The lien shall continue until the amount of the charge
and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation
of the charge, is paid or until it is discharged of record.
   (B)   The lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien.
   (C)   An abatement lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the City
for a money judgment.
   (D)   The City may recover from the property owner any costs incurred
regarding the process and recording of the lien and providing notice to the
property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
   (E)   After notice to the property owner(s) as provided in division (G), the
City Clerk shall record a notice of lien with the County Recorder within 60
days after the confirmation of the charge by the Abatement Hearing Officer.
   (F)   The notice of lien shall be in substantially the following form:
      NOTICE OF LIEN
      NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Eureka Municipal Code Chapter
150, Sections 150.140 through 150.190, the City of Eureka undertook the
following actions:
      1.   On                           , the Abatement Hearing Officer of the
City of Eureka ordered the abatement of a substandard building and/or public
nuisance on the real property described herein.
      2.   On                           , the City of Eureka abated the
substandard building and/or public nuisance.
      3.   On                         , the City of Eureka confirmed the cost
of the abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance and charged
such cost as a lien against the real property described herein.
      4.   As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the cost of
the abatement has not yet been paid, and the City of Eureka does hereby claim a
lien on the real property described herein for the net expense of abating the
substandard building and/or public nuisance on the property in the amount of $
        , and this amount shall be a lien against the real property described
herein until the full amount, with interest at the legal rate, has been paid in
full and discharged of record.
      5.   As of the date of recordation of this Notice of Lien, the name and
address of the record owner of the property described below is:
                             .
      6.   The real property upon which the lien is claimed is that certain
real property commonly known as                                       
(Assessor Parcel Number), and more particularly described in Exhibit A,
attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
   CITY OF EUREKA
   Dated:                                
   (G)   The City Clerk shall serve the notice of lien on the owner of record
of the property on which the substandard building and/or public nuisance was
located based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll,
whichever is more current. The notice of lien shall be served in the same
manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Cal. Civ. Proc.
Article 3 (§ 415.10 et seq.) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2. If the owner of
record cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the
notice in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and by
publication in a Eureka newspaper of general circulation pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code § 6062.
   (H)   In the event the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either
through payment or foreclosure, the City Clerk shall record a notice of
discharge in substantially the following form:
         DISCHARGE OF LIEN
         NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN THAT pursuant to Eureka Municipal Code Chapter
150, Sections 150.140 through 150.190, the City of Eureka undertook the
following actions:
      1.   On                     , the Abatement Hearing Officer of the City
of Eureka ordered the abatement of a substandard building and/or public
nuisance on the real property described herein.
      2.   On                     , the City of Eureka abated the substandard
building and/or public nuisance.
      3.   On                   , the City of Eureka confirmed the cost of the
abatement of the substandard building and/or public nuisance and charged such
cost as a lien against the real property described herein.
      4.   The amount of the lien claimed by the City of Eureka was $        ,
with interest at the legal rate.
      5.   As of the date of recordation of this Discharge of Lien, the name
and address of the record owner of the property described below is:
                    
      6.   The lien claimed by the City of Eureka has been discharged, released
or satisfied and the City of Eureka no longer claims a lien on the real
property described herein.
      7.   The real property upon which the lien was claimed is that certain
real property commonly known as                                   (Assessor
Parcel Number), and more particularly described in Exhibit A, attached hereto
and incorporated by reference herein.
   CITY OF EUREKA
   Dated:                                          
   Name of Officer                                               
(Ord. 680-C.S., passed 6-17-04; Am. Ord. 850-C.S., passed 11-1-16; Am. Ord.
904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.188 COST RECOVERY; SPECIAL ASSESSMENT AS ALTERNATIVE.
   (A)   As an alternative to collecting the lien as provided in §
150.187, the City may request and the Hearing Officer may order that the costs
of abatement be made a special assessment upon the property on which the
substandard building and/or public nuisance was located.
   (B)   The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest
at the same rate as delinquent property taxes computed from the date of the
order until payment.
   (C)   The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ad valorem real property taxes are collected, and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ad valorem real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of ad valorem real property taxes apply to this
special assessment.
   (D)   When a special assessment is charged against property as provided in
this section, the City shall mail, by certified mail, to the property owner and
file in the office of the County Recorder of Humboldt County a certificate in
substantially the following form:
      NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT
   On (insert date), the City of Eureka abated a nuisance on the property
located at (insert address) (insert assessor's parcel number). This property is
owned by (insert name). The abatement was done under the authority of
California Government Code Section 38773.5 and Eureka Municipal Code Chapter
150, Sections 150.140 through 150.190.
   The City of Eureka claims a special assessment on the real property for the
cost of the abatement in the amount of $________. This amount is a special
assessment against the real property until paid with interest at the rate of 10
percent per annum from (insert date) and discharged of record. This property
may be sold after three (3) years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent
assessments.
   The real property referred to in this notice is that parcel of land situated
with the City of Eureka, County of Humboldt, State of California, more
specifically described as follows: (insert or attach legal description)
   CITY OF EUREKA
   Dated:                                
   (E)   The City shall file with the County Auditor a certified copy of the
notice of special assessment, a brief description of the abatement action taken
and a request that the charges be added to the tax rolls and collected at the
same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes. These documents
shall be filed on or before the August 10th which follows the close of the tax
year in which the abatement action was taken.
(Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.189 COST RECOVERY; EFFECT OF FAILURE TO RECEIVE NOTICE.
   The fact that the owner or other person to whom notice is given under this
subchapter (§§
150.140 through
150.190) does not receive notice, or a letter is returned by the post office as
undeliverable, does not affect the validity of the abatement proceedings.
(Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
§ 150.190 TREBLE COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   Upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a
two-year period finding that an owner of the property is responsible for a
condition on the property which may be abated as a public nuisance, the court
may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. This section does
not apply to court-ordered abatement of dangerous buildings pursuant to Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 17980.
(Ord. 904-C.S., passed 10-6-20)
CONSTRUCTION SITE EROSION CONTROL
§ 150.200 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water
quality of watercourses, water bodies and wetlands pursuant to and consistent
with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.) by
minimizing, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of sediment and
other pollutants into the storm drainage system as a result of construction
related activities.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.201 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
   CITY. The City of Eureka.
   CLEAR. Any activity which removes the vegetative ground cover and/or trees
including, but not limited to, root mat removal and/or top soil removal.
   CONSTRUCTION SITE. All areas where soil is disturbed related to a project,
including but not limited to, soil disturbed for construction, staging area,
ingress, egress and any temporary dumping areas.
   ENTITY. Any property owner, lessee, contractor, utility company, person,
firm, corporation, or any legal entity, and their employees and agents. The
term ENTITY shall include all entities with authority or control over the
property in issue.
   EROSION. The wearing away of the ground surface, and the detachment of soil
particles resulting from the movement of water, wind or mechanical causes.
   EXCAVATE. Any digging, scraping or other methods of removing earth
materials.
   FILL. Any depositing or stockpiling of earth materials.
   GRADE. Any excavating or filling of earth materials or any combination
thereof, including land in its excavated or filled condition.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect sediment discharge to the storm
drainage system and either in violation of an approved erosion control permit
or in the absence of an approved erosion control permit.
   POLLUTANTS. Any agent, material or substance that may cause or contribute to
the degradation of water quality.
   SEDIMENT. Eroded earth material, such as rock, sand, silt, soil, or
combination thereof, which threatens to be transported by runoff and/or
deposited in a stream, drainage course, tidal slough or other area.
   SOIL. Unconsolidated mineral and organic material.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Any inlet, pipe, conduit, swale, channel or waterway
designed or used for the disposal of stormwater and non-stormwater, excluding
any sanitary sewer system.
   STORMWATER. Runoff discharges originating from precipitation events.
   WATERWAY. Natural or artificial body of water, or system of interconnected
bodies of water.
   WET SEASON. October 15 through April 15.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.202 APPLICABILITY.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all property within
the jurisdiction of the City of Eureka.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.203 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The Building Official or designee of the city shall administer, implement
and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the Building Official may be delegated in writing by the Building
Official to the designee.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.204 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.205 REGULATORY CONSISTENCY.
   This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements
of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Act and any acts amendatory thereof
or supplementary thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.206 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY OF DISCHARGER.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards. Greater erosion and pollution control measures may be
necessary to comply with other applicable local, state and federal laws. This
chapter does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure
that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of
pollutants into waters of the state and/or U.S. caused by said person. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Eureka, or any
agent or employee thereof for any damages that result from any discharger's
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.207 CLEARING, GRADING, EXCAVATING, FILLING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any entity to clear, grade, excavate or fill
(hereinafter "work") any property within the city limits without having first
obtained an erosion control permit ("ECP") from the city except when work is
performed in accordance with an exemption set forth in §
150.208. The ECP applications shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant for the
ECP.
      (2)   The name, address, and telephone number of the contractor who will
perform the work.
      (3)   The building site location.
      (4)   A scaled site map and grading plan detailing the total area to be
cleared, graded, excavated or filled.
      (5)   General description of work to be performed.
      (6)   The specific erosion/sediment control devices and best management
practices (BMPs) proposed, as specified herein below.
      (7)   Soils or geotechnical engineer reports and designs as required by a
site-specific determination from staff.
      (8)   Schedule of work detailing when the work is to occur, indicating
when BMPs will be installed prior to ground disturbance, the construction
period and BMP removal. Note any schedule details regarding working in the wet
weather period.
      (9)   Stormwater information form(s) as required.
   (B)   The State Water Resources Control Board General Permit for Discharges
of Stormwater Associated with Construction Activity requires a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) for construction sites that are larger than
an acre. If an application for an ECP involves a construction site larger than
one acre, a copy of the SWPPP shall be submitted, and may take the place of a
separate ECP, as long as the SWPPP meets all of the ECP requirements.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.208 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Work below finished grade for footings, sewers, water pipes, natural
gas pipes, electrical/communications conduit or cables, or other ground
disturbing activities associated with a valid building permit that already have
an ECP. Such excavations performed in the public right-of-way or in a public
utility easement shall require an encroachment permit.
   (B)   Emergency work to mitigate dangers posing an immediate risk to life or
property.
   (C)   Any work where the total volume of material stored, disposed of, or
used as fill does not exceed 50 cubic yards, provided all the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The activity does not obstruct or modify existing site drainage or
drainage capacity.
      (2)   The site is not located in the Coastal Zone or the Gulch Greenway
Management Area.
      (3)   No new impervious surfaces are created.
      (4)   Erosion control devices are implemented for controlling site storm
water runoff and remain in place during appropriate seasons as prescribed in §
150.210.
      (5)   Work is not commenced or continued during the wet season.
(Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.209 SUBMISSION OF EROSION CONTROL PERMIT.
   ECP applications shall be submitted to the Building Department and reviewed
by the Engineering Department. ECP plan review and application fees shall be
set by resolution of the City Council. No building permit will be issued for
any property on which indebtedness to the city exists by reason of an order of
abatement costs or liens associated with this chapter.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.210 EROSION/SEDIMENT CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The ECP shall require, and the entity shall install specific erosion/
sediment control devices, which shall be maintained in proper working condition
for so long as work is being conducted on the property or for so long as an
active permit of any nature is issued for the project. Erosion/sediment control
devices required by the ECP may include, but are not limited to, silt fences,
straw bales, retention ponds, mulch, sod, rip-rap, vegetation barriers, hydro-
seeding, erosion blankets and any other measures which will adequately prevent
soil from being eroded and transported onto adjoining property or into
waterways.
   (B)   The ECP shall always require a stabilized construction site access for
any sites where sediment can be tracked onto public roads by construction
vehicles.
   (C)   The responsibility of the property owner and its agents shall be joint
and severable with the entity performing the work for the maintenance of all
erosion control devices, which shall be maintained in a condition so as to
prevent soil erosion on the property and transport of sediment off the
property.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.211 WET SEASON WORK.
   Work during the wet season shall be commenced only when demonstrated that
the disturbance is minor and that sediment and erosion can be controlled. For
protracted work extending into the wet season, BMPs shall be employed as to
secure the site and prevent stormwater runoff and erosion. Specific permission
shall be obtained for any wet season work.
(Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.212 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Municipal property. It shall be unlawful for any entity to cause,
permit or allow any sediment to be deposited upon any municipal property within
the city unless otherwise approved in an erosion control permit. In the event
any entity shall allow such sediment to be deposited upon municipal property,
such entity shall immediately remove such sediment from said municipal
property.
   (B)   Private property. It shall be unlawful for any entity to cause, permit
or allow any sediment to be deposited upon any private property within the city
unless otherwise approved in an erosion control permit. In the event any entity
shall allow such sediment to be deposited upon private property, such entity
shall immediately remove such sediment from said property, upon notice by and
with consent of the property owner.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.213 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this
chapter or whenever the Building Official or City Engineer have cause to
believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any
condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the Building Official
or City Engineer may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the
same and to inspect and record stormwater compliance issues. In the event the
owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been
made, the city is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of
competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.214 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Building Official or City Engineer finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the
Building Official or City Engineer may order compliance by written notice of
violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation
and in addition to penalties or any other remedies available under law:
   (A)   The elimination of illicit discharges or practices and operations
contributing to illicit discharges;
   (B)   The immediate placement of erosion/sediment control devices or
practices;
   (C)   The abatement or remediation of the illicit discharge;
   (D)   The restoration of any affected property; and
   (E)   Payment of any administrative and remediation costs incurred by the
city for abatement.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
 § 150.215 APPEAL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
150.216 below, any person receiving a Notice of Violation under §
150.214 above may appeal the determination of the Building Official or City
Engineer to the City Manager. The notice of appeal must be received by the City
Manager within five days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on
the appeal before the City Manager or his or her designee shall take place
within 15 days from the date of city's receipt of the notice of appeal. The
decision of the City Manager or designee shall be final.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.216 ABATEMENT BY CITY.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal under §
150.215, within ten days of the decision of the City Manager upholding the
decision of the Building Official or City Engineer, then the city or a
contractor designated by the Building Official may enter upon the subject
private property and is authorized to take any and all measures necessary to
abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any
person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow
the city or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.217 CHARGING COSTS OF ABATEMENTS/LIENS.
   (A)   Within 30 days after abatement of the illicit discharge by the city,
the Building Official shall notify the property owner of the abatement cost,
including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest
objecting to the amount of the assessment with the City Clerk within 15 days.
The City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing by the City Council. The
decision of the City Council shall be set forth by resolution and shall be
final.
   (B)   If the amount due is not paid within ten days of the decision of the
City Council or the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal under
this section, the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. A copy of the resolution shall be turned over to the County Auditor
so that the auditor may enter the amounts of the assessment against the parcel
as it appears on the current assessment roll, and the tax collector shall
include the amount of the assessment on the bill for taxes levied against the
parcel of land.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 150.218 ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN A VIOLATION OF THE CLEAN WATER ACT AND/
OR CALIFORNIA PORTER-COLOGNE ACT.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any requirement issued pursuant to this chapter may also be in violation of the
Clean Water Act and/or the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and may be
subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties.
(Ord. 724-C.S., passed 5-20-08; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
OPERATION OF HOTELS AND MOTELS
§ 150.300 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to ensure the continued availability of
transient lodging within the City of Eureka; and to protect the public
interest, health, safety and welfare by ensuring continued maintenance of
hotels through the issuance of a lodging permit to own or operate a hotel
within the city, regardless of the date of the hotel's construction. Further,
this subchapter establishes standards for the issuance of said permit;
establishes rules and regulations under which such permit shall remain in
force, be denied or revoked; and provides penalties for violations.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.301 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The city is committed to the health, safety, and welfare of its
residents and visitors.
   (B)   Statistics compiled by the Police and Fire Departments indicate that
hotels and motels in the city can have disproportionately high rates of police
and emergency calls for service due to violence, prostitution, and drug
activity, which can have a negative impact on the health, safety, and welfare
of the community.
   (C)   The City Council recognizes that it is necessary for the city to apply
its available emergency services resources in accordance with the needs of the
community at large, and to adjust the application of those resources as
necessary to address changes in those needs.
   (D)   The U.S. Department of Justice's Office of Community Oriented Policing
Services' (COPS) Problem-Oriented Guide for police titled Disorder at Budget
Motels (January 2005) outlines general principles for an effective strategy for
reducing crime at hotels, including regulating management practices through
calls for service/room ratios and taking action against hotels that have a
calls for service/room ratio of greater than 1.0 annually.
   (E)   Excessive levels of Municipal Code violations (such as plumbing,
electrical, and sanitation) in a hotel are detrimental to human health and
welfare and result in impaired health, safety, and welfare of tenants and
neighbors of such properties.
   (F)   The implementation of a registration and permitting requirement for
owners and operators of hotels would greatly facilitate the application and
enforcement of city health, building, and safety codes and ordinances, as well
as help create a vibrant and robust environment for the enjoyment of the city's
tourists, visitors, residents, and businesses.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.302 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall be applicable to all hotels and motels within the
city, regardless of their date of construction or initial operation. Existing
non-transient ("residential") hotels and motels shall be subject to this
subchapter unless they:
   (A)   Were initially operated as a non-transient hotel or motel on or before
October 16, 1966 and have been in continuous operation as such since that date;
or
   (B)   Consist of multiple dwelling units and have been legally permitted as
a multi-family dwelling, as defined in EMC §
155.504.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 150.303 SEVERABILITY.
    The City Council intends that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses,
and phrases of this chapter are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be declared unconstitutional by the
valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.304 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, words, and derivations
shall have the meaning given, unless the context clearly indicates or requires
a different meaning:
   CALLS FOR SERVICE (CFS). Includes, but is not limited to, any and all calls
to emergency services, (police, fire, medical, code enforcement, and building
inspection) related to criminal activity and/or violations of local, state, or
federal laws that result in a city, county, fire district, or other government
employee being dispatched or directed to the hotel. This shall include any
calls for service within the surrounding neighborhood that, through information
or investigation, can be attributed or traced to the hotel premises. Calls for
service include any self-initiated activity or investigation based on the
observation(s) of emergency services representatives or code enforcement
personnel in which it is determined, based on the greater weight of evidence,
that a violation of law has occurred. Calls for service shall be measured by
one event or occurrence at a hotel. Multiple calls for one discrete event shall
count as one call for service. Calls for service are cumulative regardless of
ownership. Calls for service include, but are not limited, to:
      (1)   Commission of crimes that are drug-related, or drug-related
arrests;
      (2)   Commission of crimes that are prostitution-related, or
prostitution-related arrests;
      (3)   Commission of crimes that are a breach of the peace;
      (4)   All fire alarms at a hotel;
      (5)   Medical calls for service related to criminal activity and/or
violations of local, state, or federal laws;
      (6)   Immediate public safety and health issues at a hotel; or
      (7)   Noncompliance with federal law, state law or city codes and
ordinances.
   CALLS FOR SERVICE do not include:
      (1)   Calls originating from the hotel premise, but relating to off-
premises disturbances observed by a hotel owner, operator, or occupant, if the
activity is not attributable to the hotel;
      (2)   Medical calls for service unrelated to criminal activity and/or
violations of local, state, or federal laws;
      (3)   Building inspection requests made in conjunction with an active
building permit.
   CALLS FOR SERVICE ROOM RATIO. The number of calls for service in a one-year
period divided by the total number of guest rooms in a hotel.
   CLEAN CONDITION. A hotel premises that is continuously maintained free of:
trash, debris, junk, dirt or refuse; insect or rodent infestation; and
maintained in conformance with the housekeeping and premises conditions
described in §
150.312.
   DESIGNATED CITY OFFICIAL or DCO. The City Manager. The term may include the
City Manager's designee or delegated staff or duly authorized representative of
the City Manager.
   DRUG-RELATED. Includes, but is not limited to, the manufacture, cultivation,
importation into the state, transportation, possession, possession for sale,
sale, furnishing, administering, giving away, providing a place to use, or
fortification of a place involving any illegal or controlled drug, narcotic or
drug paraphernalia.
   EXCESS CFS FEE. A fee, set by Council Resolution, per CFS, above and beyond
the number of calls which would result in a CFS Room Ratio of 1.0.
   HOTEL. Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed
to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be occupied, or which
are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. HOTEL does not mean any hospital,
convalescent home, sanitarium, or multi-family dwelling. For the purposes of
this chapter, hotel and motel shall be synonymous.
   HOTEL ROOM or ROOM. The portion of the hotel which may be used by a guest as
a temporary residence, including single rooms and suites.
   INSPECTION REPORT. The record of an inspection, conducted by the city, to
assess and document substandard conditions with respect to weather protection
and plumbing, mechanical, and electrical systems, as well as any condition
deemed to be in violation of applicable city, state or federal regulations.
   LAW. Any federal or state statute, or city ordinance, court decision or
regulation.
   LET or LET FOR OCCUPANCY. To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a hotel room, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   MANAGER. Any person who manages the business operations of any hotel, whose
duties may include the collecting of rental charges, issuing of keys, direction
of maintenance personnel, assigning of rooms to guests, handling guest affairs
or overseeing security.
   MOTEL. See HOTEL.
   OPERATOR. Any person who is the proprietor of any hotel whether in the
capacity of the owner, lessee, receiver, sub-lessee, franchisee, mortgagee in
possession, manager or agent of any of the aforementioned; who offers or
accepts payment for rooms, guest rooms, sleeping accommodations, or board and
lodging; and who retains the right of access to, and control of, the guest
rooms.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, or the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERMIT YEAR. The span of time between October 1 and September 30 of each
year.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate trust,
partnership, or any other group acting as a unit.
   PROSTITUTION-RELATED. Includes but is not limited to those that involve
prostitution or prostitution-related crimes such as pimping or pandering, in
violation of §§ 315, 316, 647(b), 653.22, and 653.23 of the California Penal
Code.
   SECURITY GUARDS. Individuals who possess a valid security guard registration
from the California Bureau of Security and Investigative Services (BSIS).
Security guards must be at least 18 years old, undergo a criminal history
background check through the California Department of Justice (DOJ) and the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and complete a 40-hour course of
required training as mandated by the BSIS.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.305 LODGING PERMIT TO OPERATE.
   (A)   In addition to the business license required by EMC
Chapter 110, it shall be unlawful to operate a hotel without a lodging permit.
The application shall be submitted with the lodging permit fee, as adopted by
resolution and identified in the city's Schedule of Fees and Service Charges.
For each licensing year, the base lodging permit fee shall be multiplied by the
calls for service room ratio for the preceding year, but shall not be less than
the minimum fee. For initial applications required after passage of the
ordinance from which this subchapter is derived or for new hotels, the lodging
permit fee shall be the minimum fee.
   (B)   An application for an annual lodging permit shall be filed with the
DCO on a yearly basis by the owner or operator of each hotel. The initial
deadline for submitting the application shall be 45 days from the date of
passage of the ordinance from which this subchapter is derived. The lodging
permit shall be issued or denied within 60 days from the date of receipt of the
completed application. This initial permit shall be effective until December
31, 2014 unless it is revoked earlier. Applications thereafter must be
submitted no later than October 31 of each year beginning in 2014 or, if this
date falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, on the next business day. The
lodging permit shall be issued or denied within 60 days from the date of
receipt of the completed application and fee. All subsequent permits shall be
effective until December 31 of the following year. The operator or owner shall
re-apply for additional periods of one year thereafter by October 31 of each
year.
   (C)   In the event that a new hotel applies for a lodging permit during the
year, but after the October 31 application deadline, the permit will be issued
or denied within 60 days of receipt of the application and the lodging permit
shall be effective until December 31 of that year. The application fee will be
prorated, based on the number of months remaining before the December 31
expiration of the permit. Any subsequent permit shall be applied for in
accordance with the October 31 deadline in subsection (B) above.
   (D)   Application for a lodging permit shall be filed on forms provided by
the city and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Owner and/or operator's name, address, work and home telephone
number; owner's driver license number or identification card number and state
of issuance.
      (2)   If owned/operated by a partnership, the names of all partners, the
principal business address, and telephone number of each partner.
      (3)   If owned/operated by a corporation, the person registering must
state whether it is organized under the laws of the state of California or is a
foreign corporation; must provide the mailing address, business location,
telephone number, and name of the person in charge of the local office of such
corporation, if any; and must provide the names of the registered agent, and
all officers and directors or trustees of the corporation. If the corporation
is a foreign corporation, the person registering must also provide the place of
incorporation.
      (4)   Name, address and telephone number of the managers and operators
and owners.
      (5)   Street address of the hotel.
      (6)   If, during the last five years, any owner, operator, or manager has
been convicted of, is continuing on parole or probation, or has completed
parole or probation for a crime which relates directly to the operation of a
hotel while he or she was acting as an owner, operator, or manager of a hotel;
or for any offense constituting a misdemeanor or felony involving weapons,
narcotics, assault, or crimes of moral turpitude; he or she must provide an
official criminal history from each state of residence during that five-year
period.
      (7)   Number of hotel guest rooms.
      (8)   A signature of the owner or operator or the owner or operator's
agent.
      (9)   Every lodging permit renewal application shall be accompanied by an
inspection report in conformance with this section. Initial lodging permit
applications are not required to be accompanied by an inspection report,
provided that there are no active code enforcement cases at the property at the
time the application is filed.
         (a)   Lodging permit renewal applications for those properties
classified as tier 1 hotels shall, on a biannual basis, be accompanied by an
inspection report on the form(s) provided by the city, showing that there are
no violations of this subchapter at the property.
         (b)   Lodging permit renewal applications for those properties
classified as tier 2 hotels shall, on an annual basis, be accompanied by an
inspection report on the form(s) provided by the city, showing that there are
no violations of this subchapter at the property.
      (10)   All material contained on the application must be maintained
current with the city at all times by the owner, operator and manager.
   Any material misrepresentation in the application for the lodging permit, or
a failure to provide the required information, shall be grounds for denial or
revocation of the application or lodging permit.
   (E)   The application for a lodging permit or lodging permit renewal shall
constitute the consent of the applicant and owner to inspection of the entire
licensed premises at reasonable times by the Code Enforcement Officers,
Building Inspectors, Fire Inspectors and other authorized departments of the
city, for the purpose of determining whether there is any violation of any
ordinance of the city or any law of the State of California on the premises
sought to be permitted. Those persons entitled to make inspections may enter on
premises to make inspections to the extent authorized by law.
   (F)   The lodging permit shall not be transferable or assignable from one
person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity to another person, firm,
partnership, corporation or entity.
   (G)   Whenever a change in the operator or owner occurs at an existing
hotel, the new operator or owner shall apply for a lodging permit within ten
business days after closing on the sale of the property. If the prior
operator's lodging permit for the hotel was denied or revoked, a provisional
lodging permit may be issued to the new owner or operator, with special
conditions designated by the DCO, while a decision is pending on the new
operator or owner's application for permit.
   (H)   The operator shall display the lodging permit in the hotel in an open
and conspicuous public place at or near the check-in desk.
   (I)   Failure to obtain a lodging permit or maintain a lodging permit at all
times may result in revocation of the hotel's certificate of occupancy.
   (J)   Continued compliance with this subchapter is required to retain or
renew any lodging permit and/or business license to operate a hotel within the
city.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.306 CLASSIFICATION OF HOTELS BY CFS ROOM RATIO.
   (A)   By September 30 of each calendar year, the DCO shall determine the
calls for service (CFS) room ratio of all hotels located within the city during
the previous 12-month period, or during actual operations if fewer than 12
months during the previous 12-month period.
   (B)   Based upon the CFS room ratio determined by the DCO, all hotels shall
be classified during the successive year according to the following tier
system:
      (1)   Tier 1. Less than or equal to 1.0 CFS/room/year; or
      (2)   Tier 2. Greater than 1.0 CFS/room/year.
   (C)   A newly constructed or converted hotel which has not previously
operated in the city shall be presumed to be a tier 1 hotel until the next
September 30 registration period.
   (D)   Upon adoption of this subchapter, all hotels shall be classified as
tier 1 hotels until September 30 of the following calendar year, at which point
they will be classified in accordance with this subsection.
   (E)   By September 30 of each calendar year, the DCO shall notify each hotel
owner and/or operator within the city, in writing delivered by personal
service, certified mail or other method which provides confirmation of
delivery, of the CFS room ratio which shall be used as the classification for
that hotel for that ensuing lodging permit year. The DCO shall provide periodic
updates to each hotel owner and/or operator on at least a quarterly basis,
listing CFS tracked during the period.
   (F)   The notices specified in subsection (E) shall include:
      (1)   The classification assigned to the hotel;
      (2)   As allowed by law, data specifying the types of CFS identified as
having occurred on the property during the period reviewed, including the
incident numbers assigned to such CFS and the date and time of each call, to
allow the owner to understand the basis of the designation;
      (3)   The requirement of a mandatory inspection to be conducted by the
DCO; and
      (4)   The opportunity and procedures by which the owner may challenge the
data provided to the owner pursuant to this subsection upon which the
designation is based.
   (G)   Upon notice of initial classification or reclassification, the owner
or operator shall have ten days from the date of notice to show proof to the
DCO that the CFS Room Ratio is erroneous. After receipt of such information
from the owner or operator, the DCO shall classify the hotel as a tier 1 or
tier 2 within ten days of receipt of such information. The owner or operator
may appeal the DCO's decision in accordance with this chapter.
   (H)   The owner or operator shall have 30 days from the date of notice of
tier classification or reclassification (or from the date of the decision of
the appeal if there was an appeal) to implement completely the changes in
operation required by the revised classification. Failure to comply with this
provision may result in revocation of the lodging permit.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.307 LODGING PERMIT; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   (A)   The lodging permit may be denied for any of the following reasons
discovered or deemed advisable or necessary by the DCO in the course of the
review of the application:
      (1)   The hotel as constructed or as proposed to be operated by the
applicant does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited
to, the applicable building, zoning, housing, fire, safety, and health
regulations and codes; or
      (2)   Any owner, operator or manager has been convicted in the past five
years for any crime listed in §
150.305(D)(6); or
      (3)   The applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the
date of filing the application, had a lodging permit suspended or revoked; or
      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the
application for the lodging permit; or
      (5)   The operator has not fulfilled their duties under EMC §
35.070 et seq. to collect, report, and remit transient occupancy taxes to the
Finance Department during the previous licensing year.
      (6)   The CFS room ratio for the hotel is greater than 1.0 for two
consecutive years.
      (7)   The applicant fails to pay any/all excess CFS fees incurred.
   (B)   The owner or operator may appeal the DCO's decision in accordance with
this subchapter.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.308 APPEAL PROCESS.
   Filing appeal. Any owner or operator of a hotel that has been denied a
lodging permit by the DCO or whose hotel has undergone tier classification by
the DCO may appeal the action of the DCO to the Board of Appeals. The appeal
shall be filed within 20 calendar days of service of the denial or
reclassification by the DCO. The owner or operator must file a written appeal
with the office of the City Clerk on the forms provided by the city.
   (A)   Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to
this section, the Building Official shall present it at the next available
regular or special meeting of the Board of Appeals.
   (B)   Noticing for appeal hearing. Hearing notice shall be provided in
accordance with EMC §§
150.164 and
150.165.
   (C)   Hearing. Appeal hearings shall be conducted in accordance with EMC §§
150.168 and
150.169.
   (D)   Enforcement of the denial for a lodging permit or reclassification of
a hotel shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom that is
properly and timely filed.
   (E)   At the conclusion of the appeal, or after the time allowed to appeal
the decision of the DCO has elapsed without an appeal, the DCO shall record a
notice containing the legal description of the hotel property and the final
action of the Board of Appeals or of the DCO if no appeal was filed.
   (F)   The action of the Board of Appeals is a final decision, subject only
to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.309 LODGING PERMIT; REVOCATION.
   (A)   A lodging permit may be revoked by the Board of Appeals if:
      (1)   The owner is convicted of a drug-related or prostitution-related
crime;
      (2)   The operator is convicted of a drug-related or prostitution-related
crime, unless a new operator without a conviction is appointed by the owner
prior to revocation and a new application is submitted and approved by the DCO.
   (B)   A lodging permit may be revoked by the Board of Appeals upon good
cause showing that the condition or operation of the hotel is such that it is
or has negatively impacted the health, safety and/or welfare of its guests or
the neighboring community. Decision for revocation shall be based on, but is
not restricted to, the following:
      (1)   Noncompliance with federal, state and/or city codes and ordinances;
      (2)   Drug-related calls for service and/or drug-related arrest(s);
      (3)   Prostitution-related calls for service and/or prostitution-related
arrest(s);
      (4)   Disproportionate calls for fire, police, emergency medical service;
      (5)   The operator and/or the owner have failed to correct a violation
within the time period ordered by the city; or
      (6)   The operator has not fulfilled their duties under EMC §
35.070 et seq., to collect, report, and remit transient occupancy taxes to the
Finance Department, and said payments are in arrears for more than 60 days.
      (7)   Any other conditions, problems, issues, concerns or facts that are
deemed relevant.
   (C)   In processing a revocation, the DCO shall prepare an investigation
report that details the circumstances that have led to the request for a
revocation. It may include, but is not limited to, any or all of the following:
      (1)   Frequency or occurrence of violation(s), arrest(s), or call(s) for
service;
      (2)   Seriousness of the violation(s), arrests(s), or call(s) for
service;
      (3)   Alleged or adjudicated code violations;
      (4)   History of violation(s) of city code(s) or state statute(s), arrest
(s), or call(s) for service;
      (5)   Any activity, action or effort taken by the responsible party to
obstruct or interfere with correction of the problem;
      (6)   The impact of the violation(s), arrest(s), or call(s) for service
on the surrounding property and community; and/or
      (7)   The financial impact to the city.
   (D)   Upon good cause shown in the Investigation Report, the DCO shall file
a written revocation request with the Building Official containing the
following:
      (1)   A heading in the words: "Before the Board of Appeals of the City of
Eureka;"
      (2)   A caption reading: "Revocation of a Lodging Permit," giving the
names and addresses of owners and operators (as shown on the most recent permit
application) and the physical address of the hotel;
      (3)   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language stating why the
permit should be revoked, together with any material facts claimed to support
the contentions of the DCO; and
      (4)   The signature of the DCO and their official mailing address.
   (E)   Processing revocation. Upon receipt of any revocation request filed
pursuant to this section, the Building Official shall present it at a regular
or special meeting of the Board of Appeals within 30 days.
   (F)   Revocation hearings and notice. Hearing notice shall be provided in
accordance with EMC §§
150.164 and
150.165. Revocation hearings shall be conducted in accordance with EMC §§
150.168 and
150.169.
   (G)   Findings and orders of the Board of Appeals for a revocation hearing.
After hearing evidence from any interested party regarding revocation of the
lodging permit the Board may:
      (1)   Find the lodging permit is revoked; or
      (2)   Place the hotel on probation for a specified time period,
describing in detail all deficiencies that must be corrected. Failure of the
owner/operator to correct the deficiencies by the end of the probationary
period will result in revocation of the lodging permit by the DCO with no
additional appeal allowed; or
      (3)   Deny the DCO's request to revoke the lodging permit.
   (H)   Notice to the owner(s) and operator of the decision of the Board of
Appeals shall be provided in accordance with EMC §§
150.165 and
150.166. Upon a final decision issued by the Board of Appeals to revoke the
lodging permit, the DCO shall post on the hotel premises a copy or copies of
the revocation of the lodging permit of the hotel.
   (I)   Upon a final decision issued by the Board of Appeals to revoke the
lodging permit, the DCO shall record a notice containing the legal description
of the hotel property and the final action of the Board of Appeals revoking the
lodging permit.
   (J)   The action of the Board of Appeals is a final decision, subject only
to judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
   (K)   A posted notice of the revocation of the lodging permit may only be
removed by an authorized DCO. Any removal, covering, defacing, altering or
tampering by unauthorized person(s) may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor
violation of this chapter.
   (L)   Whenever a lodging permit has been revoked by the city, the operator
and/or owner of the hotel for which the lodging permit was issued shall
surrender such permit to the city. The operations of the hotel shall cease
within ten days of the posting of the notice of revocation of the lodging
permit.
   (M)   If the lodging permit revoked was for a property operated as a non-
transient hotel, the owner shall be liable for relocation benefits to each
tenant in accordance with California Health and Safety Code § 17975 et seq.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
§ 150.310 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A copy of the lodging permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location
in the public lobby of the facility.
   (B)   Each owner, operator, or manager shall cause to be maintained a
complete register for each person to whom any room at a hotel is let. The
register shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Correct name and permanent address, designating street and number,
city, state and country;
      (2)   Check-in and check-out dates, along with room number;
      (3)   Amount of the bill and method of payment; and
      (4)   Register records shall be maintained for a period of two years for
each person who lets any room at a hotel.
   (C)   No owner, operator, or manager shall allow or permit any hourly charge
for any room within said establishment.
   (D)   No owner, operator, or manager shall knowingly let, allow or permit
any room on the premises to be used for any illegal purpose including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Prostitution;
      (2)   Gambling;
      (3)   Use, sale or manufacture of drugs;
      (4)   Sale of alcoholic beverages.
   (E)   Providing false information to city authorities regarding the identity
of and hours of occupancy by any occupant shall be prima facie evidence of
knowledge of premises being used for illegal purposes including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Prostitution;
      (2)   Gambling;
      (3)   Use, sale or manufacture of drugs;
      (4)   Sale of alcoholic beverages.
   (F)   A representative of the owner, operator or manager shall be physically
present and accessible to the DCO, on a 24-hour basis.
   (G)   No tier 2 hotel owner, operator, or manager shall allow or permit any
room or rooms within the hotel to be rented more than twice in any 24-hour
period commencing at 12:01 a.m.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a tier 2 hotel to let or otherwise provide
any room therein to any person for more than 90 days in any 180 consecutive day
period. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager to allow
registration under a different name in order to avoid the continuous and
cumulative occupancy provision defined in this chapter. A tier 2 hotel may not
be found in violation of this subsection if adequate evidence is provided to
the DCO that the owner, operator, or manager is diligently pursuing a formal
eviction process pursuant to the California Civil Code.
   (I)   Excess CFS fee. Tier 2 hotels shall be required to pay a per-call fee
for each CFS in excess of the number that would result in a calls for service
room ratio of 1.0. The amount of the fee shall be determined based on the
approximate costs to the city of providing this additional coverage and shall
be set by the Council at the time this subchapter is adopted and may be
adjusted as necessary to ensure full and complete recovery of related city
expenses. Such fees shall be assessed annually at the time the CFS room ratio
is calculated.
   (J)   Tier 2 hotels that are determined to have a CFS room ratio in excess
of 1.0 for more than one consecutive year are required to have 24-hour on-site
security provided by commissioned security officers in addition to paying the
excess CFS fee. Security officers shall thereafter be required continuously for
a minimum of two consecutive years regardless of CFS classification.
   (K)   All security guards shall be in uniform and shall possess a valid
security guard registration from the California Bureau of Security and
Investigative Services (BSIS) while working for a tier 2 hotel.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.311 MAINTENANCE AND HOUSEKEEPING.
   (A)   Housekeeping. In general, the condition of bedding and other minor
housekeeping items shall not be deemed a nuisance as defined in EMC §
150.163. Upon receipt of a complaint, the DCO shall investigate any of the
following conditions, which may be taken into consideration during a permit
renewal or revocation.
      (1)   Bedding condition/cleanliness. Mattresses and box springs shall be
free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear, and be
maintained in a sanitary, non-defective condition (e.g. without broken springs,
indentations, sags, and the like). Any coverings placed over mattresses to
prevent stains and excess wear must be removable and not permanently attached
to the mattress or box spring (e.g., not stapled, nailed, or pinned or tied
down to the mattress or box spring).
      (2)   Linen condition/cleanliness. Linens shall be maintained in a
sanitary condition and be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in excess of
normal wear and tear. Linens (except quilts, bedspreads, blankets and
comforters) shall be cleaned upon each change of occupancy, or at least once a
week when occupancy does not change. Linens shall be cleaned with appropriate
sanitizing material to ensure disinfection. Linens include, but are not
restricted to, pillow cases, sheets, and towels.
      (3)   Bathroom condition/cleanliness. Bathroom fixtures (i.e. toilet,
bathtub, sink, shower, mirror) shall be maintained without cracks, chips, or
stains in excess of normal wear and tear. Floors shall be washed with water and
a sanitizer at change of occupancy, or at least once a week when occupancy does
not change. Daily cleaning schedules shall be maintained in the manager's
office.
      (4)   Carpet condition/cleanliness. Carpeting shall be free of stains,
holes, rips or odors in excess of normal wear and tear, and maintained in a
sanitary, non-defective condition.
      (5)   Floor condition/cleanliness. Non-carpeted floor surfaces shall be
made of non-absorbent material. All surfaces and tile grouting shall be
maintained without cracks, rips or missing elements in excess of normal wear
and tear.
      (6)   Wall condition/cleanliness. Wall surfaces shall be maintained
without spots, stains, flakes, chips, holes, and the like. and shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (7)   Mold/mildew. All surfaces, including carpeting and flooring, and
fixtures shall be free from mold and mildew.
      (8)   Electrical equipment. For the purpose of this chapter, electrical
equipment shall include furniture items installed by the owner, operator or
manager, including televisions, lamps, and the like. All electrical items must
be properly maintained and be in operable condition.
      (9)   Telephones.
         (a)   A central telephone service shall be maintained in accordance
with the provisions of California Civil Code § 1940(b)(2)(B); or
         (b)   Inside telephone wiring and at least one usable telephone jack
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of
California Civil Code § 1941.4.
      (10)   Furniture condition. All furniture items shall be maintained in
proper working condition, without defects, chips, holes, and the like in excess
of normal wear and tear.
      (11)   Window coverings. Shades, draperies or blinds shall be
appropriately hung to cover all windows and appropriate light fixtures. All
shades, draperies, blinds, shall be free of stains, holes, rips or odors in
excess of normal wear and tear, and shall be maintained in a sanitary, non-
defective condition.
      (12)   Minimum occupancy. A minimum of 50% of all guest rooms must be
available or in use for occupancy at all times unless work is being performed
pursuant to an active building permit.
      (13)   Windows. All windows designed to be opened shall be operable and
have an operable window security or locking device.
      (14)   Viewports. Each door shall have a viewport or window convenient to
the door.
      (15)   Door locks. All rooms are required to be outfitted with deadbolts
complying with California Civil Code § 1941.3 or an approved equal. All locks
shall be openable from the inside without the use of a key or tool.
      (16)   Exterior lighting. The exterior of the hotel property, including
adjacent public sidewalks and parking lots under the control of the operator,
shall be illuminated at least between one hour after sundown and one-half hour
before sunrise. Illumination shall be a minimum of one-tenth of one footcandle
throughout the property.
      (17)   Pest control maintenance. All hotel premises shall be maintained
so that they are free from rodents, insects, and vermin, and free from
conditions that encourage or harbor rodents, insects, and vermin. If the DCO,
Building Official, or Health Officer determine that an infestation exists, the
responsible agency may require an ongoing pest control agreement with a
licensed exterminator.
      (18)   Any property left in a room by a person or party who has checked
out shall be removed by the operator of the hotel before the room may be
occupied by another party, and be stored or disposed of in accordance with
applicable laws.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.312 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. An
owner, operator, or manager shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any provision of
this subchapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person.
   (B)   Allegation and evidence of a culpable mental state is not required for
proof of an offense defined by this chapter, except where expressly required by
this chapter.
   (C)   Any immediately dangerous condition as defined in EMC §
150.152 may be summarily abated in accordance with EMC §
150.153. Actions taken to abate the immediately dangerous conditions may
include, but are not limited to, repair or removal of the condition creating
the danger and/or the restriction from use of occupancy of the property on
which the dangerous condition exists, or any other abatement action determined
by the DCO to be necessary. In the event use or occupancy is restricted, the
owner, operator or manager shall discontinue said use immediately.
   (D)   If a hotel is operated without a lodging permit, whether through
denial, revocation, or failure to obtain, the DCO shall have authority to
vacate the structure and restrict occupancy after first providing the owner,
operator, or manager with no less than ten days notice of said restriction.
   (E)   If, in attempting to obtain compliance with subsections (C) or (D)
above, the DCO is denied entry to the property by its owner, operator, or
manager, the DCO may, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50
through 1822.60, seek an inspection and abatement warrant from the Superior
Court.
   (F)   Costs for any abatement performed by, or on behalf of the city,
including the cost of police services provided, relocation of occupants of the
property, and any other administrative costs, shall be recoverable by the city
by the methods given in EMC §§
150.183 through
150.190.
   (G)   In any action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding to
abate a nuisance in which the city elects, at the initiation of the action or
proceeding, to seek recovery of its attorneys' fees, the prevailing party in
the action or proceeding shall recover its attorneys' fees incurred in the
action or proceeding. In no action, administrative proceeding or special
proceeding shall an award of attorneys' fees to a prevailing party exceed the
amount of reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the city in the action or
proceeding. “Prevailing party” shall not include a party who complies with a
notice of violation issued by the city or an order in any action,
administrative proceeding or special proceeding. Attorney fees shall include
fees for the services of the City Attorney or his or her assistant and
deputies, calculated based on the effective hourly rate of such attorney. Ref.
Government Code § 38773.5.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13) Penalty, see §
150.999
EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESSING FOR ELECTRICAL VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
§ 150.401 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the City of
Eureka by Assembly Bill 1236 (Chiu, 2015) of the California Government Code,
that creates an expedited and streamlined permitting process for electrical
vehicle charging stations.
(Ord. 905-C.S., passed 11-3-20)
§ 150.402 DEFINITIONS.
   The terms, phrases, and words used in this subchapter shall be construed in
compliance with the definitions set forth by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7.
(Ord. 905-C.S., passed 11-3-20)
§ 150.403 EXPEDITING PERMITTING PROCESSING.
   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7 the City shall implement an
expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging
stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle
charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review.
   (A)   The city shall administratively approve an application to install
electric vehicle charging stations through the issuance of a building permit or
similar nondiscretionary permit.
   (B)   Review of the application to install an electric vehicle charging
station shall be limited to the Building Official's review of whether the
project meets all health and safety requirements of local, state, and federal
law. The requirements of local law shall be limited to those standards and
regulations necessary to ensure that the electric vehicle charging station will
not have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety. However,
if the Building Official makes a finding, based on substantial evidence, that
the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact
upon the public health or safety, the City may require the applicant to apply
for a use permit.
   (C)   The City may not deny an application for a use permit to install an
electric vehicle charging station unless it makes written findings based upon
substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a
specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety, and there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse
impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of potential
feasible alternatives of preventing the adverse impact.
   (D)   The decision of the Building Official pursuant to divisions (A), (B)
and/or (C) may be appealed to the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Any conditions imposed on an application to install an electric
vehicle charging station shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse
impact upon the public health or safety at the lowest cost possible.
   (F)   An electric vehicle charging station shall meet applicable health and
safety standards and requirements imposed by state and local permitting
authorities.
   (G)   An electric vehicle charging station shall meet all applicable safety
and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the
Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers
Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters
Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission
regarding safety and reliability.
   (H)   The City shall not condition approval for any electric vehicle
charging station permit on the approval by any association, as that term is
defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080.
(Ord. 905-C.S., passed 11-3-20)
§ 150.404 PERMIT APPLICATION PROCESSING.
   (A)   A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in
the City's adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly
processed. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit
application and supporting documents meet the requirements of the City adopted
checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety
standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §
65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval
does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle
charging station until approval is granted by the City/County. If the Building
Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall
issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies
in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for
expedited permit issuance.
(Ord. 905-C.S., passed 11-3-20)
§ 150.405 ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL OF PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   Consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850.7, the Building Official shall allow
for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this Ordinance and
associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications,
the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms,
applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any
applicant.
(Ord. 905-C.S., passed 11-3-20)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter where no other penalty
is provided, refer to §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter or cover a
placard once it has been attached to a building or structure, or cause or
permit the same to be done in violation of §§
150.085 through
150.095 of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
provisions of §§
150.085 through
150.095 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or
portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of §§
150.085 through
150.095 of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon
conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than $500, or by imprisonment in the city jail or county jail for a
period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 586, passed 2-7-95)
   (C)   (1)   An operator, owner, manager or responsible person who violates
any provisions of §§
150.300 through
150.312 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is
punishable as set forth in EMC §
10.99 for each act of violation and for each day or part of a day during which
the violation is committed, continued or licensed.
      (2)   Subsection (C)(1) notwithstanding, when the DCO determines that a
violation of any provisions of this chapter has occurred, he or she shall have
the authority to issue an administrative citation pursuant to EMC §
10.35 et seq., to any person responsible for the violation and/or to the owner
of the property.
(Ord. 798-C.S., passed 10-1-13)
CHAPTER 151: AIRPORT ZONING
Section
   
151.01   Short title
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Height limits
   
151.04   Use restrictions
   
151.05   Nonconforming uses
   
151.06   Administrative agency
   
151.07   Variances
   
151.08   Permits
   
151.09   Hazard marking and lighting
   
151.10   Appeals
   
151.11   Violations of provisions
   
151.12   Conflicting regulations
§ 151.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Airport Zoning
Regulations of the City”.
('63 Code, § 10-1.01) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Any publicly owned or publicly administered airport located within
the city.
   AIRPORT APPROACH ZONE. The approach area and the air space directly above
it.
   AIRPORT HAZARD. Any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the air
space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off from any
airport or which is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of
aircraft.
   AIRPORT HAZARD AREA. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard
might be established if not prevented as provided in this chapter. The zones
described in this section are hereby designated as the airport hazard areas of
all airports subject to the provisions of this chapter.
     AIRPORT REFERENCE POINT. A point selected and marked at the approximate
center of the airport landing area.
   AIRPORT TRANSITION ZONE. The land area directly beneath the transition
surfaces and the air spaces directly above and below the transition surfaces.
   AIRPORT TURNING ZONE. The land areas directly beneath the conical surface
and the horizontal surface and the air spaces directly above and below the
horizontal surface and the conical surface.
   APPROACH AREA LENGTH. The approach area has a length of 10,000 feet
beginning 200 feet outward from the end of each runway and extended outward,
ending at a point 10,200 feet from the end of the runway on the extended center
line of the runway. In addition, the approach areas of all runways which are
used for instrument operation shall extend outward an additional 40,000 feet.
The approach area requirements for instrument runways shall apply to all
runways which are used for instrument operations and to both ends of such
runways.
   APPROACH AREA SLOPE. For instrument runways the slope of the approach
surface along the runway center line extended is 50:1 for the inner 10,000 foot
section and 40:1 for the outer 40,000 foot section. For all other runways, not
intended for instrument operation, which meet or exceed the minimum runway
length requirements for feeder carrier service, the slope is 40:1. On airports
with shorter runway lengths than those specified for feeder air carrier
service, the slope of the approach surface is 20:1 for all runways.
   APPROACH AREA WIDTH. The approach area is symmetrically located with respect
to the extended runway center line and for all instrument runways has a total
width of 1,000 feet at the end adjacent to the runway. The approach area flares
uniformly to a total width of 4,000 feet at the end of the 10,000-foot section
and to a total width of 16,000 feet at the end of the additional 40,000-foot
section. For all other runways not intended for instrument operation, the
approach area has a total width at the end adjacent of the runway and at the
approach respectively as follows:
      (1)   For express air carrier service and larger airports, 500 feet and
2,500 feet;
      (2)   For trunk line air carrier service airports, 400 feet and 2,400
feet;
      (3)   For feeder air carrier service airports, 300 feet and 2,300 feet;
and,
      (4)   For secondary airports, 250 feet and 2,250 feet.
   APPROACH SURFACES. Inclined planes located directly above the approach area.
The dimensions of the approach shall be measured horizontally.
   CONICAL SURFACE. The conical surface extends upward and outward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface with a slope of 20:1 measured in a vertical
plan passing through the airport reference point. Measuring radially outward,
from the periphery of the horizontal surface, the conical surface extends for a
horizontal distance of 7,000 feet for intercontinental airports and
intercontinental express airports; 5,000 feet for continental, express, trunk
line, and feeder airports; and 3,000 feet for all smaller airports.
   ESTABLISHED ELEVATION OF AN AIRPORT. The elevation of the highest point of
the usable landing area.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. The horizontal surface is a plane, circular in shape,
with its height 150 feet above the established airport elevation and having a
radius from the airport reference point as indicated in the following table,
which table also indicates the classification of each airport for the purposes
of this chapter:
      (1)   Intercontinental express airports, 13,000 feet.
      (2)   Intercontinental airports (Arcata Airport), 11,500 feet.
      (3)   Continental airports, 10,000 feet.
      (4)   Express airports, 8,500 feet.
      (5)   Trunk line airports, 7,000 feet.
      (6)   Feeder airports (Rohnerville Airport), 6,000 feet.
      (7)   Secondary airports (Eureka County Airport, Eureka Municipal
Airport, Garberville Airport, Shelter Cove Airport, and Dinsmore Airport),
5,000 feet.
   LANDING AREA. The area of an airport used for landing, taking off, or
taxiing of aircraft, consisting of the areas more particularly described in
other sections of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any structure, tree, or use of land which does not
conform to a regulation prescribed in this chapter on June 21, 1956.
   STRUCTURE. Any object constructed or installed by man, including, but
without limitations, buildings, towers, smokestacks, mill burners, and overhead
transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. The transitional surfaces and inclined planes with a
slope of 7:1 measured upward and outward in a vertical plane at right angles to
the center line of the runway. The transitional surfaces, symmetrically located
on either side of the runway, extend upward and outward from a line on either
side of the runway which is parallel to and level with the runway center line.
Such parallel lines are at a horizontal distance from the runway center line
equal to one-half the minimum width of the approach area. Transitional surfaces
extend from the edges of all approach surfaces upward and outward to the
intersection with the horizontal surface or conical surface. The  approach
surfaces for instrument runways projecting through and beyond the limits of the
conical surface have a 7:1 transitional surface extending a distance of 5,000
feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surfaces and at right
angles to the runway center line.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
('63 Code, § 10-1.02) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
§ 151.03 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be
erected or altered, and no tree shall be maintained in any airport approach
zone, airport turning zone, or airport transition zone to a height which would
project above the approach surface, the horizontal surface, the conical
surface, or the transitional surface.
   (B)   Whenever or wherever any of such surfaces overlap, the most lightly
restrictive requirement shall govern and control; provided, however, the
foregoing descriptions shall not impose upon the city any duty of maintenance
or care.
('63 Code, § 10-1.03) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 151.04 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use may be made of
land within any airport approach zone, airport turning zone, or airport
transition zone in such manner as to create electrical interference with radio
communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers
to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes
of flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft.
('63 Code, § 10-1.04) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 151.05 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The regulations prescribed in §
151.04 of this chapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering,
or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to such
regulations on June 21, 1956, nor otherwise interfere with the continuance of
any nonconforming use.
('63 Code, § 10-1.05) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
§ 151.06 ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCY.
   The County Division of Aviation is hereby designated the administrative
agency charged with the duty of administering and enforcing the regulations of
this chapter. The duties of the County Division of Aviation shall include that
of hearing and deciding all permits, except as provided in §
151.07 of this chapter, but shall not include any of the powers or duties
delegated to the Council. The County Division of Aviation shall prepare and
make available to the public maps showing the approximate elevation of all
property affected by this chapter in order to aid property owners in complying
with the provisions of this chapter. Copies of such maps shall also be
furnished to the office of the Director of Public Works and to the Planning
Commission for public use.
('63 Code, § 10-1.06) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56; Am. Ord. 587-C.S., passed 2-
21-95)
§ 151.07 VARIANCES.
   Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or
permit the growth of any tree, or use his property in conflict with the
provisions of this chapter may apply to the Planning Commission for a variance
therefrom, and such variance may be granted by the Council following the
receipt of a report of findings by the Planning Commission. Such variance shall
be permitted when a literal application or enforcement of the regulations of
this chapter would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and
the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but would do
substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of the provisions of
this chapter; provided, however, any such variance may be subject to such
reasonable conditions and restrictions as the Council may deem necessary.
('63 Code, § 10-1.07) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
§ 151.08 PERMITS.
   Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced, substantially altered,
or rebuilt within any airport approach zone, airport turning zone, or airport
transition zone, a permit shall be secured authorizing such replacement or
change. Such permit shall be granted except when the granting thereof would
permit the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a
nonconforming use or structure to be made or become higher or become a greater
hazard to air navigation than existed on the effective date of the applicable
regulation thereunder. In the event of emergencies affecting the public welfare
or safety, or the preservation of property, any nonconforming structure may be
replaced or repaired without first obtaining a permit provided an application
for a permit is filed with the County Division of Aviation within 24 hours
after such department is first opened subsequent to the emergency.
('63 Code, § 10-1.08) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56; Am. Ord. 587-C.S., passed 2-
21-95)
§ 151.09 HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING.
   Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of this chapter
and is reasonable in the circumstances, may be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure in question to install, operate, and maintain thereon
such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence
of an airport hazard. The provisions of this section shall apply only to any
nonconforming structure or tree and to any nonconforming structure or tree
which is replaced, altered, or rebuilt in such a way as to create a greater
hazard than existed before such replacement, alteration, or rebuilding
commenced.
('63 Code, § 10-1.09) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
§ 151.10 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved or affected by any decision of the County
Division of Aviation, made in the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, if of the opinion that a decision of the County Division of Aviation
is an improper application of this chapter, shall appeal to the Council prior
to introducing any litigation forming the subject matter of such grievance.
   (B)   Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by
the rules of the Council, by filing with the County Division of Aviation and
with the Council a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The County
Division of Aviation shall forthwith transmit to the Council all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (C)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Airports Manager of the Aviation Division certifies to
the Council after the notice of appeal has been filed that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such event, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by order of the Council on notice to the County Division of
Aviation and on due cause shown.
   (D)   The Council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal,
giving public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person
or by agent or by attorney.
   (E)   The Council may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as may seem proper.
   (F)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Council shall
be sufficient to reverse, affirm, or modify any order, requirement, decision,
or determination of the County Division of Aviation, or to decide in favor of
the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this
chapter, or to effect any variation in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-1.10) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56; Am. Ord. 587-C.S., passed 2-
21-95)
§ 151.11 VIOLATIONS OF PROVISIONS.
   Each violation of this chapter, or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated or made pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor.
('63 Code, § 10-1.11) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
§ 151.12 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where this chapter imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the
use of land than is imposed or required by any other law or regulation, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
('63 Code, § 10-1.12) (Ord. 2660, passed 6-19-56)
CHAPTER 152: PLANNING AND ZONING ADMINISTRATION
Section
Administrative Bodies
   
152.01   Planning Commission
Procedures for Naming and Renaming Streets and Other Public Facilities
   
152.15   Submittal of requests
   
152.16   Recommendations by Planning Commission; policy guidelines
   
152.17   Change of street names; notice and hearing
   
152.18   Review by Council
ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
§ 152.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Created. The Planning Commission is hereby created and shall consist
of five members.
('63 Code, § 10-2.01)
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Planning Commission shall have the following
powers and duties:
      (1)   To prepare and recommend to the Council after a public hearing
thereon the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a comprehensive general master
plan, or any part thereof, or the adoption, amendment, or repeal of a precise
plan for the physical development of the city and its environs as such terms
are defined by Cal. Gov't Code Chapter 3 of Title 7 (being §§ 65100 et seq.);
      (2)   To perform all of the functions assigned to a Planning Commission
by Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65100 et seq., and other state statutes relating to
planning and zoning;
      (3)   To advise with and recommend to the proper officials of the city
the approval, disapproval or modification of all maps or plats for the
subdivision of land in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act of the state or
it may be provided by law;
      (4)   To hold hearings on planning and zoning matters as prescribed in
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65100 et seq., or by law;
      (5)   To advise with and recommend to the proper officials of the city
the acquisition, use, or disposition of all city owned real property;
      (6)   To list and classify annually all proposed public improvements
recommended by officers, departments, boards, and commissions of the city and,
on or before March 1 of each year, to have prepared and submit to the Council
and the City Manager a coordinated program of proposed public improvements for
at least the ensuing five-year period, together with its recommendations in
connection therewith;
      (7)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65901 and 65902, to hold hearings
and decide applications for conditional uses, variances, or other permits when
the zoning ordinance provides; and
      (8)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Council.
(‘63 Code, § 10-2.02)
(Ord. 2878, passed 8-15-61; Am. Ord. 496-C.S., passed 7-20-89; Am. Ord. 791-
C.S., passed 12-4-12)
PROCEDURES FOR NAMING AND RENAMING STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC FACILITIES
§ 152.15 SUBMITTAL OF REQUESTS.
   All requests for the naming and renaming of streets, public buildings, parks
or recreational facilities owned or controlled by the city, except proposals
initiated by the City Council or the Planning Commission, shall be submitted in
writing to the Director of Community Development.
('63 Code, § 10-6.101) (Ord. 464-C.S., passed 1-14-88)
§ 152.16 RECOMMENDATIONS BY PLANNING COMMISSION; POLICY GUIDELINES.
   (A)   All requests for the naming or renaming of any public street, public
building, park or recreational facility shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for recommendation. In the event that the request for naming or
renaming involves a street, public building, park or recreational facility
under the authority of the Recreation and Parks Commission, Harbor Commission
or Zoo Advisory Board, the request for naming or renaming shall be referred to
that body involved for recommendation prior to being referred to the Planning
Commission. The Planning Commission may recommend the name proposed, or
recommend a different name.
   (B)   In reaching its decision the Planning Commission shall give
consideration to the following policy guidelines:
      (1)   Any street which is a continuation of, or approximately the
continuation of, any existing street should be given the same name as the
already existing street, in the absence of other overriding considerations.
      (2)   Streets and other public facilities should not be given names which
would cause confusion with other streets or public facilities.
      (3)   Names which achieve any of the following purposes should be
promoted:
         (a)   A name which serves to identify the location of the subject by
reference to distinct geographic, environmental or development features in the
immediate area.
         (b)   A name which references the history of the subject site or its
immediate area.
         (c)   A name which identifies a person or family who made an
extraordinary donation of land or funds to promote the construction or
improvement of the subject public facility.
         (d)   A name which recognizes a person or family who made a distinct,
significant contribution to the well-being of the city, including past mayors,
councilmembers, board or commission members, officers, or employees of the
city.
('63 Code, § 10-6.102) (Ord. 464-C.S., passed 1-14-88; Am. Ord. 660-C.S.,
passed 10-1-02)
§ 152.17 CHANGE OF STREET NAMES; NOTICE AND HEARING.
   Prior to any change of name of an existing street, if the renaming would
change the street address of one or more occupants of abutting property, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed street
renaming. The Director of Community Development shall endeavor to mail written
notice of the proposed renaming to all such affected occupants at least 10 days
prior to the date of the hearing, but the failure of any such affected occupant
to receive such notice shall not invalidate any determination to change the
name of the street made pursuant to this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-6.103) (Ord. 464-C.S., passed 1-14-88)
§ 152.18 REVIEW BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   In cases other than those governed by §
152.17 of this subchapter, the Director of Community Development, the Planning
Commission, or the City Council may set a public hearing on any request for the
naming or renaming of any street or other facility, subject to such notice as
they deem appropriate.
   (B)   (1)   Following the decision of the Planning Commission under §§
152.16 and
152.17 of this subchapter, the Director of Community Development shall prepare
a report of the Planning Commission's action, summarizing the public input, if
any, and the reasons for the Commission's recommendation. Such report shall be
submitted to the City Council at its first regular meeting occurring at least
15 days after the Commission's action. The City Clerk shall provide
notification of the date and approximate time of the Council's action to any
person who requests such notification.
      (2)   The City Council may affirm the Commission's decision, remand the
matter back to the Planning Commission for further consideration or made its
own decision on the matter.
   (C)   Any person who desires may address the Council prior to the Council's
action or may submit such opposition in writing prior to such time.
('63 Code, § 10-6.104) (Ord. 464-C.S., passed 1-14-88)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD HAZARD AREA REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Statutory authorization
   
153.002   Findings of fact
   
153.003   Statement of purpose
   
153.004   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
153.005   Definitions
   
153.006   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
153.007   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
153.008   Compliance
   
153.009   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
153.010   Interpretation
   
153.011   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
153.012   Severability
Administration
   
153.013   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
153.014   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
153.015   Development permit
   
153.016   Appeals
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
153.017   Standards of construction
   
153.018   Standards for utilities
   
153.019   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development
   
153.020   Standards for manufactured homes
   
153.021   Standards for recreational vehicles
   
153.022   Floodways
   
153.023   Coastal high hazard areas
Variance Procedures
   
153.024   Nature of variances
   
153.025   Conditions for variances
   
153.026   Appeal Board
Substantial Improvement/Damage Determination
   
153.027   Improvement costs that must be included within substantial
improvement and/or damage determinations
   
153.028   Improvement costs that may be excluded
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of California has in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65302,
65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Eureka City Council does hereby adopt the
following floodplain management regulations.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Eureka are subject to periodic
inundation which can result in a loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities also contribute to flood losses.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied
uniformly throughout the city to all publicly and privately owned land within
flood prone, mudslide (i.e. mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These
regulations are designed to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   (H)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.004 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses and facilities vulnerable to floods, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage;
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   A ZONE. see "Special Flood Hazard Area."
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is either:
      (1)   A subordinate structure which use is appropriate, subordinate, and
customarily incidental to that of the main structure or the main use of the
land and which is located on the same site with the main structure or use; or
      (2)   An attached or detached garage or similar covered structure for the
parking of vehicles for residential units; or
      (3)   A small shed or similar structure less than 120 square feet in
size.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal
use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   ALLUVIAL FAN. A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped
deposit of boulders, gravel, or fine sediments that have been eroded from areas
of higher topography, transported by flood flows, and then deposited at lower
elevations, and which are subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar land form below which the flow
path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial
fan flooding can occur.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized
by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See "Special Flood Hazard Area."
   BASE FLOOD. A flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). BASE FLOOD is
the term used throughout this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   BASEMENT. Any area of a building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below
ground level - on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALLS. Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether
constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other suitable
building material which is not part of the structural support of the building
and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action
without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which
they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by flood waters.
A BREAKAWAY WALL shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than
ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of breakaway walls must be
certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following
conditions:
      (1)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
      (2)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the
event of the base flood.
   BUILDING. See "Structure.”
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. An area of special flood hazard extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. It is an area subject to high velocity waters, including coastal and
tidal inundation or tsunamis. The area is designated on a Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) as Zone V1- V30, VE, or V.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill,
excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain
which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 19, 1986
(Ord. 448-C.S.).
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FLOOD, FLOODING, or FLOOD WATER.
      (1)   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
      (2)   The condition resulting from flood related erosion.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base
flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source - see “Flooding.”
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited
to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of
police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing,
see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as "Regulatory Floodway."
   FLOODWAY FRINGE. That area of the floodplain on either side of the
"Regulatory Floodway" where encroachment may be permitted.
   FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION. As related to the Variance section of this chapter,
means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the
public. In examining this requirement, the Planning Commission will consider
the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years.
Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation
are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods,
while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to
all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood
damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware
that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very
high flood insurance rates.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the City of Eureka, which is empowered
to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and
general welfare of its citizenry.
   HARDSHIP. As related to the Variance section of this chapter means the
exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested
variance. The Planning Commission requires that the variance be exceptional,
unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial
hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations,
physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors
likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these
problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even
if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build
elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places.
   LEVEE. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and
constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control
or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement (see "Basement" definition).
      (1)   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor
that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor,
provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   The flood openings standards in §
153.017(C)(3);
         (b)   The anchoring standards in §
153.017(A);
         (c)   The construction materials and methods standards in §
153.017(B); and
         (d)   The standards for utilities in §
153.018.
      (2)   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are
prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "Basement" definition).
This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. Substantial damage/improvement procedures. See §
153.014(B)(1).
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the start of construction commenced on or after June 19, 1986, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 19,
1986.
   OBSTRUCTION. Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100 YEAR FLOOD. See Base Flood.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE. A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of
sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and
adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides
and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal
dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively
mild slope.
   PROGRAM DEFICIENCY. A defect in a community's floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management regulations.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE. As related to the Variance section of this
chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything
which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood,
or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage
or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream,
canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. Means to bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may
be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SAND DUNES. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
   SHEET FLOW AREA. See Area of Shallow Flooding.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM
as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, AH, V1-V30, VE or V.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days from the date of the
permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground;
this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to before damaged condition would equal or
exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   V ZONE. See "Coastal High Hazard Area."
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or
other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains
of coastal or riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.006 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the City of Eureka.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.007 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of
Eureka, Humboldt County California, and Incorporated Areas dated June 17, 1986,
with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and
Floodway Maps (FBFMs), dated June 17, 1986, and all subsequent amendments and/
or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of
this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow
implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Planning
Commission by the Floodplain Administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on
file at Eureka City Hall, Eureka, California.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.008 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Nothing herein shall prevent the City of Eureka from taking such lawful action
as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.009 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.010 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.011 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee
thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.012 SEVERABILITY.
   This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of
this chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so
declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.013 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Manager or his or her designee, is hereby appointed to administer,
implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits
in accord with its provisions.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.014 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Permit review. Review all development permits to determine:
      (1)   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including
determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing
structures;
      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the city; and
      (5)   All Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not
be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved
CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition.
   (B)   Development of substantial improvement and substantial damage
procedures.
      (1)   The Floodplain Administrator, with the concurrence of the Public
Works/Building Safety Departments, shall determine the extent of substantial
damage and/or improvement to an affected structure or building. The city shall
use §§
153.027 and
153.028, the Substantial Improvement/Damage Determination sections of this
chapter and any subsequent FEMA Technical Guides to determine if structural
damage and /or improvements rise to the level of substantial as defined in §
153.005. The city shall, when determining the market value of a structure,
shall utilize the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its
condition prior to such damage or partial deconstruction to the estimated cost
of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for
this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by, the Chief
Building Official or designee.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall assure all procedures referenced
in §
153.014 are coordinated with other city departments/divisions and implemented
by city staff.
   (C)   Review, use and development of other base flood data.
      (1)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
153.007, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or
state agency, or other source, in order to administer §§
153.017 through
153.023, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
      (2)   A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods
from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, Managing Floodplain Development in
Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year)
Flood Elevations dated July 1995.
   (D)   Notification of other agencies.
      (1)   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
         (a)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
         (b)   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency; and
         (c)   Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      (2)   Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:
         (1)   Within six months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the Floodplain Administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA
for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).
         (2)   (a)   All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to
the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on
Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the "start of construction" definition.
            (b)   Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of
those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and
floodplain management requirements are based on current data.
         (3)   Changes in corporate boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever
the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate
limits.
   (E)   Documentation of floodplain development. Obtain and maintain for
public inspection and make available as needed the following:
      (1)   Certification required by §
153.017(C)(1) and §
153.020 (lowest floor elevations);
      (2)   Certification required by §
153.017(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
      (3)   Certification required by §
153.017(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);
      (4)   Certification of elevation required by §
153.019(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
      (5)   Certification required by §
153.022(B) (floodway encroachments);
      (6)   Information required by §
153.023(F) (coastal construction standards); and
      (7)   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in the city's biennial
report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (F)   Map determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in §
153.016.
   (G)   Remedial action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
specified in §
153.008.
   (H)   Biennial report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA.
   (I)   Planning. Assure community's General Plan is consistent with
floodplain management objectives herein.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.015 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood
hazard established in §
153.007. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the city and fees established by the City Council. The applicant shall
provide the following minimum information:
   (A)   Three sets of plans for residential construction, five sets for
commercial structures, drawn to scale, showing:
      (1)   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their
location;
      (2)   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;
      (3)   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
      (4)   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
      (5)   Base flood elevation information as specified in §
153.007 or §
153.014(C);
      (6)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; and
      (7)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in §
153.017(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.
   (B)   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the
nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in §
153.017(C)(2).
   (C)   For a crawlspace foundation, location and total net area of foundation
openings as required in §
153.017(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and
7-93.
   (D)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
   (E)   All appropriate certifications listed in §
153.014(E) of this chapter.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.016 APPEALS.
   The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 153.017 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
   (A)   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
      (1)   With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
      (2)   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      (3)   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding; and
      (4)   Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths shall be constructed
around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.
      (1)   Residential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement:
         (a)   In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation.
         (b)   In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a
height equal to or exceeding the base flood elevation specified in feet on the
FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no base
flood elevation is specified.
         (c)   In an A zone, without base flood elevations specified on the
FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as
determined under §
153.014(C).
         Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the Chief Building Official to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
with §
153.017(C)(1) or:
         (a)   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities below the elevation recommended under §
153.017(C)(1), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water; and
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that
the standards of §
153.017(C)(2)(a) and (b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to
the Floodplain Administrator.
      (3)   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements
of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of flood water. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the
following minimum criteria:
         (a)   For non-engineered openings:
            1.   Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding; and
            2.   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade; and
            3.   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of flood water; and
            4.   Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings
on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter.
         (b)   Engineered openings shall be certified by a registered civil
engineer or architect.
      (4)   Manufactured homes. See §
153.020.
      (5)   Garages and accessory structures.
         (a)   Attached garages.
            1.   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with
the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters. See §
153.017(C)(3). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with
flood-resistant materials. See §
153.017(B).
            2.   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the
above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking
areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
         (b)   Detached garages and accessory structures.
            1.   Accessory structures, used solely for parking or limited
storage, as defined in §
153.005, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood
elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
               a.   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking
or limited storage;
               b.   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;
               c.   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
               d.   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory
structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
               e.   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain
encroachment provisions in §
153.022; and
               f.   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with §
153.017(C)(3).
            2.   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the
above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in §
153.017.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.018 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate:
      (1)   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
      (2)   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.019 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER PROPOSED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   All new subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall:
      (1)   Identify the Special Flood Hazard Areas (SFHA) and Base Flood
Elevations (BFE).
      (2)   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures
and pads on the final plans or tentative subdivision maps.
      (3)   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following
as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application
for a Letter of Map Revision based on Fill (LOMR-F) to the Floodplain
Administrator:
         (a)   Lowest floor elevation.
         (b)   Pad elevation.
         (c)   Lowest adjacent grade.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (D)   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate
drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.020 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   (A)   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on
sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as the result of a flood, shall:
      (1)   Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (2)   Within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's Flood Insurance
Rate Map, meet the requirements of §
153.023.
   (B)   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH,
AE, V1-30, V, and VE on the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not
subject to the provisions of §
153.020(A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so
that either the:
      (1)   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation; or
      (2)   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36
inches in height above grade.
      Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor
including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.021 STANDARDS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, AE, V1-30 and VE
will either:
      (1)   Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle
is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached
to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and
has no permanently attached additions; or
      (3)   Meet the permit requirements of §
153.015 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in §
153.020.
   (B)   Recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones V1-30, V, and VE on
the community's Flood Insurance Rate Map will meet the requirements of §§
153.021(A) and
153.023.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.022 FLOODWAYS.
   Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
   (A)   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the city.
   (B)   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city shall prohibit
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and
other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is
provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any
increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (C)   If §
153.022(A) and (B) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other
applicable provisions for flood hazard reduction.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.023 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREAS.
   Within coastal high hazard areas, Zones V, V1-30, and VE, as established
under §
153.007, the following standards shall apply:
   (A)   All new residential and nonresidential construction, including
substantial improvement/damage, shall be elevated on adequately anchored
pilings or columns and securely anchored to such pilings or columns so that the
bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to or above the base flood
level. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored
to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the effects of wind
and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading
values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values
used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards.
   (B)   All new construction and other development shall be located on the
landward side of the reach of mean high tide.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvement shall have the space
below the lowest floor free of obstructions or constructed with breakaway walls
as defined in §
153.005. Such enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation and will be
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage.
   (D)   Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings.
   (E)   Man-made alteration of sand dunes which would increase potential flood
damage is prohibited.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain and maintain the following
records:
      (1)   Certification by a registered engineer or architect that a proposed
structure complies with §
153.023(A); and
      (2)   The elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the bottom of the
lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or
columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether such
structures contain a basement.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
VARIANCE PROCEDURES
§ 153.024 NATURE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk
and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.
   (B)   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the
general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a property and are
not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a property with physical
characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter
would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding
property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be
shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land
itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.
   (C)   It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding.
This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a
structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood
elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The
long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met
if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided
in this chapter are detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met
before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen
out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more
appropriate.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.025 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of the Administration and Provisions for Flood hazard Reduction
sections of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   (B)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures (as defined in §
153.005) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (C)   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
MINIMUM NECESSARY means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the Planning Commission need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the Planning
Commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the
local ordinance.
   (E)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      (1)   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and
      (2)   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to
life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain
Administrator in the office of the Humboldt County Recorder and shall be
recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.026 APPEAL BOARD.
   (A)   Upon reviewing requests for variances, the Planning Commission shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      (1)   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury
of others;
      (2)   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      (4)   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
      (5)   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      (10)   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      (11)   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   (B)   Variances shall only be granted upon a:
      (1)   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance (see §
153.005, definition of “public safety and nuisance"), cause fraud and
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement,
and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally
dependent use provided that the provisions of §
153.026(A) through (D) are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not
create a public nuisance.
   (D)   Upon consideration of the factors of §
153.026 (A) and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Commission may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT/DAMAGE DETERMINATION
§ 153.027 IMPROVEMENT COSTS THAT MUST BE INCLUDED WITHIN SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT AND/OR DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   All structural elements, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Spread or continuous foundation or footings and pilings;
      (2)   Monolithic concrete slab foundations;
      (3)   Bearing walls, tie beams, and trusses;
      (4)   Wood or reinforced concrete decking or roofing;
      (5)   Floors and ceilings including insulation;
      (6)   Attached decks, stairways and porches;
      (7)   Interior partition walls;
      (8)   Exterior wall finishes;
      (9)   Windows and doors;
      (10)   Roof sheathing;
      (11)   Roof re-shingling or re-tiling;
      (12)   Roof dormers;
      (13)   Balconies;
      (14)   Hardware.
   (B)   All interior finish elements, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Floor cover such as tile, wood, vinyl, carpet, marble and the like;
      (2)   Wall and ceiling finishes such as drywall, painting, stucco,
plaster, wood paneling, marble, and the like;
      (3)   Kitchen, utility, bathroom, and garage cabinets and counter tops;
      (4)   Built-in bookcases, cabinets, entertainment centers, aquariums,
bars, wine racks, and the like.
   (C)   All utility and service equipment, including but not limited to:
      (1)   HVAC equipment including ducting, boilers, chillers and the like;
      (2)   Plumbing services including water heaters, sinks, fixtures,
toilets, showers, tubs, and the like;
      (3)   Electrical services including light fixtures, ceiling fans, and the
like;
      (4)   Built-in appliances, including dishwashers, ovens, ranges, garbage
disposals, trash compactors, and the like;
      (5)   Security and fire alarms, and fire suppression systems;
      (6)   Central vacuum systems;
      (7)   Water filtration, conditioning or recirculation systems.
   (D)   Miscellaneous costs that must be included:
      (1)   Labor and other costs associated with demolishing, removing or
altering of building components;
      (2)   Overhead and profit;
      (3)   The values of donated or discounted materials must be included at
their full market value and estimated as though they were purchased during a
normal market transaction;
      (4)   The value of self or volunteered labor must be estimated at
prevailing wages for the appropriate type of construction wage scale.
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
§ 153.028 IMPROVEMENT COSTS THAT MAY BE EXCLUDED.
   (A)   Costs of improvements to correct existing code violations, only if the
following:
      (1)   A regulatory official was informed and knew the extent of the Code-
related deficiencies;
      (2)   The deficiency was in existence prior to the damage event or
improvement;
      (3)   Only the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions may be
excluded from the improvement cost;
   (B)   Historic structures must be:
      (1)   Listed on the National Register of Historic Places; or
      (2)   Certified by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historic significance of a historic district; or
      (3)   Listed on a state inventory of historic places approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Listed on a local inventory to the satisfaction of the State Office
of Historic Preservation.
      (5)   If the improvements are for purposes of restoration or preservation
only and the structure meets one of the above certifications, then the
substantial improvement requirements may be waived upon issuance of a variance.
   (C)   ADA requirements. Structural upgrades necessary to comply with the
American Disabilities Act may be excluded from the total improvement cost if
the building falls within one of the 12 organizations included within the
purview of Title III of ADA.
   (D)   Debris removal and clean-up costs may be excluded:
      (1)   Debris removal from building or lot, dumpster rental, transport
fees to landfill, landfill disposal fees;
      (2)   Clean-up dirt and mud removal, building dry-out and the like;
   (E)   Outside improvements may be excluded including:
      (1)   Landscaping;
      (2)   Sidewalks;
      (3)   Fences;
      (4)   Yard lights;
      (5)   Swimming pools;
      (6)   Screened pool enclosures;
      (7)   Sheds;
      (8)   Gazebos;
      (9)   Detached structures including garages;
      (10)   Landscape irrigation systems;
      (11)   Wells and septic systems.
   (F)   Excludable miscellaneous items. Items not considered real property
including but not limited to throw rugs, furniture, refrigerators, other
contents not connected/attached to, or part of the structure.
   (G)   Other excludable costs.
      (1)   Plans and specifications;
      (2)   Surveys;
      (3)   Permit fees;
(Ord. 767-C.S., passed 4-19-11)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Citation and authority
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Conformity to general plan, Local Coastal Program, specific plan and
zoning ordinances
   
154.004   Application
   
154.005   Modification of requirements
   
154.006   Definitions
   
154.007   Responsibilities of officials and administrative bodies
Maps Required
   
154.020   Necessity for maps
   
154.021   Maps required for division of land
   
154.022   Fees and deposits
Subdivision Maps; Five or More Parcels
   
154.035   Preliminary maps
   
154.036   Tentative subdivision maps; governing provisions
   
154.037   Form and contents
   
154.038   Accompanying data and reports
   
154.039   Submittal to Department of Community Development; review
   
154.040   Planning Commission and City Council action
   
154.041   Appeals of Planning Commission action
   
154.042   Expiration and extensions
   
154.043   Amendments to approved tentative map
   
154.044   Construction agreement
   
154.045   Final maps; conformance to provisions; preparation
   
154.046   Survey required
   
154.047   Form and contents
   
154.048   Submittal for city approval
Subdivision Maps; Four or Less Parcels
   
154.060   Preliminary and tentative parcel maps
   
154.061   Form and contents
   
154.062   Submittal to Department of Community Development
   
154.063   Review and notice
   
154.064   Action by Director of Community Development
   
154.065   Approval and/or denial; conditions of approval
   
154.066   Request for review of Director of Community Development's action
   
154.067   Expiration and extensions
   
154.068   Amendments to the approved tentative parcel map
   
154.069   Parcel maps; conformance required
   
154.070   Surveys required
   
154.071   Form and contents
   
154.072   Submittal and approval procedures
   
154.073   Waiver of parcel map requirements
Vesting Tentative Maps
   
154.085   Authority and purpose
   
154.086   Consistency with general plan or specific plans; city approvals
required prior to application
   
154.087   Application; when vesting tentative map shall be filed
   
154.088   Filing and processing; payment of development fees
   
154.089   Expiration
   
154.090   Rights of a vesting tentative map
   
154.091   Amendment to approved vesting tentative map
   
154.092   Development inconsistent with zoning; conditional approval
   
154.093   Applications inconsistent with current policies
Dedications and Reservations
   
154.105   Dedication of streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way or
easements
   
154.106   Park land dedication
   
154.107   School site dedication
   
154.108   Reservation of land
   
154.109   Waiver of direct street access
Condominium Conversion
   
154.120   Purpose
   
154.121   Requirements and procedures
   
154.122   Physical elements report
   
154.123   Conformance to existing building regulations, zoning and standards
   
154.124   Refurbishing and restoration
   
154.125   Notice to tenants
   
154.126   Tenants’ right to purchase
   
154.127   Vacation of units
Subdivision Improvements
   
154.140   Construction according to standards; prerequisite to submittal of
maps
   
154.141   Improvements required
   
154.142   Design of improvements
   
154.143   Access
   
154.144   Improvement plans
   
154.145   Improvement and construction agreements
   
154.146   Improvement security
   
154.147   Construction
   
154.148   Completion of improvements
   
154.149   Acceptance of improvements
Reversion to Acreage
   
154.160   Conformance to provisions required; coastal development permit
   
154.161   Initiation of proceedings
   
154.162   Contents of petition
   
154.163   Submittal of petition to the Director of Community Development
   
154.164   Public hearing; City Council approval
   
154.165   Filing with County Recorder
Correction and Amendments of Maps
   
154.175   Amendment by certificate of correction or amending map; reasons
   
154.176   Form and contents
   
154.177   Submittal and approval by the City Engineer
   
154.178   Filing with the County Recorder
   
154.179   Fee
Parcel Mergers
   
154.190   Mergers not required
   
154.191   Mergers required
   
154.192   Notice of merger
   
154.193   Request by property owner; approval of merger
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.205   Prohibitions
   
154.206   Remedies
   
154.207   Certificate of compliance
   
154.208   Certificate of noncompliance
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 CITATION AND AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act,
Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66410 et seq., and may be cited as the Subdivision Ordinance
of the City of Eureka.
('63 Code, § 10-4.101) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate and control the division of
land within the city and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map
Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the
form and content of all maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act and the
procedure to be followed in securing the official approval of the Planning
Commission, the City Engineer , the Department of Community Development and the
City Council regarding such maps. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations
outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of
the public health, safety and general welfare, to promote orderly growth and
development and to promote open space, conservation, protection, and proper use
of land and to insure provisions for adequate traffic circulation, utilities
and services.
('63 Code, §10-4.102) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S., passed
2-5-02; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.003 CONFORMITY TO GENERAL PLAN, LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM, SPECIFIC PLAN AND
ZONING ORDINANCES.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided and developed for any purpose which is not
in conformity with the general plan and any specific plan of the city or
specifically authorized by precise zoning of the city. No subdivision approval
shall be given to any project located in the coastal zone which is found to be
in conflict with the certified Local Coastal Program.
   (B)   The type and intensity of land use as shown on the general plan and
coastal land use plan for lands in the coastal zone shall determine the type of
streets, roads, highways, utilities and public services that shall be provided
by the subdivider.
   (C)   For lands within the coastal zone, the subdivider shall obtain a
coastal development permit, as prescribed in
Chapter 156 of this title, in addition to the requirements of this chapter.
('63 Code, §10-4.103) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed
3-20-07)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 154.004 APPLICATION.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all subdivisions or
parts thereof within the city and to the preparation of subdivision maps
thereof and to other maps provided for by the Subdivision Map Act. Each such
subdivision and part thereof within the city shall be made and each such map
shall be prepared and presented for approval as hereafter provided for and
required.
('63 Code, § 10-4.104) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.005 MODIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the land involved
in any subdivision is of such size or shape, or is subject to such title
limitations of record, or is affected by such topographical location or
conditions, or is to be devoted to such use that it is impossible or
impracticable in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the
regulations contained in this chapter, the Planning Commission may make such
modifications thereof as, in its opinion, are reasonably necessary or expedient
and in conformity with the State Subdivision Map Act. In the case of
subdivisions of four or less units, this determination may be made by the
Director of Community Development with the concurrence of the City Engineer.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to subdivisions in the coastal zone.
('63 Code, §10-4.105) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed
3-20-07)
§ 154.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY AGENCY. A designated official or an official body charged with the
duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvements of
proposed divisions of real property, the imposing of requirements or conditions
thereon, or having the authority to approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove maps.
   BLOCK. The area of land within a subdivision which area is entirely bounded
by streets, highways or ways, except alleys, or the exterior boundary or
boundaries of the subdivision.
   CITY. The City of Eureka.
   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer of the city.
   COASTAL COMMISSION. The California Coastal Commission.
   COASTAL LAND USE PLAN. The city's land use plan, an element of the Local
Coastal Program certified by the Coastal Commission as meeting the requirements
of the California Coastal Act of 1976, Cal. Public Resources Code, §§30000 et
seq.
   COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT. Means any of the following:
      (1)   A community apartment project.
      (2)   A condominium project.
      (3)   A planned development.
      (4)   A stock cooperative.
    COMMUNITY APARTMENT PROJECT. A development in which an undivided interest
in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment
located thereon.
   CONDOMINIUM. An estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest
in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in
space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final
map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all
boundaries thereof.
   CONDOMINIUM PROJECT. A development consisting of condominiums.
   CONVERSION. The creation of separate ownership of existing real property
together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial or
commercial buildings thereon.
   DESIGN. Street alignments, grades and widths; drainage and sanitary
facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; location and
size of all required easements and rights-of-way; fire roads and fire breaks;
lot size and configuration; traffic access; grading; land to be dedicated for
park or recreational purposes; and such other specific physical requirements in
the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to
insure consistency with, or implementation of the general plan or any
applicable specific plan. (Cal. Gov't Code § 66418)
   DEVELOPMENT COORDINATION COMMITTEE. A body consisting of representatives
from city departments which reviews development proposals within the city. The
Committee Coordinator shall be the representative from the Department of
Community Development.
   ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REPORT (EIR). A detailed statement setting forth the
environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified
in Section 22100 of the California Environmental Quality Act, and may mean
either a draft or a final EIR.
   FINAL MAP. A map showing a subdivision for which a tentative and final map
is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this chapter, prepared in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act designed to be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
   GENERAL PLAN. The general plan of the city, adopted September 1977, and any
amendment thereto.
   IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Such street work, storm drainage, utilities and landscaping to be
installed, or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on the land to be used
for public or private streets, highways, and easements, as are necessary for
the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood
traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and
acceptance of the final map thereof; or to such other specific improvements or
type of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by
public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the
local agency or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure
conformity to or implementation of the general plan or any adopted specific
plan.
      (2)   Improvements shall be constructed in accordance with city standards
and details and/or when applicable with standards as adopted by local utility
companies and approved by the City Engineer.
   LOT. A parcel of land, considered as a unit, devoted to or intended for a
use or occupied by a structure or a group of structures that are united by a
common interest or use which has frontage on a dedicated improved public street
that serves as the principal means of access to abutting land, described as in
a subdivision or record of lease, survey map or by metes and bounds for the
purpose of sale, financing or separate use.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. A minor shift or rotation of an existing lot line or
other adjustments where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is
not created, as approved by the Director of Community Development with the
recommendations from the Development Coordinator Committee.
   MERGER. The joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one
ownership into once parcel.
   MAP ACT. The Subdivision Map Act of the State of California.
   PARCEL MAP. A map showing a division of land of four or less parcels as
required by this chapter, prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the Map Act.
   PERIPHERAL STREET. An existing street whose right-of-way is contiguous to
the exterior boundary of the subdivision.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT. A development (other than a community apartment
project, a condominium project, or a stock cooperative) having either or both
of the following features:
      (1)    The common area is owned either by an association or in common by
the owners of the separate interests who possess appurtenant rights to the
beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area.
      (2)    A power exists in the association to enforce an obligation of an
owner of a separate interest with respect to the beneficial use and enjoyment
of the common area by means of an assessment which may become a lien upon the
separate interests in accordance with Cal. Civil Code § 1367 or 1367.1.
   REMAINDER. That portion of an existing parcel which is not included as part
of the subdivided land. The remainder is not considered as part of the
subdivision but must be shown on the required maps as part of the area
surrounding subdivision development.
   STOCK COOPERATIVE. A development in which a corporation is formed or availed
of, primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for
a term of years, improved real property, and all or substantially all of the
shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a
portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation. The
owners' interest in the corporation, whether evidenced by a share of stock, a
certificate of membership, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an interest in a
common interest development and a real estate development for purposes of Cal.
Corporations Code § 25100(f). A STOCK COOPERATIVE includes a limited equity
housing cooperative which is a stock cooperative that meets the criteria of
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 33007.5.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or associate who
proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for himself or for others, except that employees and consultants of
such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not “subdividers.”
   SUBDIVISION.
      (1)   The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved
or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized
county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of
sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be
considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets,
utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION includes a condominium
project, as defined herein or in Cal. Civil Code § 1351, a community apartment
project, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1351, or the conversion of five or
more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Cal. Civil
Code § 1351. (Cal. Gov't Code § 66424)
      (2)    SUBDIVISION does not include:
         (a)   Buildings divided into apartments, offices, stores or similar
space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings,
mobile home parks or trailer parks for the purpose of lease or financing;
         (b)   Land divided by mineral, oil, or gas leases;
         (c)   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the California Health
and Safety Code;
         (d)   A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels,
where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a
greater number of parcels than originally existed is not created, provided the
lot line adjustment is approved by the Director of Community Development;
         (e)   Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands
Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands
is a party; or,
         (f)   Any separate assessment under Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code § 2188.7.
   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS. Standard details, standard
specifications, and other standards approved by the City Engineer that shall
govern the improvements to be constructed pursuant to this chapter and the Map
Act.
   TENTATIVE MAP. A map made for the purpose of showing the design and
improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and
around it.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A TENTATIVE MAP that shall have printed conspicuously
on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map” at the time it is filed in
accordance with §
154.048(D) of this chapter, and is thereafter processed in accordance with the
provisions hereof.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. Chapters
155 through
157 of this municipal code, or any ordinance enacted under zoning law.
('63 Code, § 10-4.201) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 444-C.S.,
passed 4-17-86; Am. Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 588-C.S., passed 2-
21-95; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.007 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OFFICIALS AND ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES.
   (A)   City Attorney. The City Attorney shall be responsible for preparing
and approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements and subdivision
improvement securities.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.1)
   (B)   City Council.
      (1)   The City Council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval of
final maps and improvement agreement and the acceptance by the city of such
lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for dedication to the city for
subdivisions of five or more parcels.
      (2)   The City Council shall act as the Appeals Board for hearing appeals
of the approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative subdivision maps
for subdivisions of five or more parcels.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.2)
   (C)   City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Establishing design and construction details, standards and
specifications; and in conjunction with the Director of Community Development,
design matters.
      (2)   Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the
provisions of this chapter and the Map Act and for reporting the findings
together with any recommendations for approval, or conditional approval, of the
tentative map to the Director of Community Development for subdivisions of five
or more parcels.
      (3)   The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to
acreage maps, and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision
improvement plans, lot line adjustments, mergers and certificates of compliance
in conjunction with the Director of Community Development.
      (4)   The inspection and approval of subdivision improvements.
      (5)   The acceptance of dedications and improvements for subdivisions of
four or less parcels.
      (6)   The acceptance of private improvements (improvements not to be
maintained by the city).
      (7)   The final certification of maps.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.3)
   (D)   Department of Community Development. The Department of Community
Development shall be responsible for the processing of preliminary and
tentative maps, final and parcel maps, and for the collection of all required
deposits and fees.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.4)
   (E)   Director of Community Development. The Director of Community
Development shall be responsible for the management of the Department of
Community Development in carrying out the responsibilities imposed upon it by
this chapter, and shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the general
plan, coastal land use plan, specific plans, and zoning ordinances of the city
and reporting his findings together with recommendations for approval or
conditional approval to the Planning Commission (for subdivision of five or
more parcels) and to the City Engineer (for subdivision of four or less
parcels).
      (2)   Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial
conformance to the approved tentative map.
      (3)   The approval, conditional approval, or denial of the tentative map
for subdivisions of four or less parcels.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.5)
   (F)   Development Coordination Committee. The Development Coordination
Committee may, at the discretion of the Community Development Department, be
responsible for the review of maps for general layout and aesthetics and making
its recommendations to the Director of Community Development.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.6)
   (G)   Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for
approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application for tentative
map approval of subdivisions of five or more units and reporting its action to
the City Council; and hearing of appeals for subdivisions of four or less
parcels.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.7)
   (H)   Coastal Commission. For proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone
which are appealable, as prescribed in
Chapter 156 of this title, the City Council's action may be appealed to the
Coastal Commission subject to the requirements of
Chapter 156 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-4.202.8)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S., passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 710-
C.S., passed 3-20- 07)
MAPS REQUIRED
§ 154.020 NECESSITY FOR MAPS.
   The necessity for preliminary, tentative, final, and parcel maps shall be
governed by the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.301) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.021 MAPS REQUIRED FOR DIVISION OF LAND.
   (A)   Five or more parcels.
      (1)   A preliminary, tentative, and final map shall be required for all
divisions of land when determined by the Director of Community Development that
such land may be divided into five or more parcels, or a common interest
development consisting of five or more units, except where:
         (a)   The land before division contains less than five acres, each
parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway
and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body;
         (b)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres
or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway;
         (c)   The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved
access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land
zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of
the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or,
         (d)   Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less
than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.
      (2)   A parcel map shall be required for these subdivisions described in
subdivisions (a), (b), (c) and (d) of division (A)(1) of this section.
('63 Code, § 10-4.302)
   (B)   Four or less parcels. A preliminary map, at the option of the
subdivider, may be submitted prior to the following:
      (1)   A tentative map and parcel map shall be required for all divisions
of lands which create four or less parcels, or a common interest development
consisting of four or fewer units, except for:
         (a)   Divisions of land created by short-term leases (terminable by
either party on not more than 30 days notice in writing) of a portion of an
operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined as such by Cal. Pub.
Util. Code § 230; provided, however, that upon a showing made to the City
Engineer based upon substantial evidence that public policy necessitates such a
map, this exception shall not apply.
         (b)   Lot line adjustments, provided:
            1.   No additional parcels or building sites have been created.
            2.   There are no resulting violations of the code of ordinances.
            3.   Lot line adjustments may, at the discretion of the Community
Development Department, be reviewed by the Development Coordination Committee
which will provide recommendations to the Director of Community Development.
The Director of Community Development shall approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the proposed lot line adjustment. The applicant or interested persons
adversely affected may request a review of the Community Development's action
in accordance with the procedures of
§ 154.066(B) of this chapter.
            4.   For proposed lot line adjustments in the coastal zone, a
coastal development permit may be required.
         (c)   When the parcel map is waived by the Director of Community
Development as provided by
§ 154.066 of this chapter.
      (2)   A map or written document in a form as required by the Director of
Community Development, and a certificate of compliance in accordance with
§ 154.207 of this chapter shall be required for lot line adjustments, mergers,
certificates of compliance and parcel map waivers.
('63 Code, § 10-4.303)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S., passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 710-
C.S., passed 3-20- 07)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 154.022 FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   All persons submitting maps as required by this chapter shall pay all fees
and/or deposits as provided by the city's resolution establishing fees and
charges.
('63 Code, § 10-4.304) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
SUBDIVISION MAPS; FIVE OR MORE PARCELS
§ 154.035 PRELIMINARY MAPS.
   (A)   Contents and form; tentative map in lieu of preliminary map.
      (1)   The contents and form and submittal of preliminary maps shall be
governed by the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The tentative subdivision map may be submitted to the Development
Coordination Committee in lieu of a preliminary map. If such is submitted, the
review time by the Development Coordination Committee shall not be considered
as a part of the time limit specified by
§ 154.040 of this chapter for Planning Commission action.
   (B)   Submittal to Department of Community Development and Development
Coordination Committee action. Prior to the filing of an application for a
tentative subdivision map for a subdivision of five or more parcels, the
subdivider may submit plans and data related to the design, layout, grading,
existing noise levels, and other features proposed for the development as
required by the Department of Community Development for submittal to the
Development Coordination Committee for preliminary review and comment. The
Development Coordination Committee shall advise the applicant in writing of any
comments it desires to make and any changes to the proposed plan it deems
appropriate as a result of its preliminary review. Upon receipt of the
Development Coordination Committee comments on grading, building design,
landscaping, building layout, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a
tentative subdivision map pursuant to the provisions of this chapter which
shall incorporate the comments of the committee.
('63 Code, § 10-4.401) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S.,
passed 2-5-02)
§ 154.036 TENTATIVE SUBDIVISION MAPS; GOVERNING PROVISIONS.
   The form and contents, submittal and approval of tentative subdivision maps
shall be governed by the provisions of this section.
('63 Code, § 10-4.402.1) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.037 FORM AND CONTENTS.
   The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the Department
of Community Development and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer,
or licensed land surveyor, as applicable. The tentative map shall be clearly
and legibly drawn on one sheet and contain not less than the following:
   (A)   A title which shall contain the subdivision name, and type of
subdivision (such as, planned development, condominium, and the like).
   (B)   Name, address, and phone number of legal owner, subdivider, and person
preparing the map (including registration number).
   (C)   Sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the proposed
subdivision.
   (D)   Date, north arrow, scale, and contour interval.
   (E)   Existing and proposed land use.
   (F)   A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions, towns, creeks,
railroads, and other data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and
show its relation to the community.
   (G)   Existing topography of the proposed site and at least 25 feet beyond
its boundary, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Contour lines having the following intervals (the date and the
method of developing the contours shall be stated):
         (a)   Two-foot contour intervals for ground slopes between level and
5%, plus spot elevations as required.
         (b)   Five-foot contour intervals for ground slopes exceeding 5% but
less than 25%.
         (c)   Ten-foot or 20-foot contour intervals for ground slopes
exceeding 25%.
         (d)   For subdivisions with no lot less than 20 acres, aerial
planimetric maps without contours and blow-up of USGS contours may be submitted
in lieu of a more detailed contour map.
      (2)   Types and size of existing trees shall be indicated. Any trees
proposed to be removed shall be so indicated. Trees will be retained wherever
possible to preserve the character of the area.
      (3)   The approximate location and outline of existing structures
identified by type. Buildings to be removed shall be so marked.
      (4)   The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or
stormwater overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each
watercourse.
      (5)   The location, pavement, and right-of-way width, grade and name of
existing streets or highways.
      (6)   The widths, location, and identity of all existing easements.
      (7)   The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water mains and
storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm drains shall
be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on peripheral
streets.
      (8)   The approximate location of the 60, 65, and 70 CNEL (Community
Noise Equivalent Level) contours, if any.
      (9)   For proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone, the location of
environmentally sensitive habitat areas and natural hazards, as designated in
the coastal land use plan.
   (H)   Proposed improvements to be shown shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves,
pavement, and right-of-way, width, and name of all streets. Typical sections of
all streets shall be shown.
      (2)   The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs.
      (3)   The location, width, and purpose of all easements.
      (4)   The angle of intersecting streets if such angle deviates from a
right angle by more than four degrees.
      (5)   The approximate layout and area and the approximate dimensions of
each lot and each building site. Engineering data shall show the approximate
finished grading of each lot, the preliminary design of all grading, the
elevation of proposed building pads, the top and toe of cut and fill slopes to
scale and the number of each lot.
      (6)   Proposed recreation sites, trails, greenways and parks for private
or public use.
      (7)   Proposed common areas and areas to be dedicated to public open
space.
      (8)   The approximate location and size of sanitary sewers, water mains
and storm drains. Proposed slopes and approximate elevations of sanitary sewers
and storm drains shall be indicated.
   (I)   The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services
were required in the preparation of the design of the tentative map.
   (J)   If the subdivider plans to develop the site as shown on the tentative
map in units, then he shall show the proposed units and their proposed sequence
of construction, if known, on the tentative map.
   (K)   The Director of Community Development may waive any of the foregoing
tentative map requirements whenever he finds that the type of subdivision is
such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements, or may require
other such drawings, data, or other information as deemed necessary.
('63 Code, § 10-4.402.2) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.038 ACCOMPANYING DATA AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or
reports.
      (1)   Soils report. A preliminary soils report prepared in accordance
with
Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code shall be submitted. If the preliminary
soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soil
limitations or problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural
defects, the soils report accompanying the final map shall contain a thorough
investigation of each individual lot within the problem area. The report shall
be reviewed by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Subdivision report. A preliminary subdivision report showing the
names of the parties whose signatures will be necessary under the provisions of
the Subdivision Map Act and stating the nature of the interest of the parties
in the land being subdivided. The report must include all easements that affect
the land being subdivided (Cal. Gov't Code §§ 66436, 66439, 66445(f) and
66447).
      (3)   Engineering geology and/or seismic report.
         (a)   If the subdivision lies within a “medium risk” or “high risk”
geologic hazard area, as shown on maps on file in the Department of Community
Development, a preliminary Engineering Geology and/or Seismic Safety Report
indicates the presence of geological hazards or seismic hazards which, if not
corrected, would lead to structural defects, an Engineering Geology and/or
Seismic Safety Report shall accompany the final map and shall contain a
thorough investigation of each individual lot within the problem area. The
report shall be reviewed by the City Engineer.
         (b)   For proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone, the subdivider
shall provide reports on liquefaction and shoreline erosion hazards, as
designated in the coastal land use plan and as prescribed by the policies
therein.
      (4)   School site. The subdivider shall obtain from the school districts
involved their intention, in writing, concerning the necessity for a school
site, if any, within the subdivision and shall present this information to the
Community Development Department prior to the consideration of the tentative
map.
      (5)   Environmental impact study. The various time limits set forth in
this chapter for taking action on tentative maps shall not be deemed to
commence until the subdivision is found exempt or an initial study is completed
and a negative declaration or environmental impact report, as appropriate, is
prepared, processed, and considered in accordance with the provisions of the
California Environmental Quality Act. The subdivider shall provide such
additional data and information and deposit and pay such fees as may be
required for the preparation and processing of environmental review documents.
      (6)   Utility certification. Certification in writing from all utilities
that the proposed subdivision can be adequately served. The City Engineer may
defer the required certifications until after the filing of the tentative map.
      (7)   Other reports. The Director of Community Development may waive any
of the foregoing data and reports whenever he finds that the type subdivision
is such as not to necessitate compliance with these requirements, or may
require other such drawings, data, or reports as deemed necessary.
   (B)   Subsections (1), (3), (4), and (6) of division (A) shall not apply to
condominium conversions.
('63 Code, § 10-4.402.3) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S.,
passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.039 SUBMITTAL TO DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT; REVIEW.
   (A)   Submittal.
      (1)   The tentative map shall be considered for filing only when such map
conforms to
§ 154.037(B) of this chapter and when all accompanying data or reports, as
required by the Department of Community Development have been submitted and
accepted by the Department of Community Development.
      (2)   The subdivider shall file with the Department of Community
Development two reproducible copies of the tentative map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.402.4)
   (B)   Review. The Department of Community Development may forward copies of
the tentative map to the Development Coordination Committee and shall forward
copies to the affected public agencies which, in turn, will forward to the
Department of Community Development their findings and recommendations thereon.
('63 Code, § 10-4.402.5)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S., passed 2-5-02)
§ 154.040 PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   Notice of public hearings.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a valid application, and having received from the
Department of Community Development their report and recommendations for the
proposed tentative subdivision map, the secretary of the Planning Commission
shall set the matter for public hearing.
      (2)   The notice shall be provided as set forth in §§
155.408.080 et seq. of this title.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve or
deny the tentative map and shall report its decision to the City Council and
the subdivider within 50 days after the tentative map has been accepted for
filing.
   (B)   Approval.
      (1)   In approving or conditionally approving the tentative subdivision
map, the Planning Commission shall find that the proposed subdivision, together
with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with
applicable general or specific plans (including the coastal land use plan)
adopted by the city.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may modify or delete any of the conditions
of approval recommended in the Department of Community Development’s report,
except conditions required by city ordinance or by the City Engineer, related
to public health and safety or standards approved by the City Engineer, or add
additional requirements as a condition of its approval.
      (3)   If no action is taken by the Planning Commission within the time
limit as specified, the tentative map as filed shall be deemed to be approved,
insofar as it complies with other applicable provisions of the State
Subdivision Map Act, this chapter or other city ordinances, and it shall be the
duty of this City Clerk to certify the approval.
   (C)   Denial. The tentative subdivision map may be denied by the Planning
Commission on any of the grounds provided by city ordinances or the State
Subdivision Map Act. The Planning Commission shall deny approval of the
tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:
      (1)   That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general,
coastal, and specific plans.
      (2)   That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not
consistent with applicable general, coastal land use, or specific plans, as
applicable.
      (3)   That the site is not physically suitable for land use for the type
of development.
      (4)   That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density
of development.
      (5)   That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably
injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.
      (6)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is
likely to cause serious public health problems.
      (7)   That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will
conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or
use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the
governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for
access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially
equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This subdivision shall
apply only to easements of record or to easements established by judgment of a
court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is hereby granted to a
legislative body to determine that the public at large has acquired easements
for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.
      (8)   In the coastal zone, that the proposed subdivision results in the
creation of a parcel or parcels totally within an environmentally sensitive
habitat area or flood hazard area as defined in the coastal land use plan.
Parcels created by division shall have sufficient nonsensitive and non-hazard
area to accommodate development allowed in the applicable land use category,
but not allowed in a sensitive habitat or flood hazard area.
   (D)   City Council review.
      (1)   If a tentative map is approved or conditionally approved, the
Department of Community Development shall make a written report to the City
Council. After the 15-day appeal period has expired, the City Council at its
first meeting thereafter, shall consider the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, unless the subdivider consents to a continuance. If the Council
decides to review the map and conditions, it shall conduct a public hearing
after giving notice pursuant to division (A) of this section. In addition,
notice shall be given to the subdivider and the Planning Commission. At that
hearing, the Council may add, modify, or delete conditions when the Council
determines that such changes are necessary to insure that the tentative map
conforms to zoning conditions imposed upon the property, applicable city
ordinances, and of the State Subdivision Map Act. The City Council may deny the
tentative map on any of the grounds contained in division (C) of this section.
If the Council does not act within the time limits set forth in this
subchapter, the tentative map shall be deemed to have been approved or
conditionally approved as set forth in the Planning Commission’s report.
      (2)   For proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone, the City Council
shall provide notice of final city action on a tentative map to the Coastal
Commission, as prescribed in Chapter 156 of this title.
   (E)   Extension of time for Planning Commission or City Council action. The
time limits set forth in this section for acting on the tentative map may be
extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Commission or the
City Council.
(‘63 Code, § 10-4.402.6) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord. 727-C.S., passed 6-17-08; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-
7-16; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 154.041 APPEALS OF PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   By subdivider. If the subdivider disagrees with any action by the
Planning Commission with respect to the tentative subdivision map, he or she
may, within 15 days of such decision, file an appeal with the City Clerk. The
Council shall consider the appeal within 30 days or at its first regular
meeting subsequent to such appeal, unless the subdivider consents to a
continuance. This appeal shall be a public hearing after notice has been given
pursuant to §
155.408.080  of this title. The Council shall within ten days declare its
findings and may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or
rulings of the Planning Commission and may make such findings as are not
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or the State Subdivision Map
Act.
   (B)   By interested persons adversely affected. Any interested person
adversely affected by a decision of the Planning Commission may file a
complaint with the City Council concerning such decision. Any such complaint
shall be filed with the City Clerk within 15 days after the action which is the
subject of the complaint. No complaint shall be considered after the 15-day
period. The City Council may, at its discretion, reject the complaint within 15
days or set the matter for hearing. If the City Council rejects the complaint,
the complainant shall be notified of such action. If the matter is set for
hearing, a public hearing shall be held within 30 days after filing of the
complaining pursuant to the procedures contained in division (A) of this
section with additional notice being given to the affected interested persons.
   (C)   For general plan, coastal land use plan, and specific plan conformity.
      (1)   Any interested person may appeal any decision of the Planning
Commission relative to conformity to the general plan, coastal land use plan,
or any specific plan of the city to the City Council. Such appeal and hearing
thereon shall be in accordance with division (A) of this section, with
additional notice to be given to the appellant.
      (2)   For proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone which are located in
the Coastal Commission Appeal Zone, the provisions of
Chapter 156 of this title shall apply.
   (D)   By tenant. Any tenant of the property being subdivided in the course
of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium project,
community apartment project, or stock cooperative project may appeal from any
action of the Planning Commission to the City Council pursuant to Cal. Gov't
Code § 66452.5.
(‘63 Code, § 10-4.402.7) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 834-C.S.,
passed 6-7-16; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 154.042 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Expiration.  
      (1)   The official actions of the Planning Commission on a tentative
subdivision map shall expire 24 months from the date of the adoption of the
resolution by the Planning Commission. An extension to the expiration date may
be approved as provided in subsection (B)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The period of time specified above shall not include any period of
time during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of
competent jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a
tentative map only if a stay of the time period is approved by the City
Council. Within 10 days of the service of the initial petition or complaint
upon the city, the subdivider shall, in writing, to the Director of Community
Development, request a stay in the time period of the tentative map. Within 40
days after receiving such request, the City Council shall either stay the time
period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The request for the
stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to the appellant, and
upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall, within 10 days, declare
its findings.
      (3)   Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map
shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or any portion of the real
property included within such tentative map shall be filed without first
processing a new tentative map.
   (B)   Extensions.
      (1)   Request by subdivider. The subdivider or his engineer may request
an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved
tentative subdivision map by written application to the Department of Community
Development. The application shall be filed not less than 45 days before the
map is to expire and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.
      (2)   Planning Commission action. The Director of Community Development
shall review the request and submit the application for the extension, together
with a report, to the Planning Commission for approval, conditional approval or
denial. A copy of the Director of Community Development's report shall be
forwarded to the subdivider prior to the Planning Commission meeting on the
extension. The resolution adopted by the Planning Commission approving or
conditionally approving an extension shall specify the new expiration date of
the tentative subdivision map.
      (3)   Time limit of extension. The approved extension shall not exceed 12
months. The approved new expiration date shall not extend more than five years
beyond the date of the resolution adopted by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Conditions of approval. As a condition of the extension of a
tentative subdivision map, the Planning Commission may impose new conditions or
revise existing conditions in the approved tentative map as recommended by the
Department of Community Development in its report or as it may find necessary.
      (5)   Appeal of conditions of extension. The subdivider may appeal any
action of the Planning Commission on the extension to the City Council within
15 days of such action in conformance to §
154.041(A) of this chapter.
      (6)   Fee. A fee for processing an extension shall be required.
('63 Code, § 10-4.402.8) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 441-C.S.,
passed 1-16-86; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 154.043 AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED TENTATIVE MAP.
   (A)   Minor changes in the tentative map may be approved by the Department
of Community Development upon application by the subdivider or on its own
initiative, provided:
      (1)   No lots, units, or building sites are added;
      (2)   Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the
original tentative map approval; and
      (3)   There are no resulting violations of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any revision shall be approved by the Director of Community
Development and the City Engineer. The amendment shall be indicated on the
approved map and certified by the Director of Community Development and the
City Engineer.
   (C)   Amendments of the tentative map other than minor amendments shall be
presented to the Planning Commission for approval. Processing shall be in
accordance with §§
154.039(B) of this chapter and
155.408.080 of this title.
   (D)   Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the
tentative map.
   (E)   Amendments to an approved tentative map for a proposed subdivision
located in the coastal zone shall require a coastal development permit, as
prescribed in
Chapter 156 of this title.
(‘63 Code, § 10-4.402.9) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-7-16; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-
21-19) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 154.044 CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENT.
   In the event the subdivider elects to construct the improvements prior to
recordation of the map, the subdivider shall enter into a construction
agreement as specified in §
154.145(B) of this chapter. Said construction agreement shall be approved by
the City Engineer. The final map shall remain on file at the office of the City
Engineer until acceptance of the improvements, or until an improvement
agreement is entered into. Construction of the improvements shall not commence
until the City Engineer has approved the construction agreement.
('63 Code, §10-4.402.10) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.045 FINAL MAPS; CONFORMANCE TO PROVISIONS; PREPARATION.
   (A)   The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of the final map
shall conform to the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The final map shall be proposed by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor.
('63 Code, § 10-4.403.1) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.046 SURVEY REQUIRED.
   (A)   An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be
made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments,
property lines, adjoining surveys, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements
adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The
allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed 1/
10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.
   (B)   At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or
surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards
described in Cal. Bus. and Prof. Code § 8771 so that another engineer or
surveyor may readily retrace the survey. The exterior boundary line of each lot
shall be monumented. Other monuments shall be set as required by the City
Engineer.
('63 Code, § 10-4.403.2) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.047 FORM AND CONTENTS.
   (A)   Form.
      (1)   The form of the final map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act
and as provided herein.
      (2)   The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced by a
process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester
base film. Certificates, affidavits, and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped
or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film,
the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent
legibility.
      (3)   The size of each sheet shall be 18 inches by 27 inches. A marginal
line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank
margin of one inch, except the left margin shall be three inches wide. The
scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals 100 or as may be
necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to
accomplish this end. The particular number of the street and the total number
of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its
relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more
sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet will be included.
      (4)   All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth inch
minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints
and other reproductions made from the original drawings.
      (5)   The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the City
Engineer.
('63 Code, § 10-4.403.3)
   (B)   Contents. The contents of the final map shall conform to the
Subdivision Map Act and as provided herein.
      (1)   Boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a
heavy blue line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data.
      (2)   Title. Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number
and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to
maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of a
United States survey. The following words shall appear in the title, “In the
City of Eureka.” The section, township, and range shall be identified.
      (3)   Certificates. The following certificates shall appear only once on
the cover sheet, and shall be signed by the appropriate parties in India ink:
         (a)   Owner's certificate. A certificate, signed and acknowledged by
all parties having record title interest in the land subdivided, excepting
those parties having rights-of-way, easements, or other interests which cannot
ripen into a fee, or exceptions provided by the Subdivision Map Act and
consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and offering for
dedication to the public certain specific parcels of land.
         (b)   Engineer's certificate.
            1.   A certificate by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the
survey and final map shall appear on the map. The certificate shall give the
date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by or under
the direction of the engineer or surveyor, and that the survey is true and
complete as shown.
            2.   The certificate shall also state that all the monuments are of
the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will beset in
such positions on or before as specified later date. The certificate shall also
state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be
retraced.
            3.   The certificate shall state that the map complies to the
Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   City Engineer’s certificate. A certificate by the City Engineer
stating that the map has been examined and that it is in accord with the
tentative map and any approved alterations thereof, complies with the
Subdivision Map Act of the state and the provisions of this chapter, and is
technically correct.
         (d)   Planning Commission certificate. A certificate by the secretary
of the Planning Commission stating that the tentative map was approved by
resolution of the Planning Commission. The date and number of the resolution
shall appear in the certificate.
         (e)   City Clerk's certificate. A certificate for execution by the
City Clerk stating the date and number of the resolution adopted by the City
Council approving the final map and stating that the City Council accepted,
accepted subject to improvement or rejected on behalf of the public, any real
property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of
the offer of dedication.
         (f)   Certificate of soils and geologic report. When a soils report, a
geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically
for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with
the date of such report or reports, and the name of the engineer making the
soils report and geologist making the geologic report and the location where
the reports are on file. The certificate shall read, “A soils and/or geologic
report for this subdivision was prepared by me or under my direction and was
filed with the city on (Date).”
         (g)   County Recorder's certificate.
            1.   A certificate to be executed by the County Recorder stating
that the map has been accepted for filing; that the map has been examined and
that it complies with the provisions of state laws and local ordinances
governing the filing of final maps.
            2.   The certificate shall show who requested the filing of the
map, the time and date the map was filed, and the book and page where the map
was filed.
         (h)   County Clerk's certificate. A certificate to be executed by the
County Clerk stating that all taxes due have been paid or that a tax bond
assuring the payment of all taxes which are a lien but not yet payable has been
filed with the county.
      (4)   Scale, north point and basis of bearings. There must appear on each
map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings. The basis of
bearings shall be approved by the City Engineer.
      (5)   Linear, angular and radial data. Sufficient linear, angular, and
radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument
lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision and of the
boundary lines of every lot and parcel which is a part thereof. Length, radius
and total central angle or radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. Ditto
marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map.
      (6)   Monuments. The location and description of all existing and
proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard city monuments shall be set at (or
from offsets as approved by the City Engineer) the following locations:
         (a)   The intersection of street centerlines.
         (b)   Beginning and end of curves in centerlines.
         (c)   At other locations as deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
         (d)   The City Engineer may waive the above requirements where deemed
impractical.
      (7)   Lot numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number in each
subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications
except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided
in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next
consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot
shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the
City Engineer.
      (8)   Adjoining properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining
subdivisions shall be identified by a subdivision number, or name when not
identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed
map showing such subdivision; and if no such subdivision is adjacent, then by
the name of the owner and reference to the recorded deed by book and page
number for the last recorded owner of such adjacent property.
      (9)   City boundaries. City boundaries which cross or join the
subdivision shall be clearly designated.
      (10)   Street names. The names and widths of all streets, alleys, or
highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown.
      (11)   Easements.
         (a)   Easements for roads or street, paths, stormwater drainage,
sanitary sewers, public access in the coastal zone, or other public use as may
be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the city or
other public agency (or private association, in the case of public access
easements), and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final
map is approved, any streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are not
accepted by the City Council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the
City Council may, by resolution at any late date, accept and open the streets,
paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance
shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
         (b)   All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with
the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the
conveyance, e.g., recorder's serial number and date, or book and page of
official records.
         (c)   Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the
County Recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be
specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements
for which the easement was created.
         (d)   All easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the
final map with adequate survey data to locate said easements.
         (e)   The width and location of all easements to be dedicated on the
map shall be approved by the City Engineer.
('63 Code, § 10-4.403.4)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.048 SUBMITTAL FOR CITY APPROVAL.
   (A)   Preliminary submittal. The subdivider shall submit a reproducible copy
of the final map to the City Engineer for checking. The preliminary submittal
shall be accompanied by two copies of the following data, plans, reports and
documents in a form as approved by the City Engineer.
      (1)   Improvement plans. Improvement plans as required by §
154.144 of this chapter.
      (2)   Soils report. A soils report prepared in accordance with §
154.038(A) of this chapter.
      (3)   Subdivision report. A subdivision report as required under §
154.038(B) of this chapter.
      (4)   Improvement bond estimate. The improvement bond estimate shall
include all improvements within public rights-of-way, easements, or common
areas and utility trench backfill as provided by the developer, except for
those utility facilities installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction
of the California Public Utilities Commission.
      (5)   Deeds for easements or rights-of-way. Deeds for easements or
rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been
dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the city in the form
or rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside of
the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction
work and permitting the maintenance of the facility.
      (6)   Traverse closures.
         (a)   Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements,
street centerlines and monument lines.
         (b)   The error of calculated closures in the traverse around the
subdivision and around the interior lots or blocks shall not exceed one part in
20,000 (1/20,000).
      (7)   Hydrology and hydraulic calculations. Complete hydrology and
hydraulic calculations of all storm drains.
      (8)   Organization documents. The submittal of the final map shall
include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, and
all other organizational documents for the subdivision in a form as prescribed
by Cal. Civil Code § 1355. All documents shall be subject to review by the City
Engineer and City Attorney.
      (9)   Additional information. Any additional data, reports or information
as required by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Return to subdivider's engineer for corrections. Upon completing the
preliminary check, the City Engineer shall note the required corrections on the
preliminary prints, reports and data and return one set to the subdivider's
engineer for revision.
   (C)   Resubmittal to City Engineer. The subdivider's engineer shall submit a
reproducible copy of the revised map, and two sets of reports and data to the
City Engineer. After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the
subdivider's engineer marked approved as submitted, approved when corrected as
noted or revise and resubmit.
   (D)   Approval by the City Engineer.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an approved print from the City Engineer, the
subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the revised map, prepared in
accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter and corrected to its
final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this chapter
to execute the certificates on the map, to the City Engineer.
      (2)   The City Engineer and the secretary of the Planning Commission
shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original to the City
Clerk.
   (E)   Approval or denial by City Council.
      (1)   Approval.
         (a)   The final map upon execution by the City Engineer and the
secretary of the Planning Commission, together with the subdivision improvement
agreement, shall be placed on the Council agenda for their approval. The City
Council shall consider the final map for approval within 10 days after filing
with the City Clerk, or at its next regular meeting at which it received the
map, whichever is later. The City Council shall have approved the subdivision
improvement agreement before approving the final map.
         (b)   If the subdivision improvement agreement and final map are
approved by the City Council, it shall instruct the Mayor to execute the
agreement on behalf of the city. If the subdivision improvement agreement and/
or final map is unacceptable, the Council shall make their recommended
corrections, instruct the City Engineer to draft a new agreement and/or revise
the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement and/or final map
has been resubmitted.
      (2)   Denial.
         (a)   The City Council shall deny approval of the final map upon
making any of the findings contained in §
154.040(C) of this chapter.
         (b)   The City Council shall not deny approval of the final map if it
has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if it
finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously
approved tentative map.
   (F)   Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the final map by the
City Council and receipt of the improvement security by the City Engineer, the
City Clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet
and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map to the Clerk
of the County Board of Supervisors for transmittal to the County Recorder.
   (G)   Submittal by units. Multiple final maps relating to an approved or
conditionally approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of
the tentative map; provided, however, that the subdivider, at the time the
tentative map is filed, informs the Director of Community Development of the
subdivider's intention to file multiple final maps on the tentative map. In
providing such notice the subdivider shall not be required to define the number
of configuration of the proposed multiple maps. However, the Planning
Commission shall approve the sequence of map approvals. The filing of a final
map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall
not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes
a part, or unit, of the approved tentative map shall have a separate
subdivision number. The subdivision improvement agreement to be executed by the
subdivider shall provide for the construction of such improvements as may be
required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the whole
subdivision by units.
('63 Code, § 10-4.403.5) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-81; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
SUBDIVISION MAPS; FOUR OR LESS PARCELS
§ 154.060 PRELIMINARY AND TENTATIVE PARCEL MAPS.
   (A)   Submittal of preliminary map. At the option of the subdivider, a
preliminary parcel map may be submitted to Department of Community Development
for initial review and comments, which may lead to a tentative parcel map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.1)
   (B)   Tentative map; conformance required; preparation. The form and
contents, submittal, and approval of tentative parcel maps shall conform to the
provisions of this division. The tentative parcel map shall be prepared by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.2)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.061 FORM AND CONTENTS.
   (A)   Form. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one
sheet. The scale shall be approved by the City Engineer. The final form shall
be approved by the City Engineer.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.3)
   (B)   Contents.
      (1)   The tentative map shall show the following information:
         (a)   A title.
         (b)   Name, address, and phone number of legal owner, subdivider, and
person preparing the map (including registration number).
         (c)   Date, north arrow, scale and contour interval.
         (d)   Existing and proposed land use.
         (e)   A vicinity map sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and
show its relation to the community.
         (f)   Existing topography of the proposed site and at least 25 feet
beyond its boundary, including but not limited to:
            1.   Contour lines having the following intervals (the date and the
method of developing the contours shall be stated):
               a.   Two-foot contour intervals for ground slopes between level
and 5% plus spot elevations as required.
               b.   Five-foot contour intervals for ground slopes exceeding 5%
but less than 25%.
               c.   Ten-foot or 20-foot contour intervals for ground slopes
exceeding 25%.
               d.   For subdivisions with no lot less than 20 acres, aerial
planimetric maps without contours and blow-up or USGS contours may be submitted
in lieu of a more detailed contour map.
            2.   Types, and size of existing trees shall be indicated. Any
trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated. Trees will be retained
wherever possible to preserve the character of the area.
            3.   The approximate location and outline of existing structures
identified by type. Buildings to be removed shall be so marked.
            4.   The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation of
stormwater overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of each
watercourse.
            5.   The location, pavement and right-of-way width, grade, and name
of existing streets or highways.
            6.   The widths, location and identity of all existing easements.
            7.   The location and size of existing sanitary sewers, water
mains, and storm drains. The approximate slope of existing sewers and storm
drains shall be indicated. The location of existing overhead utility lines on
peripheral streets.
            8.   For proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone, the location of
environmentally sensitive habitat areas and natural hazards as designated in
the coastal land use plan.
         (g)   Any improvements proposed by the owner shall be shown.
         (h)   If the site is to be graded, engineering data shall be shown as
required under
§ 154.037(H)(5) of this chapter.
         (i)   The proposed lot layout and lot areas.
         (j)   Proposed easements or rights-of-way.
         (k)   A subdivision report as required under
§ 154.038(B) of this chapter. A soils and/or engineering geology report may be
required by the Director of Community Development with the concurrence of the
Building Official. If required, the reports shall be as specified in
§§
154.035 through
154.048 of this chapter.
      (2)   The Director of Community Development may waive any of the
foregoing requirements upon finding that the locations or nature of the
proposed minor subdivision is such as not to necessitate compliance with these
requirements; or may require additional information as deemed necessary.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.4)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 652-C.S., passed 2-5-02; Am. Ord. 710-
C.S., passed 3-20- 07)
§ 154.062 SUBMITTAL TO DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   Any person making a division of land for which a parcel map is required
shall in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter, file two
reproducible copies of the tentative parcel map to the Department of Community
Development.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.5) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.063 REVIEW AND NOTICE.
   (A)   (A)   The tentative parcel map shall be reviewed by the Department of
Community Development for compliance to all applicable city ordinances and the
State Subdivision Map Act. Upon completion of the review and upon receipt of a
valid application for the tentative parcel map, the Director of Community
Development shall provide notice pursuant to §
155.408.080 of this title.
   (B)   In the event that the proposed subdivision has been requested by a
person other than the property owner as such property owner is shown on the
latest assessment roll, the city shall also give mailed notice to the owner of
the property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   (C)   In addition, notice shall be given by first class mail to any person
who has filed a written request with the Director of Community Development.
Such a request may be submitted at any time during the calendar year and shall
apply for the balance of such calendar year. The city may impose a reasonable
fee on persons requesting such notice for the purpose of recovering the cost of
such mailing.
   (D)   Substantial compliance with these provisions therewith to notice shall
be sufficient, and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity
of any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this subchapter.
   (E)   The Director of Community Development, at his or her discretion, may
require that a public hearing be held by the Planning Commission when the
proposed development arouses extraordinary public concern. The hearing and
action shall be in accordance with § 154.040 of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-4.501.6) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 727-C.S.,
passed 6-17-08; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-7-16; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-
21-19)
§ 154.064 ACTION BY DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   Upon completion of the review, the Director of Community Development shall
approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative parcel map. If the map is
approved, it shall be signed and dated by the City Engineer and the Director of
Community Development. A letter of the action taken, along with any conditions
imposed shall be sent to the subdivider and engineer. If the subdivision is
denied, the subdivider or the engineer shall be so notified in writing with a
statement for the reasons of denial. The Department of Community Development
may refer the tentative parcel map to the Planning Commission for their
consideration.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.7) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.065 APPROVAL AND/OR DENIAL; CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Approval and/or denial.
      (1)   In approving or conditionally approving the tentative parcel map,
the Director of Community Development shall find that the proposed subdivision,
together with its provisions for its design and improvements is consistent with
applicable general or specific plans (including the certified coastal land use
plan) adopted by the city.
      (2)   The tentative parcel map may be denied for any reason provided by
city ordinances, resolutions, or the State Subdivision Map Act. The Director of
Community Development shall deny approval of the tentative parcel map if he
makes any of the findings contained in §
154.040(C) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.8)
   (B)   Conditions of approval.
      (1)   In approving the tentative parcel map, the Director of Community
Development or the Director of Public Works may impose as conditions of filing
a parcel map any or all, but not limited to the following requirements:
         (a)   Frontage improvements.
         (b)   On-site improvements.
         (c)   Off-site improvements.
         (d)   Dedications.
         (e)   Applicable fees.
         (f)   A soils and/or engineering geology report.
      (2)   These requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. The subdivider or the engineer shall be notified in writing of
all the conditions imposed.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.9)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.066 REQUEST FOR REVIEW OF DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT'S ACTION.
   (A)   By subdivider. If the subdivider disagrees with any action by the
Director of Community Development with respect to the tentative map, he may,
within 15 days of receipt of such decision, request a hearing of such action to
the Planning Commission in accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (B)   By interested persons adversely affected.
      (1)   Any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the
Director of Community Development with respect to the tentative parcel map may,
within 15 days of such decision, file a request for hearing with the secretary
of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the request
within 45 days. This request shall be reviewed at a public meeting with notice
being given to the subdivider and to the affected interested persons. Upon
conclusion of the public meeting, the Planning Commission shall within 30 days
declare its findings. The Planning Commission may sustain, modify, reject, or
overrule any recommendations or rulings of the Director of Community
Development and may make such findings as are not inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter or the State Subdivision Map Act.
      (2)   Any interested person adversely affected by a decision of the
Planning Commission with respect to the tentative parcel map may file an appeal
with the City Council concerning such decision. The procedure contained in §
154.041(B) of this chapter shall apply.
   (C)   Subdivisions in coastal zone. For proposed subdivisions in the coastal
zone which are appealable to the Coastal Commission, the appeals provisions of
Chapter 156 of this title shall apply.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.10) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.067 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Expiration.
      (1)   The approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map
shall expire 24 months from the date of its approval.
      (2)   The period of time specified shall not include any period of time
during which a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent
jurisdiction involving the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map
only if a stay of the time period is approved by the City Council. Within 10
days of the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the city, the
subdivider shall, in writing, to the Director of Community Development, request
a stay in the time period for up to five years or deny the requested stay. The
request for the stay shall be a hearing with notice to the subdivider and to
the appellant, and upon conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall,
within 10 days, declare its findings.
      (3)   The expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative
parcel map shall terminate all proceedings and no parcel map of all or any
portion of the real property included within such tentative parcel map shall be
filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map.
   (B)   Extensions.
      (1)   Request by subdivider. The subdivider or his engineer may request
an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved
tentative map by written application to the Director of Community Development.
The application shall be filed not less than 30 days prior to the expiration
date and shall state the reasons for requesting the extension.
      (2)   Director of Community Development.
         (a)   The Director of Community Development shall review the request
for extension for approval, conditional approval, or denial. Not more than two
extensions shall be approved for a tentative map and the period of extension
shall not exceed 12 months. The extension of time shall commence with the
expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. The
approved new expiration date shall not extend more than 2½ years beyond the
date of initial approval by the Director of Community Development.
         (b)   Conditions of approval of the extension shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this division.
         (c)   If the Director of Community Development denies a subdivider's
application for extension, the subdivider may request a review by the Planning
Commission within 15 days after the Director of Community Development has
denied the extension. Requests for review shall be in accordance with §
154.066 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.11) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.068 AMENDMENTS TO THE APPROVED TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP.
   (A)   Amendments to the tentative map or conditions of approval thereof may
be approved by the Director of Community Development upon application by the
subdivider or on its own initiative; provided:
      (1)   No lots, units or building sites are added.
      (2)   Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original
tentative map approval.
      (3)   There are no resulting violations of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any revision shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and approved by
the Director of Community Development. The revision shall be denoted on the
approved tentative map and or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is
appropriate.
   (C)   Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved
tentative map.
   (D)   The Director of Community Development or City Engineer may require a
new tentative parcel map application in lieu of the above procedure when, in
their opinion, requested changes are substantial enough to warrant refiling and
reprocessing.
   (E)   Amendments to an approved tentative parcel map in the coastal zone
shall require a coastal development permit, as prescribed in
Chapter 156 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-4.501.12) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.069 PARCEL MAPS; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
   The form and contents, submittal, approval and filing of parcel maps shall
conform to the provisions of this section and the State Subdivision Map Act.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.1) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.070 SURVEYS REQUIRED.
   An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made
by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, and
adjoining surveys, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys and easements
adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. The
allowable error of closure on any portion of the parcel map shall not exceed 1/
10,000 for field closures and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.2) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.071 FORM AND CONTENTS.
   (A)   Form. The form of the parcel map shall conform to final map form
requirements as specified by §§
154.045 through
154.048 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.3)
   (B)   Contents.
      (1)   The contents of the parcel map shall conform to final map content
requirements as specified by §§
154.045 through
154.048 of this chapter, and as modified herein.
      (2)   Certificates shall be in accordance with Section 66449 of the State
Subdivision Map Act.
      (3)   The Planning Commission certificates will not be required unless
the tentative parcel map was referred to the Planning Commission for its
consideration. The city and County Clerk's certificate will not be required.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.4)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.072 SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Preliminary submittal.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit one reproducible copy of the parcel map
to the City Engineer for checking. The preliminary submittal shall be
accompanied by two copies of the data, plans, reports, and documents as
required for final maps by §§
154.045 through
154.048 of this chapter and as modified herein.
      (2)   The City Engineer may waive any of the four requirements upon
finding that the location and nature of the proposed subdivision is such as not
to necessitate compliance with the requirements of §§
154.045 through
154.048 of this chapter.
      (3)   Any additional information or documents required shall be as
specified with the conditions of approval of the tentative map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.5)
   (B)   Return to subdivider's engineer for corrections. Upon completing the
preliminary check, the City Engineer shall note the required corrections on
preliminary prints, reports and data and return one set to the subdivider's
engineer for revision.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.6)
   (C)   Resubmittal. The subdivider's engineer shall submit one reproducible
copy of the revised map and two sets of reports and data to the City Engineer.
After checking the revisions, one set shall be returned to the subdivider's
engineer marked, “Approved As Submitted,” “Approved When Corrected As Noted,”
or “Revise and Resubmit.” ('63 Code, § 10-4.502.7)
   (D)   Approval by City Engineer. Upon receipt of an approved print, the
subdivider shall submit the original tracing of the revised map, prepared in
accordance with the subdivision map act and this chapter and corrected to its
final form, and signed by all parties required by the Map Act and this chapter
to execute the certificates on the map, to the City Engineer . The City
Engineer shall accept, conditionally accept or reject offers of dedication and
execute the certification on the map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.8)
   (E)   Filing with the County Recorder. The City Clerk or authorized agent
shall transmit the approved parcel map directly to the County Recorder.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.9)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.073 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Director of Community Development, only with the concurrence of
the City Engineer, may waive the parcel map for the following:
      (1)   Division of real property or interests therein created by probate,
eminent domain procedures, partition, or other civil judgments or decrees;
      (2)   A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land, or
interest therein, to a public agency for a public purpose, such as school
sites, public building sites, or rights-of-way for streets, sewers, utilities,
drainage, and the like; or,
      (3)   Upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies
with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage
control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water
supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this
chapter, local ordinance, and the Subdivision Map Act.
   (B)   Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the City Engineer shall cause
to be filed with the County Recorder a certificate of compliance for the land
to be divided.
   (C)   A parcel map waived may be conditioned to provide for payment of park-
land drainage, and other fees by a method approved by the City Engineer.
   (D)   Any waiver of a parcel map pursuant to this section shall not
eliminate the requirement of a coastal development permit, as prescribed by
Chapter 156 of this title for proposed subdivisions in the coastal zone.
('63 Code, § 10-4.502.10) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
§ 154.085 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by
Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of the Subdivision Map Act
(hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute) and may be cited
as the “Eureka Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance.” The purpose of this subchapter
is to establish appropriate local procedures for the implementation of the
Vesting Tentative Map Statute.
   (B)   To accomplish this purpose, the regulations contained in this
subchapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and
development.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.501) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.086 CONSISTENCY WITH GENERAL PLAN OR SPECIFIC PLANS; CITY APPROVALS
REQUIRED PRIOR TO APPLICATION.
   (A)   No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting
tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan or
any applicable specific plan of the city or which is not permitted by the
existing zoning ordinances or other applicable provisions of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   An application for approval of a vesting tentative map pursuant to
this subchapter shall not be submitted nor accepted for filing unless the
subdivider has previously obtained all other necessary discretionary city
approvals for the development that are required pursuant to the applicable
provisions of this code of ordinances.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.502) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 154.087 APPLICATION; WHEN VESTING TENTATIVE MAP SHALL BE FILED.
   (A)   Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as implemented and
supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a tentative map for a
subdivision development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in
accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting
Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a
prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for
construction, or work preparatory to construction.
   (C)   For purposes of this subchapter, “vesting tentative map” shall include
a vesting tentative map prepared in connection with a parcel map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.503) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.088 FILING AND PROCESSING; PAYMENT OF DEVELOPMENT FEES.
   (A)   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the
same contents, accompanying data and reports, and shall be processed in the
same manner as set forth in this chapter for a tentative map except as
hereinafter provided: at the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall
have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”
   (B)   The Community Development Director or Planning Commission, as the case
may be, may require as a condition of its approval that the payment by the
subdivider of all development fees required to be paid at the time of the
application, or issuance of, a building permit or other similar permit shall be
made at the rate for such fees in effect at the time of such application or
issuance.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.504) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.089 EXPIRATION.
   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire
at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same
extensions, established by §§
154.042 and
154.067 of this chapter for the expiration of the approval or conditional
approval of a tentative map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.505) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.090 RIGHTS OF A VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   (A)   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall
confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance
with the ordinances, policies, and standards described in Section 66474.2 of
the Subdivision Map Act. However, if Section 64674.2 is repealed, the approval
or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right
to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances,
policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is
approved or conditionally approved.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A), a permit, approval, extension, or
entitlement may be conditioned or denied if any of the following are
determined:
      (1)   A failure to do so would place the residents of subdivision or the
immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or
safety, or both.
      (2)   The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state
or federal law.
   (C)   The rights required to herein shall expire if a final map or parcel
map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as
provided in §
154.089 of this subchapter. If the final or parcel map is approved, these
rights shall last for the following periods of time:
      (1)   An initial time period of one year beyond the recording of the
final map or parcel map. Where several final maps are recorded on various
phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this one-year
initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that
phase is recorded. All of said final maps or parcel maps must be recorded
within the time period set forth in §
154.089 of this subchapter or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire
for those parcels for which final maps or parcel maps are not timely recorded.
      (2)   The one year initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of
this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit, if one is required, or for any
required design or architectural review, if such processing exceeds 30 days
from the date a complete application is filed.
      (3)   A subdivider may apply to the Planning Commission, in the case of
final maps, or to the Director of Community Development, in the case of parcel
maps, for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set
forth in subsection (1) of this division expires. If the extension is denied,
the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within 15 days in
accordance with §§
154.042(B) and
154.067 of this chapter.
      (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions (1) through (3) of
this division, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the
expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit.
   (D)   Consistent with division (A) of this section, an approved or
conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the city from
imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required approvals or permits
necessary for the development.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.506) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.091 AMENDMENT TO APPROVED VESTING TENTATIVE MAP.
   Amendments to the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map
shall be in accordance with §
154.043 or § 154.068 of this chapter, as the code may be.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.507) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.092 DEVELOPMENT INCONSISTENT WITH ZONING; CONDITIONAL APPROVAL.
   (A)   Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision
whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning ordinance in
existence at that time, that inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The city
may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the
subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the
zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning
ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative
map shall, notwithstanding §
154.090(A) of this subchapter, confer the vested right to proceed with the
development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance
and the map, as approved.
   (B)   The rights conferred by this section shall be for the time periods set
forth in §
154.090(C) of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.508) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
§ 154.093 APPLICATIONS INCONSISTENT WITH CURRENT POLICIES.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter to the contrary, a property
owner or his or her designee may seek approvals or permits for development
which depart from the ordinances, policies, and standards described in §
154.090(A) of this subchapter, and the city may grant these approvals or issue
these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under this
chapter, this code, the general plan and other applicable law.
('63 Code, § 10-4.5.509) (Ord. 492-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
§ 154.105 DEDICATION OF STREETS, ALLEYS, AND OTHER PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY OR
EASEMENTS.
   As a condition of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate
or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the
subdivision that are needed for streets and alleys, including access rights and
abutter's rights; drainage; public greenways; scenic easements; public utility
easements; public access easements in the coastal zone (consistent with the
coastal land use plan); and other required public easements.
('63 Code, § 10-4.601) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.106 PARK LAND DEDICATION.
   (A)   Authority; agreement with general plan. This division is enacted
pursuant to the authority granted by the subdivision map act of the state. The
part and recreational facilities for which dedication of land and/or payment of
a fee is required by this subchapter agree in accordance with the recreational
element of the general plan of the city, adopted by the city on September 20,
1977, and any amendments thereto.
   (B)   Requirements. If required as a condition of approval of a final
subdivision map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in
lieu thereof, or both, at the option of the city, for park or recreational
purposes at the time and according to the standards and formula contained in
this subchapter.
   (C)   General standard. It is hereby found and determined that the public
interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety require that five acres of
property for each 1,000 persons residing within the city be devoted to local
park and recreational purposes.
   (D)   Standards and formula for dedication of land. Where a park or
recreational facility has been designated in an element of the general plan of
the city, and is to be located in whole or in part within the proposed
subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the
subdivision, the subdivider, if required shall dedicate land for a local park
sufficient in size and topography to serve the residents of the subdivision.
The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to the following
standards and formula:
   Acreage = (Avg. No. Pers./Unit x (Units) x (5 Acres)
            1000 Pers.
   (E)   Formula for fees in lieu of land dedication.
      (1)   General formula. If there is no park or recreational facility
designated in the city's general plan to be located in whole or in part within
the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land,
pay a fee equal to the value of the land prescribed for dedication in division
(D) of this section and in an amount determined in accordance with the
provisions of division (F) of this section, such fee to be paid for a local
park which will serve the residents of the area being subdivided.
      (2)   Use of money. The money collected hereunder shall be used only for
the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to
serving the subdivision by way of the purchase of necessary land or, if the
Park and Recreation Commission deems that there is sufficient land available
for the subdivision, for improving of such land for park and recreational
purposes.
   (F)   Amount of fee in lieu of park land dedication.
      (1)   When a fee is required to be paid in lieu of park land dedication,
the amount of such fee shall be based upon the average estimated fair market
value of the land being subdivided.
      (2)   The fair market value shall be as determined by a qualified real
estate appraiser mutually agreed upon by the city and the subdivider, which
appraisal will be considered by the city in determining the fair market value.
All costs required to obtain such appraisal shall be borne by the subdivider.
      (3)   The amount of fee to be paid in lieu of park land dedication shall
be the value of the land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated
pursuant to division (D) of this section.
   (G)   Subdivisions not within general plan. When the proposed subdivision
lies within an area not then within, but to be included within, the city's
general plan, the subdivider shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or
both, in accordance with the adopted park and recreation principles and
standards of the city's general plan and in accordance with the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (H)   Determination of land or fee. Whether the city accepts land dedication
or elects to require payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of
both, shall be determined by consideration of the following:
      (1)   Recreational element of the city's general plan;
      (2)   Topography, geology, access and location of the land in the
subdivision available for dedication;
      (3)   Size and shape of the subdivision of land available for dedication;
      (4)   Feasibility of dedication; and,
      (5)   Availability of previously acquired park property.
   (I)   Procedure.
      (1)   At the time of approval of the tentative subdivision map, the
Recreation and Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Commission shall determine,
after a report and recommendation from the Parks and Recreation Staff, pursuant
to division (H) of this section whether land is to be dedicated or in lieu fees
are to be paid by the subdivider or any combination of land and fees.
      (2)   The recommendation by the Parks and Recreation Staff and the action
of the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Commission shall include the
following:
         (a)   The amount of land required;
         (b)   That a fee be charged in lieu of land;
         (c)   That land and a fee be required;
         (d)   That a stated amount of credit be given for private recreation
facilities or unique natural and special features, and the like;
         (e)   The location of the park land to be dedicated or use of in lieu
fees; or
         (f)   The approximate time when development of the park or recreation
facility shall commence.
      (3)   This action shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission for
concurrence. If concurrence is not obtained, this matter will be forwarded to
the City Council for final determination. In making its determination, the
Council shall be guided by the same standards contained in this subchapter
where applicable.
      (4)   At the time of the filing of the final subdivision map, the
subdivider shall dedicate the land and/or pay the fees as determined by the
city.
      (5)   Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities
shall be submitted to the city prior to approval of the final subdivision map.
   (J)   Commencement of development. At the time of approval of the final
subdivision map, the city shall specify when development of the park or
recreational facilities shall be commenced.
   (K)   Non-applicable subdivisions. The provisions of this subchapter do not
apply to industrial subdivisions, condominium projects or stock cooperatives
which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building
which is more than five years old when no new dwelling units are added.
('63 Code, § 10-4.602) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 588-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 154.107 SCHOOL SITE DEDICATION.
   As a condition of approval of a final subdivision map, a subdivider who
develops or completes the development of one or more subdivisions within a
school district shall dedicate to the school district such lands as the City
Council shall deem to be necessary for the purpose of constructing thereon
schools necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision adequate
elementary school service.
('63 Code, § 10-4.603) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.108 RESERVATION OF LAND.
   (A)   Conformance with standards and formula required. As a condition of
approval of a map, the subdivider shall reserve sites, appropriate in area and
location, for parks, recreational facilities, fire stations, libraries and
other public uses according to the standards and formula contained in this
division.
   (B)   Standards. Where a park, recreational facility, fire station, library,
or other public use is shown on an adopted specific plan or adopted general
plan containing a community facilities element, recreation and parks element
and/or a public building element, the subdivider may be required by the city to
reserve sites as so determined by the city in accordance with the definite
principles and standards contained in the above specific plan or the general
plan. The reserved area must be of such size and shape as to permit the balance
of the property within which the reservation is located to develop in an
orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make
development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically
unfeasible. The reserved area shall conform to the adopted specific plan or the
general plan and shall be in such multiples of streets and parcels as to permit
an efficient division of the reserved area in the event that it is not acquired
within the prescribed period.
   (C)   Procedure; agreement to acquire reserved area. The public agency for
whose benefit an area has been reserved shall, at the time of approval of the
final map or parcel map, enter into a binding agreement to acquire such
reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all
improvements, unless such period of time is extended by mutual agreement.
   (D)   Payment to subdivider. The purchase price shall be the market value
thereof at the time of the filing of the tentative map plus the taxes against
such reserved area from the tentative map plus the taxes against such reserved
area from the date of the reservation and any other costs incurred by the
subdivider in the maintenance of such reserved area, including interest costs
incurred on any load covering such reserved area.
   (E)   Termination. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been
reserved does not enter into such a binding agreement, the reservation of such
area shall automatically terminate.
('63 Code, § 10-4.604) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.109 WAIVER OF DIRECT STREET ACCESS.
   (A)   The city may require as a condition of approval of any subdivision,
the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets from any
property within the subdivision and abutting thereon.
   (B)   Any such waiver shall become effective in accordance with its
provisions and shall be contained in the owners certificate of the final map or
parcel map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.605) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION
§ 154.120 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To establish criteria for the conversion of the existing multiple-
family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock
cooperatives, and planned developments.
   (B)   To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental
housing who may desire to relocate due to the conversion of rental housing and
community housing, by providing for procedures for notification and adequate
time for such relocation.
   (C)   To assure that purchasers of converted community housing has been
properly informed as to the physical condition on the structure which is
offered for purchase.
   (D)   To insure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance
and quality as is consistent with the goals of the city.
   (E)   To provide for availability of alternative modes of housing to the
community by providing for the conversion of existing rental housing to
community housing within the standards provided by this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.701) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.121 REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES.
   In addition to the requirements and procedures as set forth by §§
154.020 through
154.109 of this chapter, conversions shall be subject to the additional
requirements provided by this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.1) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.122 PHYSICAL ELEMENTS REPORT.
   (A)   Submittal. A report on the physical elements of all structures and
facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map.
   (B)   Form and contents.
      (1)   The report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Structural.
         (b)   Foundations.
         (c)   Electrical.
         (d)   Plumbing.
         (e)   Utilities.
         (f)   Walls, ceilings, and windows.
         (g)   Recreational facilities.
         (h)   Sound transmission of each building.
         (i)   Mechanical equipment.
         (j)   Parking facilities.
         (k)   Appliances.
         (l)   A report from licensed structural pest control operator on each
structure and each unit within the structure.
      (2)   Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best
knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the
condition of each element when said element was replaced; the approximate date
upon which said element will require replacement; the cost of replacing said
element; and any variation of the physical condition of said element from the
current Building Code and zoning. The report shall identify any defective or
unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.
No final map or parcel may be filed until any element hazardous to the health
and/or safety of the occupants has been corrected to the satisfaction of the
Building Official or City Engineer, depending on which one's area of technical
specialty covers the specific element.
      (3)   The report shall include any known soil and geological conditions
regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, ground water, and landslides
in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of
soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any
previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report.
      (4)   The final form of the report shall be as approved by the Department
of Community Development.
   (C)   Additional submittals.
      (1)   A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would
be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the
project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to, the conveyance
of units; the assignment of parking; and agreement for common area maintenance,
including facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial
assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance, description of a provision
for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project; an indication
of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and
services for each unit.
      (2)   Any other information which, in the opinion of the Director of
Community Development, will assist in determining whether the proposed project
will be consistent with the purposes of this subchapter.
   (D)   Review and action by the Department of Community Development.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit five copies of the proposed report with
(or prior to) the tentative map submittal.
      (2)   The Building Official, Director of Community Development, and the
City Engineer or their authorized representatives shall make an on-site
inspection and review the report and within 14 days transmit the report with
their recommendations and comments to the Director of Community Development.
The Director or his authorized representative shall review the report and all
the comments and return one copy of the report to the subdivider for necessary
revisions. The review procedure shall be repeated until the report is
acceptable to the Director of Community Development.
      (3)   The report in its acceptable form shall remain on file with the
Department of Community Development for review by any interested persons. The
report shall be referenced to in the subdivision report to the Planning
Commission.
   (E)   Copy to buyers.
      (1)   The subdivider shall provide each purchaser with a copy of the
report (in its final acceptable form) prior to said purchaser executing any
purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit in the project and said
developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said report.
      (2)   Copies of the report shall be made available at all times at the
sales office, and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the
city, at the project site.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.2) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.123 CONFORMANCE TO EXISTING BUILDING REGULATIONS, ZONING AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Building Official, Director of Community Development, and City
Engineer shall review the proposed conversion for conformance to this code of
ordinances and accepted standards in effect at the time of the tentative map
submittal.
   (B)   Each division shall then make recommendations for conditions of
approval that will bring the project into conformance with existing
regulations. If the proposed conversion is in conformance, the division shall
so state.
   (C)   Any resulting conditions of approval imposed upon the tentative
subdivision map or tentative parcel map shall be fulfilled prior to filing of
the final map or parcel map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.3) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.124 REFURBISHING AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports,
accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas and additional
elements as required by the Department of Community Development shall be
refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a high degree of appearance
and quality.
   (B)   Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors and
products of combustion other than heat conforming to the latest UBC standards,
mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or
area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.
   (C)   A project inspection will be made by the Building Official, the
Director of Community Development and the City Engineer or their authorized
representatives. A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection of
all corrections required to conform to the requirements of this section.
   (D)   When the final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency
list shall be transmitted to the subdivider.
   (E)   All deficiencies must be corrected to the satisfaction of the City
Engineer or his authorized representative prior to filing of the final map or
parcel map.
   (F)   Plans for corrective work may be required. When plans are required,
they shall be generally in accordance with §
154.144 of this chapter, and as approved by the City Engineer or his authorized
representative.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.4) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.125 NOTICE TO TENANTS.
   (A)   Evidence of receipt by tenant. A notice of the intent to convert shall
be delivered to each tenant. Evidence of receipt, satisfactory to the Director
of Community Development or authorized representative, by each tenant shall be
submitted with the tentative map.
   (B)   Form and contents.
      (1)   The form of the notice shall be as approved by the Director of
Community Development and shall contain not less than the following:
         (a)   Name and address of current owner;
         (b)   Name and address of the proposed subdivider;
         (c)   Approximate date on which the tentative map is proposed to be
filed;
         (d)   Approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be
filed;
         (e)   Approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by non-
purchasing tenants;
         (f)   Tenants rights of purchase; and,
         (g)   Tenants rights of notification to vacate.
      (2)   Other information may be required as deemed necessary.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.5) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.126 TENANTS’ RIGHT TO PURCHASE.
   Any present tenant or tenants of any unit shall be given a nontransferable
right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied at a price no greater than
the price offered to the general public. The right of first refusal shall
extend for at least 60 days from the date of approval of the final subdivision
map or parcel map. A tenant who is not current in his contractual obligations
under his rental agreement or lease shall not be entitled to said right of
first refusal.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.6) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.127 VACATION OF UNITS.
   Each non-purchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the
rental agreement or lease under which he occupies his unit, shall have not less
than 90 days from the date of receipt of notification from the subdivider of
his intent to convert, or from the filing date of the final subdivision map or
parcel map, whichever date is later, to find substitute housing and to
relocate.
('63 Code, § 10-4.702.7) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.140 CONSTRUCTION ACCORDING TO STANDARDS; PREREQUISITE TO SUBMITTAL OF
MAPS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both on and
off-site according to approved standards.
   (B)   No final map shall be presented to the Council or parcel map to the
City Engineer for approval until the subdivider either completes the required
improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city agreeing to do such
work.
('63 Code, § 10-4.801) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.141 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the
tentative map or city ordinance, together with but not limited to, the
following shall be required of all subdivisions.
   (B)   Requirements for the construction of such off-site and on-site
improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the parcel map, on the
instrument evidencing the waiver of such parcel map, or by separate instrument
and shall be recorded on, concurrently with, or prior to the parcel map or
instrument of waiver of a parcel map being filed for record. Completion of
improvements shall be in accordance with §
154.148 of this chapter.
      (1)   Storm drainage. Stormwater runoff from the subdivision shall be
collected and conveyed by an approved storm drain system. The storm drain
system shall be designed for ultimate development of the watershed. The storm
drain system shall provide for the protection of abutting and off-site
properties that would be adversely affected by any increase in runoff
attributed to the development; off-site storm drain improvements may be
required to satisfy this requirement.
      (2)   Sanitary sewers. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be
served by an approved sanitary sewer system, except that in proposed
subdivisions in the coastal zone sewer service shall not be provided beyond the
urban limit line, consistent with the coastal land use plan.
      (3)   Water supply. Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be
served by an approved domestic water system constructed in accordance with
applicable provisions of
Chapter 52 of this code of ordinances, except that in proposed subdivisions in
the coastal zone off-site water service shall not be provided beyond the urban
limit line, consistent with the coastal land use plan.
      (4)   Utilities.
         (a)   Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall be served by gas
(if required), electric, telephone and cablevision facilities. All utilities
within the subdivision and along peripheral streets shall be placed underground
except those facilities exempted by the Public Utilities Commission
regulations.
         (b)   For subdivisions of five or more parcels, the developer may
appeal the undergrounding requirement along peripheral streets to the City
Council. Such appeal shall be in accordance with §
154.041 of this chapter. The appeal shall be accompanied by an estimate from
each utility company for the approximate cost per lineal foot and total cost to
the underground its facilities along the peripheral street. The developer shall
pay all fees as may be charged by each utility company to make the required
estimate.
         (c)   The City Council may, at its discretion, accept a fee in lieu of
the undergrounding of existing facilities along peripheral streets. The amount
of fee shall not be less than the amount established by the City Engineer for
the normal cost of undergrounding of existing utilities along residential
streets.
         (d)   In lieu fees shall be deposited in a special undergrounding
account to be used as approved by the City Council for future undergrounding of
utilities throughout the city.
('63 Code, § 10-4.802) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.142 DESIGN OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Conformance with standards required. The design of all required
improvements both on and off-site, private and public, shall conform to such
standards as approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Energy conservation. The design of a subdivision for which a tentative
map is required shall be in accordance with Section 66473.1 of the Subdivision
Map Act.
('63 Code, § 10-4.803) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.143 ACCESS.
   (A)   The subdivision shall abut upon or have an approved access to a public
street.
   (B)   Each unit or lot within the subdivision shall have an approved access
to a public street.
   (C)   Street layout shall be designed to provide for future access to, and
not impose hardship upon property adjoining the subdivision.
   (D)   Reserve strips, or non-access at the end of streets or at the
boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the city when
required.
('63 Code, § 10-4.804) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.144 IMPROVEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   Preparation; specifications included.
      (1)   Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and
signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state.
      (2)   Improvement plans shall include but not be limited to grading,
storm drains, landscaping, streets and related facilities.
   (B)   Form.
      (1)   Plans, profiles and details shall be legibly drawn, printed or
reproduced on 24 × 36 inch sheets. A border shall be made on each sheet
providing ½-inch at top, bottom and right side and 1½ inches on the left side.
      (2)   A suitable title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or
along the right edge and provide adequate space for approval by the City
Engineer and for approval of plan revisions.
      (3)   Plan and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of one-inch equals 50
feet or larger unless approved by the City Engineer. Details shall be drawn to
such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for
various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet.
      (4)   A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of
plans.
      (5)   A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable.
      (6)   Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of
the sheet unless approved otherwise by the City Engineer.
      (7)   All lettering shall be 1/8-inch minimum.
      (8)   If the plans include three or more sheets, a cover sheet showing
the streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index and vicinity map shall be
included.
      (9)   The form of all plans shall conform to such additional requirements
as may be established by the City Engineer. The final form of all plans shall
be as approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Contents.
      (1)   The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles and
details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and
private (including common areas).
      (2)   Reference may be made to city standards or State Standard Plans in
lieu of duplicating the drawings thereon.
   (D)   Supplementary plans and calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and
calculations, bond estimates and any structural calculations as may be
required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the City Engineer.
All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a
registered civil engineer licensed by the state and in a form as approved by
the City Engineer.
   (E)   Review and approval by the City Engineer.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit three sets of improvement plans and
three copies of all computations to the City Engineer for review. Upon
completion of his review, one set of the preliminary plans, with the required
revisions indicated thereon, will be returned to the subdivider's engineer.
      (2)   (a)   After completing all required revisions, the subdivider's
engineer shall transmit the originals and one set of reproducible copies of the
improvement plans to the City Engineer for his signature.
         (b)   Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that
the plans conform to all applicable city ordinances, design review requirements
and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the City Engineer shall sign
and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider's
engineer.
         (c)   Approval by the City Engineer shall in no way relieve the
subdivider or his engineer from responsibility for the design of the
improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design thereof or from
any required conditions of approval for the tentative map.
   (F)   Revisions to approved plans.
      (1)   Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the
approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be
submitted in writing to the Engineering Department and shall be accompanied by
three sets of revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision
is acceptable, the originals shall be submitted to the Engineering Department
office for initialing. The originals shall be returned to the subdivider's
engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to
commence until revised plans have been initialed by the City's Engineering
Department.
      (2)   When revisions are deemed necessary by the City Engineer to protect
public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in
writing shall be made to the subdivider and his engineer. The subdivider's
engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the City
Engineer. Upon receipt of the initialed originals, the subdivider's engineer
shall immediately transmit two sets of the revised drawings to the City
Engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped
by the City Engineer until revised drawings have been submitted.
('63 Code, § 10-4.805) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 588-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.145 IMPROVEMENT AND CONSTRUCTION AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Improvement agreement. The agreement shall be prepared and signed by
the City Engineer and approved as to form by the City Attorney. The agreement
shall provide for:
      (1)   Construction of all improvements per the approved plans and
specifications.
      (2)   Completion of improvements within the time specified by §
154.148 of this chapter.
      (3)   Right by city to modify plans and specifications.
      (4)   Warranty by subdivider that construction will not adversely affect
any portion of adjacent properties.
      (5)   Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the city's resolution
establishing fees and charges.
      (6)   Payment of in-lieu fees for undergrounding of utilities on
peripheral streets; proof of public utility deposits; payment of in-lieu fees
for park land dedication.
      (7)   Improvement security as required by this subchapter.
      (8)   Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and causes
thereof.
      (9)   Release of the city from all liability incurred by the development
and payment of all reasonable attorney's fees that the city may incur because
of any legal action arising from the development.
      (10)   Provide certificates of insurance for Workman's Compensation,
public liability and property damage.
      (11)   Any other deposits, fees or conditions as required by city
ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Construction agreement.
      (1)   In the event that the subdivider elects to construct the
improvements prior to signing of the map by the City Engineer and submittal to
Council, the subdivider shall enter into a construction agreement providing for
all items enumerated in division (A) of this section, except subsection (7)
regarding improvement security. In addition, the construction agreement shall
specify that the subdivider shall not sell any lots in the subdivision, nor
shall a map thereof be recorded, until such time as the complete work of
improvement has been accepted by the city, or in the alternative, the
subdivider has furnished such surety and payment bonds, and in such amounts as
are then acceptable to the City Engineer for any work remaining to be done that
is incomplete, and provides such assurance as may be required by the city that
the cost of all completed work has been paid or that payment for such work is
otherwise guaranteed.
      (2)   Upon acceptance of the improvements, warranty security shall be
provided in accordance with §
154.146(D) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.807) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.146 IMPROVEMENT SECURITY.
   (A)   Conformance required; prerequisite to approval of maps.
      (1)   Any agreement, or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map
Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with
Section 66499 of the State Subdivision Map Act and as provided herein.
      (2)   No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the City Engineer or
recorded until all improvement securities required by this section have been
received and approved.
   (B)   Form of security.
      (1)   The form of security shall be one or the combination of the
following at the option and subject to the approval of the City Engineer.
         (a)   Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties.
         (b)   A deposit, either with the local agency or a responsible escrow
agent or trust company, at the option of the city, or money or negotiable bonds
of the kind approved for securing deposits of public monies.
         (c)   An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions
subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the
funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed
for payment.
         (d)   A lien upon the property to be divided, created by contract
between the owner and the city, if the local agency expressly finds that it
would not be in the public interest to require the installation of the required
improvement sooner than two years after the recordation of the map.
         (e)   A lien in the form of deed of trust upon the real property if
approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   The provisions of the bond or bonds shall be in accordance with
Sections 66499.1 and 66499.2 of the State Subdivision Map Act.
   (C)   Real property liens.
      (1)   The City Engineer shall have the discretion to accept or reject
liens upon real property offered as good and sufficient subdivision security.
      (2)   In considering offered liens, the City Engineer may consider any
factor he finds relevant and may require the subdivider to submit such
information as he deems necessary.
      (3)   An application to the City Engineer shall contain the following:
         (a)   Two current appraisals prepared by an independent appraiser
commonly accepted by financial institutions.
         (b)   A current preliminary title report.
         (c)   A current credit report.
         (d)   A contract for the installation of the subdivision improvements
unless the subdivider is licensed to perform such work.
         (e)   A loan commitment or other source of funding the construction.
         (f)   Two copies of the tentative map and letter of approval.
         (g)   An application fee in the amount set by resolution.
      (4)   Subdivision real property liens shall be senior to all other liens
and in the case of subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall not exceed 50%
and in the case of subdivision of five or more lots shall not exceed 30% of the
appraised unsubdivided value of the property.
      (5)   Upon approval, an escrow shall be opened providing for the
preparation of the deed of trust, issuance of a standard form title policy in
favor of the city in the amount of the lien, closure of escrow within 45 days
and payment of all escrow cost fees and expenses by the subdivider.
   (D)   Amount of security.
      (1)   A performance bond or security in the amount of 100% of the
estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of
all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of
50% of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee the
payment to the subdivider's contractor, subcontractors, and to persons
furnishing labor, materials or equipment for the construction or installation
of improvements.
      (2)   The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the City
Engineer and shall provide for:
         (a)   No less than 5% nor more than 10% of the total construction cost
for contingencies.
         (b)   Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated
midpoint of construction.
         (c)   All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to
the City Engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been
deposited to insure installation.
         (d)   In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be
included costs and reasonable expenses and fees, including attorney's fees,
incurred in enforcing the obligation secured.
   (E)   Warranty security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by
the City Council, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as
required by the City Engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the
warranty period. The amount of the warranty security shall be not less than 10%
of the cost of the construction of the improvements for the one-year warranty
period.
   (F)   Reduction in performance security. The City Engineer may authorize in
writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the
acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the
work progresses upon application by the subdivider. The amount of reduction of
the security shall be as determined by the City Engineer; however, in no event
shall the City Engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which
would reduce such security to an amount below that required to guarantee the
completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by this
chapter, the Subdivision Map Act, or the improvement agreement.
   (G)   Release of improvement securities.
      (1)   Performance security. The performance security shall be released
only upon acceptance of the improvements by the city and when an approved
warranty security has been filed with the City Engineer.
      (2)   Material and labor security. Security given to secure payment to
the contractor, subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or
equipment may, six months after the completion and acceptance of the
improvements by the City Council, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount
of all claims therefore filed and of which notice has been given to the City
Council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of
all such claims and obligations for which the security was given.
      (3)   Warranty security. The warranty security shall be released upon
satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided:
         (a)   All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for
the subdivision have been corrected.
         (b)   Not less than 12 months have elapsed since the acceptance of the
improvements by the City Council.
('63 Code, § 10-4.808) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 440-C.S.,
passed 1-16-86; Am. Ord. 444-C.S., passed 4-17-86; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-
20-07)
§ 154.147 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Conformance required; plan and agreement prerequisite to commencement.
      (1)   The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall
conform to the standards and details of the city.
      (2)   Construction shall not commence until the required improvement
plans have been approved by the City Engineer, and the subdivider has entered
into an improvement or construction agreement and met all provisions thereof.
('63 Code, § 10-4.809)
   (B)   Construction inspection.
      (1)   Improvements subject to inspection. All improvements are subject to
inspection by the City Engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the
city's standards.
      (2)   Pre-construction conference. Prior to commencing any construction,
the developer shall arrange for a pre-construction conference with the City
Engineer.
      (3)   Final inspection and deficiency list.
         (a)   Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the developer
shall apply in writing to the City Engineer for a preliminary final inspection.
The City Engineer shall schedule a preliminary final inspection.
         (b)   A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection noting
all corrections or any additional work required. If the number of items are
excessive or the subdivision appears incomplete, the preliminary final
inspection may be halted and rescheduled on a date as determined by the City
Engineer or authorized representative.
         (c)   When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy
of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the developer for correction.
         (d)   Upon having completed all corrections or additional work as
outlined by the deficiency list, the developer shall certify in writing that
all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final
inspection. The City Engineer shall then make a final inspection.
         (e)   Upon finding that all items on the deficiency list have been
corrected and receipt of as-built improvement plans, the subdivision shall be
placed on the Council agenda for acceptance.
         (f)   The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list
shall not relieve the developer from the responsibility of correcting any
deficiency not shown on the list that may be subsequently discovered.
('63 Code, § 10-4.810)
(Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.148 COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Subdivisions of five or more parcels.
      (1)   The subdivision improvements shall be completed by the developer
within 18 months, or such time as approved by the City Engineer, not to exceed
a period of 24 months, from the recording of the final map, unless an extension
is granted by the City Council.
      (2)   Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the
specified time, the city may, by resolution of Council and at its option, cause
any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing
the surety or sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary
costs therefor.
   (B)   Subdivisions of four or less parcels.
      (1)   Completion of improvements will not be required until such time as
a permit or other grant of approval for the development of any parcel within
the subdivision is applied for. Improvements shall be completed prior to final
building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the subdivision.
      (2)   The completion of the improvements may be required by a specified
date by the city when the completion of such improvements are found to be
necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the
surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the City Engineer. Such
specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement
agreement or construction agreement.
   (C)   Extensions.
      (1)   The completion date may be extended by the City Council for
subdivisions of five or more parcels and by the City Engineer for subdivisions
of four or less parcels upon written request by the developer and the submittal
of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not
less than 30 days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvement agreement,
or construction agreement.
      (2)   The subdivider shall enter into an amendment to the subdivision
agreement with the city. For subdivisions of five or more parcels, the
amendment shall be prepared and signed by the City Engineer, approved as to
form by the City Attorney, executed by the subdivider and transmitted to the
City Council for their consideration. If approved by the City Council, the
Mayor shall execute the amendment on behalf of the city.
      (3)   In consideration of an amendment to the subdivision agreement, the
following may be required:
         (a)   Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and
construction standards when required by the City Engineer.
         (b)   Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current
improvement costs as approved by the City Engineer.
         (c)   Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised
construction estimates.
         (d)   Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction
costs.
      (4)   The City Council may impose additional requirements as recommended
by the City Engineer or as it may deem necessary as a condition to approving
any time extension for the completion of improvements.
      (5)   The costs incurred by the city in processing the amendment shall be
borne by the developer.
('63 Code, § 10-4.811) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-844; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.149 ACCEPTANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   When all improvements deficiencies have been corrected and original
as-built improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be
considered by the city for acceptance. Improvements for subdivisions of five or
more parcels must be accepted by the City Council. The City Engineer shall be
responsible for the acceptance of improvements for subdivisions of four or less
parcels.
   (B)   Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only when the improvements
have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been
accepted for public use.
('63 Code, § 10-4.812) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
REVERSION TO ACREAGE
§ 154.160 CONFORMANCE TO PROVISIONS REQUIRED; COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions
of this subchapter and the State Subdivision Map Act. This subchapter shall
apply to final maps and parcel maps.
   (B)   In the coastal zone, reversions to acreage shall require a coastal
development permit, as prescribed in
Chapter 156 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-4.901) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.161 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   By owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be
initiated by petition of all of the owner of record of the property. The
petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Director of Community
Development. The petition shall contain the information required by §
154.161 of this chapter and such other information as required by the Director
of Community Development.
   (B)   By City Council. The City Council, at the request of any person or on
its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to
acreage. The City Council shall direct the Director of Community Development to
obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings.
('63 Code, § 10-4.902) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.162 CONTENTS OF PETITION.
   The petition shall contain but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Evidence of title to the real property;
   (B)   Evidence of the consent to all of the owners of an interest in the
property;
   (C)   Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been
made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed for
record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements, whichever is later;
   (D)   Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map was filed for
record;
   (E)   A tentative map in the form prescribed by §§
154.036 through
154.044 or
154.085 of this chapter;
   (F)   A final or parcel map in the form prescribed by §§
154.045 through
154.048 or
154.069 through
154.073 of this chapter which delineates dedications which will not be vacated
and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps
shall be conspicuously designated with the title, “The Purpose of This Map is a
Reversion to Acreage”; or,
   (G)   All persons submitting petitions as required by this subchapter shall
pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the city's resolution establishing
fees and charges.
('63 Code, § 10-4.903) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.163 SUBMITTAL OF PETITION TO THE DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The final map or parcel map for the reversion together with all other
data as required by this subchapter shall be submitted to the Director of
Community Development for his review.
   (B)   Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this
chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act, the Director of Community
Development shall submit the final map or parcel map, together with his report
and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to
acreage to the City Council for their consideration.
('63 Code, § 10-4.904) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.164 PUBLIC HEARING; CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL.
   (A)   A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all petitions
for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall
be given as provided in Cal. Gov't Code § 66451.3.
   (B)   The Director of Community Development may give such other notice that
he deems necessary or advisable.
      (1)   The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it
finds and records by resolution that:
         (a)   Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned
by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public
purposes; and,
         (b)   Either:
            1.   All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to reversion;
            2.   None of the improvements required to be made have been made
within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or
within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements,
whichever is later; or,
            3.   No lots shown on the final or parcel map were filed for
record.
      (2)   The City Council may require as conditions of the reversion:
         (a)   The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-
of-way or easements.
         (b)   The retention of all or a portion of previously paid subdivision
fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary to
accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.905) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.165 FILING WITH COUNTY RECORDER.
   (A)   Upon approving the reversion to acreage, the City Engineer shall
transmit the final map or parcel map, together with the City Council resolution
approving the reversion to the County Recorder for recordation.
   (B)   Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record
by the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication
not shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force and
effect.
('63 Code, § 10-4.906) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
CORRECTION AND AMENDMENTS OF MAPS
§ 154.175 AMENDMENT BY CERTIFICATE OF CORRECTION OR AMENDING MAP; REASONS.
   After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the County Recorder,
it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map:
   (A)   To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;
   (B)   To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;
   (C)   To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on
the map;
   (D)   To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement
from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for
setting monuments;
   (E)   To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in
location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or
incorrectly as to its character; or
   (F)   To correct any other types of map error or omission as approved by the
City Engineer which does not affect any property right.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1001) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.176 FORM AND CONTENTS.
   The amending map or certificate or correction shall be prepared by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of
the amending map shall conform to the requirements of §§
154.045 through
154.048 of this chapter if a final map, or §§
154.069 through
154.073 of this chapter if a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall
set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee
owners of the property affected by the correction.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1002) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.177 SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL BY THE CITY ENGINEER.
   (A)   The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final
form, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for his review and approval.
   (B)   The City Engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of
correction and if the only changes made are those set forth in §
154.175 of this subchapter, he shall certify to this fact on the amending map
or certificate of correction.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1003) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.178 FILING WITH THE COUNTY RECORDER.
   The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the City Engineer
shall be filed in the office of the County Recorder in which the original map
was filed. Upon such filing, the County Recorder shall index the names of the
fee owners and the appropriate tract designation shown on the amending map or
certificate of correction in the general index and map index respectively.
Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so
corrected in the same manner as though set forth upon the original map.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1004) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.179 FEE.
   All persons submitting amending maps or certificates of correction required
by this subchapter shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the city's
resolution establishing fees and charges.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1005) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
PARCEL MERGERS
§ 154.190 MERGERS NOT REQUIRED.
   Two or more contiguous parcels or units or land which have been subdivided
under the provisions of this chapter or the State Subdivision Map Act shall not
merge by virtue of the fact that such contiguous parcels are held by the same
ownership. No further proceedings under this chapter shall be required for the
purpose of sale, lease or financing, except as provided by this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1201) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.191 MERGERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   If any of two or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same
owner does not conform to the minimum parcel size requirements of existing
zoning regulations so as not to permit its development, and at least one of the
affected parcels is not developed with a structure other than an accessory
structure for which a building permit was issued or which was built prior to
the time such permits were required by the city, and with respect to any
affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exist: comprises less
than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger; was
not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the
time of its creation; does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and
domestic water supply; does not meet slope stability standards; has no legal
access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and
maneuverability; its development could create health or safety hazards; is
inconsistent with the applicable general plan other than minimum lot size or
density standards; a structure is built on or across a property line; then such
parcels shall be considered as merged for the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   If the sole reason for merger is that the parcel(s) contain less than
5,000 square feet, then the Planning Commission may consider an exception from
merger for any parcel(s) containing a width of 35 feet or greater in accordance
with provisions included in §
154.040 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1202) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 433-C.S.,
passed 7-18-85)
§ 154.192 NOTICE OF MERGER.
   (A)   Whenever the Director of Community Development has knowledge that real
property has merged pursuant to this subchapter, they shall cause to be filed
with the County Recorder a notice of merger. At least 30 days prior to
recording of notice, the owner of the parcels or units shall be advised in
writing of the intention to record such notice.
   (B)   The notification to the owner shall specify a time, date, and place at
which the owner may present evidence as to why the notice of merger should not
be recorded.
   (C)   The notice of merger to be recorded shall specify the names of the
record owners and describing the property to be merged.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1203) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 154.193 REQUEST BY PROPERTY OWNER; APPROVAL OF MERGER.
   (A)   Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the Director of
Community Development or authorized representative may approve the merger of
the property. Such request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by such
data and documents as required by the Director of Community Development.
   (B)   Upon approval, a “notice of merger” shall be filed with the County
Recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the
Director of Community Development.
   (C)   In approving such merger, the city may impose reasonable conditions.
The reasonableness of such conditions may be appealed within 15 days of written
notice of the conditions to the City Council in accordance with §
154.041(A) of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1204) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.205 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall offer to sell or lease, to contract to sell or lease,
to sell or lease or to finance any parcel or parcels of real property or to
commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon,
except for model homes, or to allow occupancy thereof for which a final map is
required by this chapter, or the State Subdivision Map Act, until such map
thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or the State
Subdivision Map Act has been filed with the County Recorder for record.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real
property or commence construction of any buildings for sale, lease or financing
thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy thereof for which a parcel
map is required by this chapter or the State Subdivision Map Act, until such
map thereof, in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the
State Subdivision Map Act has been filed for record by the recorder.
   (C)   Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a
final or parcel map is required by this chapter shall not be made by parcel or
block number, initial or other designation, unless and until such map has been
filed for record with the County Recorder.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision
offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in
compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of
subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1101) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 154.206 REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which
has been divided, or which has resulted from a division in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or State Subdivision Map Act is voidable at the sole
option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his heirs,
personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year
after the date of discovery of the violation, but the deed of conveyance, sale
or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee,
buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and
upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, or his assignee, heir
or devisee.
   (B)   Any grantee or his successor in interest of real property which has
been divided or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or the State Subdivision Map Act may, within one
year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the
Superior Court to recover any damages he has suffered by reason of such
division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided
the property in violation and against any successors in interest who have
actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of
any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed
pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 66499.35 or identified in a recorded final map or
parcel map, from and after the date of recording. The provisions of this
section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or his
successor in interest under any other provision of law.
   (D)   This section does not bar any legal, equitable or summary remedy to
which the city or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may
otherwise be entitled, and the city or other public agency, or such person,
firm or corporation may file a suit in the Superior Court of the county to
restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease or
financing in violation of this chapter.
   (E)   The city shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to
develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a
division, in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the State
Subdivision Map Act if it finds that development of such real property is
contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny such
a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the
owner of the real property at the time of such violation or whether the
applicant therefor is the current owner of the real property with, or without,
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the
acquisition of his interest in such real property.
   (F)   The city, in issuing a permit or granting approval for the development
of any such real property, may impose those additional conditions as would have
been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner
of record acquired the property, and which has been established at such time by
this division or local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, except that if a
conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record under the
provisions of this subchapter, only such conditions stipulated shall be
applicable.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1102) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.207 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Any person owning real property within the city may request the
Director of Community Development to determine whether such real property
complies with the provisions of this chapter and the State Subdivision Map Act.
   (B)   Upon making such determination, the Director of Community Development
shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the County
Recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and
shall state that the division of land complies with applicable provisions of
this code of ordinances and the State Subdivision Map Act.
   (C)   If the Director of Community Development determines that such real
property does not comply with the provisions of this code of ordinances or
State Subdivision Map Act, he may, as a condition to granting a certificate of
compliance, impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the
division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the
property, and which had been established at such time by ordinance. Upon making
such a determination and establishing such conditions, the Director of
Community Development shall cause a conditional certificate of compliance to be
filed for record with the County Recorder. Such certificate shall serve as
notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate pursuant to
this section, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent issuance of a
permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance
with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other
grant of approval for development of such property is issued.
   (D)   A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of
compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.
   (E)   For the purposes of administration of this section, any parcel that is
shown on the County Assessor's maps prior to March 4, 1972, shall be considered
as a conforming parcel.
   (F)   A fee shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination
and processing the certificate of compliance.
   (G)   In the coastal zone, the applicant shall be required to obtain a
coastal development permit, as prescribed by
Chapter 156 of this title, in addition to any certificate of compliance.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1103) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 154.208 CERTIFICATE OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   Whenever the Director of Community Development has knowledge that real
property has been divided in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the
Subdivision Map Act, the Director of Community Development shall cause to be
filed for record with the County Recorder a notice of intention to record a
notice of violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners
thereof, and describing the violation, and stating that an opportunity will be
given to the owner to present evidence. Upon recording a notice of intention to
record a notice of violation, the Director of Community Development shall mail
a copy of such notice to the owner of such real property. The notice shall
specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence to the
Planning Commission why such notice should not be recorded. If, after the owner
has presented evidence, it is determined that there has been no violation, the
Director of Community Development shall record a release of the notice of
intention to record a notice of violation with the County Recorder. If,
however, after the owner has presented evidence, the Planning Commission
determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, or if within
60 days of receipt of such copy the owner of such real property fails to inform
the Planning Commission of his objection to recording the notice of violation,
the Director of Community Development shall record the notice of violation with
the County Recorder. The notice of intention to record a notice of violation
and the notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive
notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property.
('63 Code, § 10-4.1104) (Ord. 416-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.104   Introductory Provisions
      
155.104.010   Title
      
155.104.020   Effective date
      
155.104.030   Authority
      
155.104.040   Purpose of the Zoning Code
      
155.104.050   Relationship to the General Plan
      
155.104.060   Applicability and jurisdiction
      
155.104.070   Relationship to the Local Coastal Program
      
155.104.080   Numbering and referencing
      
155.104.090   Conflicting provisions
      
155.104.100   Transitional provisions
      
155.104.110   Severability
   
155.108   Interpretation
      
155.108.010   Purpose
      
155.108.020   Authority
      
155.108.030   Official interpretations
      
155.108.040   Rules of interpretation
      
155.108.050   Land use regulations
      
155.108.060   Zoning map
   
155.112   Rules of Measurement
      
155.112.010   Purpose
      
155.112.020   Lot area
      
155.112.030   Density
      
155.112.040   Setbacks
      
155.112.050   Floor area and floor area ratio
      
155.112.060   Site coverage
      
155.112.070   Height
      
155.112.080   Distances
      
155.112.090   Slope
   
155.116   Zoning Districts and Maps
      
155.116.010   Purpose
      
155.116.020   Zoning districts
      
155.116.030   Zoning maps
      
155.116.040   Zoning map amendments
Zoning District Standards
   
155.204   Residential Zoning Districts
      
155.204.010   Purpose of residential zoning districts
      
155.204.020   Allowed land uses
      
155.204.030   Development standards
      
155.204.040   SB 9 housing developments
   
155.208   Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
      
155.208.010   Purpose of mixed-use zoning districts
      
155.208.020   Allowed land uses
      
155.208.030   Development standards
      
155.208.040   Pedestrian-focused frontages
   
155.212   Industrial Zoning Districts
      
155.212.010   Purpose of industrial zoning districts
      
155.212.020   Allowed land uses
      
155.212.030   Residential and office uses in industrial zoning districts
      
155.212.040   Development standards
   
155.216   Public Zoning Districts
      
155.216.010   Purpose of public zoning districts
      
155.216.020   Allowed land uses
      
155.216.030   Development standards
   
155.220   Resource-Related Zoning Districts
      
155.220.010   Purpose of resource-related zoning districts
      
155.220.020   Allowed land uses
      
155.220.030   Development standards
   
155.224   Overlay Zones
      
155.224.010   Purpose of overlay zones
      
155.224.020   Qualified overlay
      
155.224.030   Neighborhood market overlay
      
155.224.040   Special considerations overlay
      
155.224.050   Gulch Greenway Overlay Zone
Citywide Standards
   
155.304   Supplemental Use Regulations
      
155.304.010   Purpose
      
155.304.020   Accessory uses
      
155.304.030   Adult entertainment
      
155.304.040   Car share facilities
      
155.304.050   Emergency shelters
      
155.304.060   Family day care homes
      
155.304.070   Home occupations
      
155.304.080   Manufactured housing
      
155.304.090   Mobile vendors
      
155.304.100   Multi-family laundry facilities
      
155.304.110   Outdoor storage
      
155.304.120   Recreational vehicle parks
      
155.304.130   Tiny house on wheels
      
155.304.140   Tree removal
      
155.304.150   Vacation rental
   
155.308   General Standards
      
155.308.010   Lot standards
      
155.308.020   Height exceptions
      
155.308.030   Setback exceptions
      
155.308.040   Vision clearance area
      
155.308.050   Outdoor lighting
      
155.308.060   Screening for residential zoning districts
      
155.308.070   Solid waste/recyclable material storage
   
155.312   Design Standards
      
155.312.010   Purpose
      
155.312.020   Applicability
      
155.312.030   Exterior materials
      
155.312.040   Building entries
      
155.312.050   Architectural features
      
155.312.060   Blank walls
      
155.312.070   Garage doors in residential zoning districts
      
155.312.080   Mechanical equipment
   
155.316   Accessory Dwelling Units
      
155.316.010   Purpose
      
155.316.020   Permitting process
      
155.316.030   Where allowed
      
155.316.040   Number of accessory dwelling units
      
155.316.050   Accessory dwelling units as short-term rentals
      
155.316.060   Site and design standards
      
155.316.070   Interpretation
   
155.320   Fences and Walls
      
155.320.010   Purpose and applicability
      
155.320.020   Required permits and approvals
      
155.320.030   Measurement of fence and wall height
      
155.320.040   Maximum height
      
155.320.050   Materials
      
155.320.060   Non-conforming fences and walls
   
155.324   Parking
      
155.324.010   Purpose
      
155.324.020   Applicability
      
155.324.030   Number of on-site parking spaces required
      
155.324.040   Reductions and alternatives to automobile parking
      
155.324.050   General requirements
      
155.324.060   Parking design and development standards
      
155.324.070   Bicycle parking
      
155.324.080   Parking lot landscaping
   
155.328   Landscaping
      
155.328.010   Purpose
      
155.328.020   Nonconformities
      
155.328.030   Landscape plans
      
155.328.040   Required landscape areas
      
155.328.050   General landscape requirements
      
155.328.060   Water Efficiency in Landscaping Ordinance (WELO)
      
155.328.070   Maintenance and enforcement
   
155.332   Residential Subdivision Alternatives
      
155.332.010   Purpose
      
155.332.020   Small lot subdivisions
      
155.332.030   Urban lot split subdivisions
      
155.332.040   Conservation subdivisions
   
155.336   Temporary Uses and Structures
      
155.336.010   Purpose
      
155.336.020   Applicability and permit requirements
      
155.336.030   General standards
      
155.336.040   Temporary uses and structures allowed by- right
      
155.336.050   Temporary uses and structures allowed with a zoning clearance
   
155.340   Signs
      
155.340.010   Purpose
      
155.340.020   Applicability
      
155.340.030   Signs allowed without permits
      
155.340.040   Prohibited signs
      
155.340.050   Rules of measurement
      
155.340.060   Sign permits
      
155.340.070   Sign standards
      
155.340.080   General requirements
      
155.340.090   Temporary signs
   
155.344   Density Bonus
      
155.344.010   Purpose
      
155.344.020   Definitions
      
155.344.030   Applicability
      
155.344.040   Application requirements
      
155.344.050   Bonus and incentive calculation
      
155.344.060   Review authority
      
155.344.070   Findings for approval
      
155.344.080   Interpretation
Administrative Responsibilities
   
155.404   Administration
      
155.404.010   Purpose
      
155.404.020   Review and decision-making authority
      
155.404.030   Development Services Department
      
155.404.040   Development Services Director
      
155.404.050   Planning Commission
      
155.404.060   Design Review Committee
      
155.404.070   Historic Preservation Commission
      
155.404.080   City Council
   
155.408   Permit Procedures
      
155.408.010   Purpose and applicability
      
155.408.020   Application preparation and filing
      
155.408.030   Application fees
      
155.408.040   Application review
      
155.408.050   Multiple permit applications
      
155.408.060   Environmental review
      
155.408.070   Applications deemed withdrawn
      
155.408.080   Notice of public hearing
      
155.408.090   Notice of pending action
      
155.408.100   Public hearings
      
155.408.110   Conditions of approval
   
155.412   Specific Permits and Approvals
      
155.412.010   Purpose
      
155.412.020   Review authority; appeals
      
155.412.030   Administrative adjustments
      
155.412.040   Design review
      
155.412.045   Gulch Greenway permits
      
155.412.050   Home occupation approvals
      
155.412.060   Infill incentive permits
      
155.412.070   Minor modifications
      
155.412.080   Reasonable accommodations
      
155.412.090   Sign permits
      
155.412.100   Tiny houses on wheels permits
      
155.412.110   Tree permits
      
155.412.120   Use permits
      
155.412.130   Vacation rental permits
      
155.412.140   Variances
      
155.412.150   Zoning clearances
   
155.416   Appeals and Reviews
      
155.416.010   Purpose
      
155.416.020   Appeal subjects and jurisdiction
      
155.416.030   Filing and processing of appeals
      
155.416.040   [Reserved]
      
155.416.050   Judicial review
   
155.420   Post-Approval Provisions
      
155.420.010   Purpose
      
155.420.020   Notice of decision
      
155.420.030   Effective date of decision
      
155.420.040   Issuance of permits
      
155.420.050   Conformance to approved plans
      
155.420.060   Certificates of occupancy
      
155.420.070   Performance guarantees
      
155.420.080   Changes to an approved project
      
155.420.090   Permit/approval expiration
      
155.420.100   Extension of time
      
155.420.110   Resubmittals following denial or revocation
      
155.420.120   Permits to run with the land
   
155.424   NonConformities
      
155.424.010   Purpose
      
155.424.020   Applicability
      
155.424.030   Non-conforming site features
      
155.424.040   Non-conforming buildings
      
155.424.050   Non-conforming signs
      
155.424.060   Non-conforming uses
      
155.424.070   Non-conforming lots
   
155.428   Enforcement and Penalties
      
155.428.010   Purpose
      
155.428.020   Violations
      
155.428.030   Permits and approvals
      
155.428.040   Enforcement authority
      
155.428.050   Inspections, access and entry
      
155.428.060   Remedies
      
155.428.070   Remedies are cumulative
      
155.428.080   Permit revocation
      
155.428.090   Signs
   
155.432   Zoning Code and General Plan Amendments
      
155.432.010   Purpose
      
155.432.020   Initiation
      
155.432.030   General Plan amendment petition
      
155.432.040   Application
      
155.432.050   Planning Commission hearing and action
      
155.432.060   City Council hearing and action
      
155.432.070   Findings for approval
      
155.432.080   Limitations on resubmittals after denial
Glossary
   
155.504   Land Use Classifications
      
155.504.010   Purpose
      
155.504.020   Primary and secondary uses
      
155.504.030   Land use classifications - Alphabetical
   
155.508   Defined Terms
      
155.508.010   Purpose
      
155.508.020   Definitions
      
155.508.030   [Reserved]
      
155.508.040   Land use classification - Use type
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.104 INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS.
§ 155.104.010 TITLE.
   
Chapter 155 of the Municipal Code will be known and cited as the “Eureka Zoning
Code” and referred to in this title as the “Zoning Code.”
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.020 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The Zoning Code takes effect and is in force from and after June 20, 2019.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.030 AUTHORITY.
   The Zoning Code is adopted pursuant to the authority in the City Charter,
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850 and all other relevant laws of the State of California.
Whenever the Zoning Code refers to a section of state law that is later amended
or superseded, the Zoning Code will be deemed amended to refer to the amended
section or the section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.040 PURPOSE OF THE ZONING CODE.
   (A)   General. The purpose of the Zoning Code is to implement the General
Plan and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Specific. The Zoning Code is intended to:
      (1)   Preserve and enhance Eureka’s unique sense of place, small city
charm, livability and sense of community;
      (2)   Support a pedestrian-friendly built environment, increase
transportation choices and expand opportunities for residents to walk, bike and
take transit to destinations;
      (3)   Maintain and expand the variety of housing types to serve a diverse
population;
      (4)   Encourage and incentivize a diversity of residential, commercial,
industrial and mixed-use developments;
      (5)   Encourage pedestrian-friendly urban development through a
streamlined approval process;
      (6)   Where appropriate, encourage vertical mixed-use development with
upper story residential units above ground floor commercial uses;
      (7)   Protect and enhance the distinctive character of Eureka’s
neighborhoods and commercial districts;
      (8)   Enhance the appearance, economic vitality and livability of
Eureka’s neighborhoods and commercial districts;
      (9)   Encourage active and inviting streetscapes, buildings and public
spaces;
      (10)   Realize the full development potential of Eureka’s industrial and
commercial waterfront areas;
      (11)   Enhance the vitality of Downtown and Old Town as the core of the
community with a diversity of land uses and pedestrian-oriented urban design;
      (12)   Encourage infill development and the reuse of existing structures
to strengthen established neighborhoods;
      (13)   Establish flexible performance-based standards to encourage design
creativity and address unique circumstances;
      (14)   Protect Eureka’s natural beauty and conserve valuable natural
resources; and
      (15)   Enhance the urban/wildland interface zones around the edges of the
city and promote recreation opportunities within these zones.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.050 RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN.
   The Zoning Code implements the General Plan by establishing detailed
regulations for land uses, structures and activities in Eureka. All land uses,
structures and activities in Eureka must be consistent with the General Plan.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.060 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   General. The Zoning Code applies to all lots, land uses, structures
and development in Eureka unless an exemption is specifically provided by the
Zoning Code.
   (B)   Coastal zone. The applicability of the Zoning Code in the coastal zone
is described in §
155.104.070 (Relationship to the Local Coastal Program).
   (C)   Compliance required. All lots, land uses, structures and development
in Eureka, including existing and proposed development, must comply with the
Zoning Code.
   (D)   Approvals required. A land use may be established and a structure may
be constructed, altered or moved only after:
      (1)   All applicable development review processes have been followed;
      (2)   All applicable approvals have been obtained; and
      (3)   All required permits and/or authorizations to proceed have been
issued.
   (E)   Administrative responsibilities. City roles and responsibilities in
the administration of the Zoning Code are as provided in §
155.404 (Administrative Responsibilities).
   (F)   Subdivisions. All subdivisions of land, lot line adjustments, and
other actions under Municipal Code
Ch. 154 (Subdivision Regulations) and the California Subdivision Map Act that
are proposed after June 20, 2019, must comply with the Zoning Code.
   (G)   Governmental activities. The Zoning Code applies to special districts
and state or federal governmental agencies to the extent legally permissible.
The Zoning Code does not apply to public projects of the City of Eureka.
Private projects on leased lands owned by the city are not public projects of
the city.
   (H)   Public utilities. Public utilities are subject to the requirements of
the Zoning Code, except to the extent provided by Cal. Gov’t Code § 53091 and
the California Public Utilities Code.
   (I)   Emergency powers. The City Council may authorize deviations from the
Zoning Code during a local emergency declared in accordance with the California
Emergency Services Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 8550 et seq.), by resolution without
notice or public hearing.
   (J)   Other regulations. Compliance with the Zoning Code does not relieve an
applicant from compliance with other federal, state and city regulations that
also apply to the property.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21)
§ 155.104.070 RELATIONSHIP TO THE LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   Implementation plan separate from Zoning Code. Eureka’s Local Coastal
Program Implementation Plan (“Implementation Plan”) is separate from the Zoning
Code. The Implementation Plan, found in Municipal Code
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning), establishes regulations that apply in Eureka’s
coastal zone to implement the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan in accordance
with the California Coastal Act of 1976. The Implementation Plan contains:
      (1)   Coastal zoning districts with allowed land uses and development
standards that apply to zoning districts within the coastal zone;
      (2)   Additional regulations needed to implement the Land Use Plan; and
      (3)   Procedures for the approval of coastal development permits and
other permits and approvals in the coastal zone.
   (B)   Implementation Plan limited to
Ch. 156. The Implementation Plan is limited exclusively to Municipal Code
Ch. 156. No contents of the Zoning Code, irrespective of its applicability in
the coastal zone, are considered a part of the Implementation Plan.
   (C)   Applicability in coastal zone. The Zoning Code and Implementation Plan
both contain requirements that apply in the coastal zone, as follows.
      (1)   Implementation plan requirements. Implementation Plan requirements
apply fully to all uses, structures and activities in the coastal zone in
accordance with the California Coastal Act. In case of conflict between the
Implementation Plan and the Zoning Code, the Implementation Plan governs.
      (2)   Requirements in both Zoning Code and Implementation Plan. Certain
topics are addressed in both the Zoning Code and the Implementation Plan (e.g.,
parking, signs). For these topics, the Implementation Plan requirements govern
in the coastal zone. All Zoning Code requirements superseded by the
Implementation Plan are identified in the Zoning Code with notes in their
respective sections.
      (3)   Zoning code content not in the Implementation Plan. Zoning Code
requirements that are not specifically addressed in the Implementation Plan
fully apply in the coastal zone. For example, Zoning Code requirements for the
processing of permit applications, which is not addressed in the Implementation
Plan, apply to all development projects. While these Zoning Code requirements
may apply in the coastal zone, they are not considered a part of the
Implementation Plan.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.080 NUMBERING AND REFERENCING.
   (A)   The numbering system used in the Zoning Code reflects the numbering
system of other chapters in the Municipal Code.
   (B)   The numbering system and outline levels used in the Zoning Code is as
follows:
   
Chapter 155 - Zoning Code
      Subchapter - Subchapter Title
         Section
155.104 - Section Title
            Section
155.104.010 - Section Title
               (A)   Division
155.104.010(A) - Division Title
                  (1)   Paragraph
                     (a)   Paragraph
                        1.   Paragraph
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.090 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. Where conflict occurs with
state or federal laws, higher law shall control over lower law unless local
variation is permitted.
   (B)   Conflicts with general plan, specific plans and development
agreements. Where the Zoning Code conflicts with the General Plan, a specific
plan or a development agreement, the General Plan, specific plan or development
agreement will control.
   (C)   Conflict with other city regulations. Where the Zoning Code conflicts
with other ordinances, resolutions or regulations of the City of Eureka, the
more restrictive will control.
   (D)   Conflict with private agreements. It is not the intent of the Zoning
Code to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, deed
restriction or other agreement between private parties. If the Zoning Code
imposes a greater restriction than imposed by a private agreement, the Zoning
Code will control. Private agreements may impose greater restrictions than the
Zoning Code, but the city is not responsible for monitoring or enforcing
private agreements.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.100 TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Relation to prior zoning ordinance. This Zoning Code supersedes the
prior Zoning Code codified as
Ch. 155 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
   (B)   Violations continue. A violation of the prior Zoning Code continues to
be a violation under this Zoning Code unless the violation is brought into
compliance with this Zoning Code.
   (C)   Pending applications.
      (1)   If the city deems an application complete, but does not take final
action on the application before the effective date of this Zoning Code, the
application remains subject to the Zoning Code in effect when the application
was deemed complete.
      (2)   If the city deems an application withdrawn under §
155.408.070 (Applications Deemed Withdrawn), any re-application is subject to
the requirements of this Zoning Code.
   (D)   Approved projects.
      (1)   Permits and other approvals valid on the effective date of this
Zoning Code remain valid until their expiration date.
      (2)   Projects with valid permits or approvals shall be completed in
compliance with the standards in effect at the time of approval. If the permit
or approval expires, future development must comply with the requirements of
this Zoning Code.
   (E)   Non-conformities. A parcel, land use or structure legally established
prior to June 20, 2019, that does not comply with this Zoning Code is
considered non-conforming and subject to the requirements in §
155.424 (Non-Conformities).
   (F)   Transition to new zoning districts.
      (1)   Upon the effective date of this Zoning Code, land with zoning from
the previous Zoning Code shall be rezoned to one of the zoning districts as
established in §
155.116 (Zoning Districts and Map) and shown on the Zoning Map.
      (2)   A property must comply with the regulations of its zoning district
classification as established in §
155.116 (Zoning Districts and Map) and shown on the Zoning Map.
   (G)   Planned development zoning districts. Requirements and allowances that
applied within a planned development zoning district existing before the
effective date of the Zoning Code remain in full force and effect.
   (H)   Qualifying overlay zoning districts. Limitations and restrictions that
applied within a qualifying overlay zone existing before the effective date of
the Zoning Code remain in full force and effect.
   (I)   References to prior zoning districts.
      (1)   In cases where city ordinances, policies, conditions of approval
and other requirements reference a zoning district classification from the
previous Zoning Code, such references will mean the equivalent zoning district
in this Zoning Code.
      (2)   For requirements based on previous zoning districts with no
equivalent zoning district in this Zoning Code, such references will be
interpreted to best achieve the requirement’s original intent as determined by
the Director.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.104.110 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of the Zoning Code is found invalid or unconstitutional by
the decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision will not
affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.108 INTERPRETATION.
§ 155.108.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.108 establishes rules and procedures for interpreting the Zoning Code to
ensure that it is applied and enforced in a consistent manner.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.108.020 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Director. The Director has the authority to:
      (1)   Interpret the meaning and applicability of the Zoning Code; and
      (2)   Issue official interpretations of the Zoning Code as provided in §
155.108.030 (Official Interpretations).
   (B)   Department staff. Department staff may apply the rules for
interpreting the Zoning Code established in this §
155.108 when performing duties described in §
155.404.030 (Development Services Department).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.108.030 OFFICIAL INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Director interpretations. When the Director determines that a
provision in the Zoning Code requires clarification, the Director may issue an
official interpretation. Official interpretations will be in writing and
maintained by the Department for public review.
   (B)   Referrals to Planning Commission. The Director may refer any issue of
interpretation to the Planning Commission for review and final determination.
   (C)   Appeals. Official interpretations of the Zoning Code may be appealed
in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.108.040 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Meaning and intent. All language shall be construed according to the
purpose and intent set out in §
155.104.040 (Purpose of the Zoning Code).
   (B)   Minimum requirements. The Zoning Code establishes minimum requirements
to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Where the Zoning Code allows
for city discretion, the city may impose more stringent requirements to achieve
the purpose and intent of the Zoning Code set out in §
155.104.040 (Purpose of the Zoning Code).
   (C)   Harmonious construction. The city intends that all provisions of the
Zoning Code be construed harmoniously. When two or more provisions of the
Zoning Code appear to conflict, the city may construe such provisions to give
effect to both, if possible, by harmonizing them with each other. In cases of
unresolvable conflict, the more restrictive will govern.
   (D)   Headings, tables and figures. In cases where text conflicts with any
heading, table or figure, the text controls.
   (E)   Lists and examples. Lists of items or examples that use terms such as
“including,” “such as” or similar language are intended to provide examples,
not to be exhaustive lists of all possibilities. Unless otherwise specifically
indicated, the word “including” always means “including, but not limited to.”
   (F)   Computation of time. References to “days” are calendar days unless
otherwise stated. When “business days” are referenced, they include only days
when Eureka City Hall is open. The end of a time period is computed by
excluding the first day and including the last day.
   (G)   Rounding of fractional numbers. Unless otherwise stated, a fraction of
one-half or more will be rounded to the next highest whole number and a
fraction of less than one-half will be rounded to the next lowest whole number.
   (H)   References to other regulations, publications and documents. Whenever
reference is made to a law or regulation, it will be construed as a reference
to the most recent edition of such law or regulation, unless specifically
stated.
   (I)   Technical and non-technical terms. Words and phrases will be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language. Technical words and
phrases with a particular and appropriate meaning in law will be construed and
understood according to such meaning.
   (J)   Public officials and agencies. All public officials, bodies and
agencies to which references are made are those of the City of Eureka, unless
otherwise indicated.
   (K)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words “will,” “must,” “shall”
and “is” are always mandatory. The words “should” is encouraged but not
required and “may” is permissive.
   (L)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly suggests the contrary,
conjunctions will be interpreted as follows.
      (1)   “And” means that all connected items apply.
      (2)   “And/or” means that the connected items may apply singularly or in
any combination.
      (3)   “Or” means that one or more of the connected items may apply.
      (4)   “Either...or” means that the connected words or provisions shall
apply singularly, but not in combination.
   (M)   Tenses and plurals. Words used in one tense (past, present or future)
include all other tenses, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. The
singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
   (N)   Terms not defined. The Director has the authority to provide a
definition for an undefined term based upon intended meaning of the term.
Director determinations will be in writing and maintained by the Department for
public review.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.108.050 LAND USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Land use regulation tables. Land use regulation tables in the Zoning
District Standards identify permitted land uses within each zoning district.
Notations within these tables have the following meanings:
      (1)   Permitted uses. A "P" means a use is permitted by right in the
zoning district after obtaining a zoning clearance in accordance with §
155.412.150 (Zoning Clearances).
      (2)   Conditionally permitted uses. A "C" means a use requires approval
of a conditional use permit in accordance with §
155.412.120 (Use Permits).
      (3)   Minor permitted uses. An "M" means a use requires approval of a
minor use permit in accordance with §
155.412.120 (Use Permits).
      (4)   Uses not allowed. A "-" (dash) means a use is not allowed in the
zoning district.
   (B)   Unlisted land uses.
      (1)   A land use not listed in a land use regulation table is not
permitted if the use is listed as an allowed use in one or more other zoning
districts. In such a case, the absence of the use in the land use regulation
table means that the use is prohibited in the zoning district.
      (2)   For a proposed use not listed in any land use regulation table, the
Director may determine that the proposed use is equivalent to a permitted or
conditionally permitted use if all of the following findings can be made:
         (a)   The use is consistent with the goals and policies of the General
Plan;
         (b)   The use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or
welfare;
         (c)   The use will meet the purpose of the zoning district;
         (d)   The use is similar to other uses allowed in the zoning district;
         (e)   The density or intensity of the use is similar to other uses in
the zoning district; and
         (f)   The use is compatible with permitted and/or conditionally
permitted uses in the zoning district.
      (3)   When the Director determines that a proposed use is equivalent to a
listed use, the proposed use will be treated in the same manner as the listed
use with respect to development standards, permits required and all applicable
requirements of the Zoning Code.
      (4)   Director determinations will be in writing and maintained by the
Department for public review.
      (5)   The Director may refer any equivalent use determination to the
Planning Commission for review and final decision.
      (6)   Equivalent use determinations may be appealed in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
   (C)   Types of uses.
      (1)   Primary land uses.
         (a)   A primary land use is the main purpose for which a site is
developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site
a majority of the hours during which activities occur.
         (b)   Multiple primary land uses may occupy a single site or building.
A land use on a site with multiple uses is considered a separate primary use if
it operates independently from the other uses (e.g., different owner, business
name, services provided) and could continue operations if the other uses were
no longer present on the site.
         (c)   Each primary land use on a site is subject only to its own
permit requirements identified in the land use regulation tables in the Zoning
District Standards subchapter regardless of the permit requirements that apply
to other uses on the site. For example, if one primary land use that requires a
conditional use permit (CUP) occupies the same space in a building as another
primary land use allowed by-right, the land use allowed by-right is not
required to obtain a CUP.
         (d)   Each primary land use on a site is subject only to the standards
and limitations that apply to the individual use. For example, if one primary
use is subject to conditions of approval limiting its hours of operations,
other primary uses on the site would not be subject to those same limitations
unless specifically required as through their conditions of approval for their
individual permits.
      (2)   Secondary uses.
         (a)   A secondary use is a land use specifically identified in §
155.504 (Land Use Classifications) as allowed only when combined with a
permitted primary use. For example, a drive-through facility is a secondary use
allowed only when combined with a permitted primary use (e.g., restaurants,
cafés and beverage sales). A secondary use by its nature cannot exist without
an associated primary use.
         (b)   A secondary use may require different permits from its
associated primary use as identified in the land use regulation tables in the
Zoning District Standards subchapter. For example, a restaurant may be
permitted by-right, but a drive-through facility associated with the restaurant
would require a conditional use permit. A secondary use may be subject to
standards and limitations separate from the requirements that apply to its
associated primary use.
      (3)   Accessory uses.
         (a)   An accessory use is a use that is subordinate to and dependent
on a primary use on the same lot.
         (b)   Accessory uses are subject to the requirements in §
155.304.020 (Accessory Uses).
         (c)   An accessory use that complies with §
155.304.020 (Accessory Uses) is considered a component of its primary use and
may operate by-right without the requirement to obtain additional permits
unless specifically required by the Zoning Code.    
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.108.060 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   Uncertain zoning district boundaries. Where zoning district boundaries
on the Zoning Map are uncertain, the following rules apply.
      (1)   Boundaries shown as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys are construed to follow the centerline.
      (2)   Boundaries shown as approximately following the coastal zone
boundary are construed to follow the coastal zone boundary.
      (3)   Boundaries shown as approximately following platted lot lines are
construed as following the lot lines. If lot lines shift as a result of updated
survey data or lot line adjustment, zoning district boundaries are construed to
follow these shifted lot lines.
      (4)   Boundaries shown as approximately following city limits are
construed as following city limits.
      (5)   Boundaries shown following railroad lines are construed to be
midway between and parallel to the main tracks.
      (6)   If a boundary does not follow a lot line and divides a parcel, the
location of the boundary is determined using the scale on the Zoning Map.
      (7)   Where further uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission shall
determine the exact boundary location considering the general purpose of the
Zoning Code, the purpose of the applicable zoning districts, site conditions of
the subject property and all other relevant information.
   (B)   Split zoning. For parcels containing two or more zoning districts
(“split zoning”), the regulations for each zoning district will apply within
the zoning district boundaries as identified on the Zoning Map.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.112 RULES OF MEASUREMENT.
§ 155.112.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.112 establishes rules for measurement in the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.112.020 LOT AREA.
   (A)   Measurement. Lot area is measured as the total area of a lot,
expressed in square feet or acres.
   (B)   Included in calculation. Lot area includes areas subject to easements
and/or private streets.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.112.030 DENSITY.
   Density is measured as the number of dwelling units divided by the lot area.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.112.040 SETBACKS.
   (A)   Setback measurement. Setbacks are measured as the distance between a
lot line and the nearest point of where a structure intersects the ground along
a line at a right angle to the lot line. See Figure 112-1.
      Figure 112-1: Setback Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7730.png]
 
   (B)   Lot line designation. The Director has the authority to designate the
location of front, side and rear lot lines based on the physical conditions and
function of the lot.
   (C)   Flag lots. For flag lots, lot lines are designated as shown in Figure
112-2 unless otherwise designated by the Director based on the existing and/or
proposed layout and function of the lot.
      Figure 112-2: Flag Lot Setback Measurement
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9029.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9027.png]
 
   (D)   Lots fronting on two parallel streets.
      (1)   For lots fronting on two parallel streets (“through lots”), the
Director will either:
         (a)    Determine that the lot has two fronts; or
         (b)    Determine which street frontage constitutes the rear of the lot
based on the placement and orientation of existing buildings on the lot and on
neighboring properties.
      (2)   An alley is not considered a street when determining whether a lot
qualifies as a through lot. See Figure 112-3.
         Figure 112-3: Through Lot
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7734.png]
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.112.050 FLOOR AREA AND FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   (A)   Floor area.
      (1)   Floor area is measured as the total area (as defined below) of all
floors of a building measured from the exterior face of the outside walls.
      (2)   The floor area calculation includes the following:
         (a)   Covered areas used for vehicle parking, including garages,
carports and parking structures, but excluding tuck-under parking (ground-floor
parking areas that are beneath a building and have three or fewer enclosed
walls);
         (b)   Elevator shafts and stairwells;
         (c)   Porches and balconies enclosed on all sides;
         (d)   Mechanical shafts;
         (e)   Mezzanines;
         (f)   Service and mechanical equipment rooms;
         (g)   Projecting windows, floors, and other architectural features
supported from the ground; and
         (h)   Cantilevered upper floors.
      (3)   The floor area calculation does not include the following:
         (a)   Non-habitable attic spaces;
         (b)   Basements;
         (c)   Non-habitable accessory structures, such as storage or garden
sheds;
         (d)   Accessory dwelling units;
         (e)   Exterior steps, patios, decks, terraces, porches, balconies and
porticoes open on one or more sides;
         (f)   Projecting windows and other exterior architectural projections
not supported from the ground; and
         (g)   For non-residential uses, arcades, porticoes and similar open
areas that are located at or near street level and are accessible to the
general public, but are not designed or used as sales, display, storage,
service or production areas.
   (B)   Floor area calculation for junior accessory dwelling unit.
      (1)   Floor area for a junior accessory dwelling unit (JADU) created
within the footprint of an existing residential structure is measured as the
total area of all floors of the JADU measured from the interior face of the
outside walls and the common wall or walls between the JADU and the existing
residential structure.
      (2)   Floor area for new residential construction that includes a junior
accessory dwelling unit is measured as the total area (as defined in §
155.112.050(A)(2) of all floors of the building measured from the exterior face
of the outside walls, and the interior face of a common wall or walls between
the JADU and the proposed residence.
   (C)   Floor area ratio. Floor area ratio (FAR) is calculated by dividing the
total floor area on a lot by the lot area. For example, a 10,000 square-foot
lot containing a 5,000 square-foot building would have a FAR of 0.5 (5,000
divided by 10,000). See Figure 112-4.
            Figure 112-4: Floor Area Ratio
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7736.png]
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21)
§ 155.112.060 SITE COVERAGE.
   (A)   Measurement. Site coverage is measured as the total horizontal area
covered by all buildings and structures on a lot, divided by the lot area.
Total horizontal building area is measured from the exterior surface of the
exterior walls of all principal and accessory buildings on the lot. See Figure
112-5.
   (B)   Included in calculation. The site coverage calculation includes the
following:
      (1)   All primary structures;
      (2)   All accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers,
storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures and the like); and
      (3)   Bay windows, cantilevered upper floors and other exterior
architectural projections that are supported from the ground.
            Figure 112-5 Site Coverage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7738.png]
 
   (C)   Excluded from calculation. The site coverage calculation does not
include the following:
      (1)   Unenclosed and unroofed decks, uncovered patio slabs, landings,
driveways, sidewalks, flatwork, balconies, stairways and other similar
unenclosed/unroofed structures less than 18 inches in height and six feet or
less for railings;
      (2)   Projecting windows and cantilevered upper floors, and other
architectural projections that are not supported from the ground;
      (3)   Eaves and roof overhangs projecting less than three feet from a
wall;
      (4)   Areas covered by a trellis or similar structure where at least 50%
of the area is open to the sky with uniformly distributed openings;
      (5)   Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in a roofed
structure; and
      (6)   Unenclosed building service equipment and mechanical appurtenances,
such as exterior water heaters, air conditioning units and chimneys.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.112.070 HEIGHT.
   (A)   Building height.
      (1)   As shown in Figure 112-6, building height is measured vertically
from the average elevation of the finished grade of the ground covered by the
structure to the:
         (a)   Average height between the bottom of the eave and the ridge of a
pitched roof;
         (b)   The coping of a flat roof; and
         (c)   The deck line of a mansard roof.
      (2)   Roofs covering decorative elements, elevator shafts, stair towers,
parapets and other similar non-habitable building features are not included in
the calculation of building height. See §
155.308.020 (Height Exceptions).
   (B)   Fence and wall height. See §
155.320.030 (Measurement of Fence and Wall Height).
   (C)   Freestanding structure height. For freestanding structures such as
poles and towers, height is measured as the vertical distance from the finished
grade at the base of the structure to the highest point of the structure.
                        Figure 112-6: Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7740.png]
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.112.080 DISTANCES.
   (A)    Measurements are shortest distance. When measuring a required
distance, such as the minimum distance between a structure and a lot line, the
measurement is made at the closest or shortest distance between the two
objects.
   (B)   Distances are measured horizontally. When measuring distances for
setbacks and structure dimensions, all distances are measured along a
horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge of building, structure,
storage area, parking area or other object. Distances are not measured
following the topography or slope of the land.
   (C)   Measurements involving a structure. Measurements involving a structure
are made to the closest support element of the structure. Structures or
portions of structures that are entirely underground are not included in
measuring required distances.
   (D)   Measurements involving a lot. When measuring a required distance from
a lot, the measurement is made from the portion of the lot that is the closest
distance from the point of measurement.
   (E)   Measuring radius. When a specified land use must be located a minimum
distance from another land use, the minimum distance is measured in a straight
line from all points along the lot line of the subject project, in all
directions.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.112.090 SLOPE.
   (A)   Formula. Average ground slope is calculated using the formula:
                        S =  l x L  (100)
                            A
         where:
         S = Average slope (in percent)
         l = Contour interval (in feet)
         L = Total length of all contour lines on the parcel (in feet)
         A = Lot area (in square feet)
                  Figure 112-7: Average Slope Calculation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7742.png]
 
   (B)   Contour intervals. Measurements along contours shall be made at
contour intervals not to exceed ten feet, and a horizontal map scale of one-
inch equals 200 feet or larger.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.116 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAPS.
§ 155.116.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.116 establishes the zoning districts that apply within the city limits and
adopts the Inland Zoning Map.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.116.020 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   The City of Eureka is divided into zoning districts and overlay zones to
achieve the purpose of the Zoning Code and to implement the General Plan.
   (A)   Inland zoning districts. Table 116-1 lists the zoning districts that
apply to inland areas outside of the coastal zone.
Table 116-1: Inland Zoning Districts
Symbol Zoning District Name General Plan Designation
Table 116-1: Inland Zoning Districts
Symbol Zoning District Name    General Plan Designation
Residential
   RResidential Estate      Estate Residential (ER)
   RResidential Low         Low Density Residential (LDR)
   RResidential Medium      Medium Density Residential (MDR)
   RResidential High        High Density Residential (HDR)
Mixed-Use
   DDowntown                Downtown (DT)
   DDowntown West
   NNeighborhood Commercial
   HHenderson Center        Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
   WWabash Avenue
   OOffice Residential      Professional Office (PO)
   HHospital Medical
   SService Commercial      General Commercial (GC)
Industrial
   HHinge Industrial        Light Industrial (LI)
   LLight Industrial
   HHeavy Industrial        General Industrial (GI)
Public
   PPublic Facilities       Public/Quasi-Public (PQP)
   PParks and Recreation
Resource-Related
   AAgricultural            Agriculture (A)
   NNatural Resources       Natural Resource (NR)
 
   (B)   Coastal zoning districts. Table 116-2 lists the zoning districts
within Eureka’s coastal zone. Regulations for these coastal zoning districts
are found in
Ch. 156 of this Municipal Code.
Table 116-2: Coastal Zoning Districts
Symbol Zoning District Name General Plan Designation
Table 116-2: Coastal Zoning Districts
Symbol    Zoning District Name          General Plan Designation
Residential
   RE-CResidential Estate - Coastal  Estate Residential (ER)
   R1-CResidential Low - Coastal     Low Density Residential (LDR)
   R2-CResidential Medium - Coastal  Medium Density Residential (MDR)
   R3-CResidential High - Coastal    High Density Residential (HDR)
Mixed-Use
   OT-COld Town - Coastal            Old Town Commercial (OC)
   BC-CBayfront Commercial - Coastal Bayfront Commercial (BC)
   LD-CLibrary District - Coastal    Professional Office (PO)
   MD-CMarina District - Coastal
   SC-CService Commercial - Coastal  General Commercial (GC)
   GN-CGateway North - Coastal
   BD-CBridge District - Coastal
Industrial
   LI-CLight Industrial - Coastal    Light Industrial (LI)
   HN-CHinge Industrial - Coastal
   HI-CHeavy Industrial - Coastal    General Industrial (GI)
   CDI-Coastal Dependent Industrial  Coastal Dependent Industrial (CDI)
Public
   PF-CPublic Facilities - Coastal   Public/Quasi-Public (PQP)
   PR-CParks and Recreation -Coastal
   WI-CWoodley Island - Coastal      Woodley Island (WI)
Resource
   A-CZAgricultural - Coastal        Agricultural (A)
   NR-CNatural Resources - Coastal   Natural Resources (NR)
   WD-CWater Development - Coastal   Water Development (WD)
   WC-CWater Conservation - Coastal  Water Conservation (WC)
 
   (C)   Overlay zones. Table 116-3 lists the overlay zones which impose
additional regulations on properties beyond what is required by the underlying
zoning district.
 
Table 116-3: Overlay Zones
Symbol Overlay Zone Name
QO     Qualified
NMO    Neighborhood Market
SCO    Special Considerations
GG     Gulch Greenway
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 962-
C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.116.030 ZONING MAPS.
   (A)   Inland Zoning Maps. The City Council hereby adopts the Inland Zoning
Map, which establishes the boundaries of zoning districts and overlay zones for
areas in Eureka located outside of the coastal zone.
   (B)   Coastal Zoning Map. The Coastal Zoning Map, which establishes zoning
district boundaries in the coastal zone, is adopted as part of Municipal Code
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning).
   (C)   Incorporation by reference. The Inland Zoning Map, including all
legends, symbols, notations, references and other information shown on the
maps, are incorporated by reference and made a part of the Zoning Code.
   (D)   Public streets.
      (1)   The Inland Zoning Map assigns a zoning district to all dedicated
public streets within the city limits.
      (2)   A public street or alley that is officially vacated or abandoned
will be assigned the zoning of the adjoining property to which it is merged.
   (E)   Location. The Inland Zoning Map are kept, maintained and updated
electronically by the Department and are available for viewing by the public at
Department offices and on the official City of Eureka website.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.116.040 ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS.
   The Inland Zoning Map may be amended in accordance with §
155.432 (Zoning Code and General Plan Amendments). The Coastal Zoning Map may
be amended in accordance with procedures established in
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
ZONING DISTRICT STANDARDS
§ 155.204 RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 155.204.010 PURPOSE OF RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General. The purposes of the residential zoning districts are to:
      (1)   Maintain stable neighborhoods offering a range of housing choices
for residents with varied incomes and lifestyle needs;
      (2)   Provide sufficient land in a range of residential densities to
enable citizens from a wide array of economic levels and stages of life to live
in Eureka, and to accommodate the existing and future workforce;
      (3)   Accommodate increased development of high-density housing to
balance Eureka's housing inventory and enhance affordability;
      (4)   Encourage the construction of new high-density multi-family housing
in zoning districts where multi-family housing is allowed;
      (5)   Promote housing in close proximity to parks, schools, and public
services;
      (6)   Promote new development that supports a pedestrian-friendly
environment and allows residents to easily walk, bike, and take transit to
destinations;
      (7)   Ensure that development protects and enhances the positive
qualities of existing neighborhoods and strengthens Eureka's unique sense of
place;
      (8)   Encourage the development of vacant lots and the redevelopment of
underutilized properties;
      (9)   Allow improvements to existing homes consistent with the historic
neighborhood character and the need to produce more housing units;
      (10)   Allow for public and quasi-public uses compatible with a
residential setting; and
      (11)   Allow limited neighborhood-serving commercial uses to enhance
residents' quality-of-life where allowed by the Neighborhood Market (NMO)
Overlay Zone.
   (B)   Specific.
      (1)   Residential Estate (RE). The RE Zoning District provides areas for
low-density single-family detached homes, accessory dwelling units, and limited
agricultural uses with a rural character compatible with adjacent agriculture,
timberland, and open space uses. Two attached or detached single-family homes
may be allowed on one lot pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 65852.21.
      (2)   Residential Low (R1). The R1 Zoning District contains neighborhoods
of single-family homes and accessory dwelling units in a moderately low-density
setting, located in proximity to parks, schools, and public services. Two
attached or detached single-family homes may be allowed on one lot pursuant to
Cal. Government Code § 65852.21.
      (3)   Residential Medium (R2). The R2 Zoning District accommodates a
variety of medium-density housing types close to commercial (mixed-use) areas.
      (4)   Residential High (R3). The R3 Zoning District accommodates high-
density multi-family housing in an urban setting close to employment centers,
mixed-use zoning districts, and/or public transportation.
   (C)   Coastal zoning districts.
      (1)   The following residential zoning districts are located exclusively
in Eureka's Coastal Zone:
         (a)   Residential Estate - Coastal (RE-CZ).
         (b)   Residential Low - Coastal (R1-CZ).
         (c)   Residential Medium - Coastal (R2-CZ).
         (d)   Residential High - Coastal (R3-CZ).
      (2)   Purpose statements, allowed land uses, and development standards
for coastal zoning districts are found in Municipal Code Chapter 156 (Coastal
Zoning).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord.
965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.204.020 ALLOWED LAND USES.
   (A)   General. 
Table 204-1 identifies allowed land uses and required permits in the
residential zoning districts.
   (B)   Additional permits. In addition to permits identified in
Table 204-1, proposed projects in the residential zoning districts may require
additional permits and approvals as described in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals).
Table 204-1: Allowed Land Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Conditional Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
         Zoning District                                          Additional
Land Use Residential Residential Low Residential Residential High Standards
         Estate RE   R1              Medium R2   R3
Table 204-1: Allowed Land Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Conditional Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
                        Zoning District                                 Additional
Land Use                Residential Residential Residential Residential Standards
                        Estate RE   Low R1      Medium R2   High R3
Residential
Accessory dwelling unit P [1]       P [1]       P           P           155.316
(ADU)
Medical care housing    C           C           M           M
Micro/shared housing    -           -           C           C
Multi-family dwellings  -           -           P           P           155.304.100
Non-medical care        -           -           P           P
housing, large
Non-medical care        P           P           P           P
housing, small
Single-family home,     P [1]       P [1]       P           P           155.204.040
attached (townhomes)
Single-family home,     P [1]       P [1]       P           P           155.204.040
detached (existing)
Single-family home,     P [1]       P [1]       P [2]       P [2]       155.204.040
detached (new)
Tiny house on wheels    P           P           P           P           155.304.130,
                                                                        155.316
Commercial
Car share facility      -           -           P           P           155.304.040
Day care facility       C [3]       C [3]       M [3]       M [3]
Family day care home,   P           P           P           P           155.304.060
small or large [4]
Vacation rental                                                         155.304.150
   Proprietor on-siteP           P           P           P
   No proprietor on- M           M           M           M
site
Agricultural and Natural Resources
Timber production and   C           C           -           -
harvesting
Resource protection and P           P           P           P
restoration
Civic and Recreation
Civic institutions      C           C           C           C
Government facilities   C           C           C           C
Non-commercial places   C           C           C           C
of assembly
Parks and playgrounds   P           P           P           P
Schools, public and     C           C           C           C
private
Instructional services  -           -           C [5]       C [5]
Infrastructure and Utilities
Public utility          C           C           C           C
Other Uses and Activities
Accessory uses          See
                        155.304.020
Animal keeping          See Municipal Code
                        Chapter 91
Home occupations        See
                        155.304.070
Neighborhood-serving    See
commercial              155.224.030
Temporary uses          See
                        155.336
Tree removal            See
                        155.304.140
Wireless                                                                Municipal
telecommunication       C           C           C           C           Code
facilities                                                              Chapter 159
NOTES:
[1] Up to four dwelling units are allowed on one lot in the RE and R1 zoning
districts: one single-family home and up to three of the following: a second single-
family home (attached or detached); two accessory dwelling units (attached or
detached); and/or one junior accessory dwelling unit. Lots resulting from an urban
lot split subdivision (§
155.332.030) are only allowed three dwelling units: one single-family residence, one
junior accessory dwelling unit and either one additional single-family residence or
one accessory dwelling unit.
[2] Allowed only on lots 3,000 square feet or less; or if an existing dwelling unit
that is part of a multi-family dwelling becomes a single-family residence as a
result of a subdivision; or on a lot with a non-residential primary use (i.e., in
combination with another primary use on the same lot).
[3] Allowed by-right when located in an existing non-residential facility such as a
church or community center. Use permit required for all other day care facilities.
[4] Allowed only as a secondary use when combined with an allowed primary use. See §
155.108.050(C) (Types of Uses).
[5] Allowed only on collector and arterial streets as shown in General Plan Figure
M-1. Not allowed on local streets.
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.204.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   RE and R1 Zoning Districts.
      (1)   General development standards. 
Table 204-2 shows development standards in the RE and R1 Zoning Districts when
the authority contained in §
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions) is not exercised. Standards apply to
both primary and accessory buildings unless otherwise noted.
      (2)   Urban lot splits. 
Table 204-2.1 shows development standards in the RE and R1 Zoning Districts for
lots that are subdivided pursuant to §
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions).
Table 204-2: RE and R1 Development Standards
Standard Zoning District                          Additional Standards
         Residential Estate RE Residential Low R1
Table 204-2: RE and R1 Development Standards
                                                                               Zoning District         Additional
Standard                                                                       Residential Residential Standards
                                                                               Estate RE   Low R1
Minimum lot area [1]                                                           10,000 sq.  5,000 sq.   155.308.010
                                                                               ft.         ft.
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) [2]                                             0.75        1.0
Maximum units per lot [3][4]                                                   4 du/lot    4 du/lot
Maximum site coverage [2]                                                      35%         60%
Maximum building height                                                        35 ft.      35 ft.      155.308.020
Minimum property line setbacks [5][6]
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Front                                                                                                  (D);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   Building walls                                                           15 ft. [7]  10 ft. [7]
   Porches and stoops                                                       15 ft. [7]  5 ft. [7]
   Garage doors and carport entrances                                       20 ft.      20 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Exterior side                                                                                          (D) and (E);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   Building walls; porches and stoops                                       15 ft. [7]  5 ft. [7]
                                                                               [8]         [8]
   Garages on a corner lot facing a side street and entirely located within 0 ft. or 20 0 ft. or 20 155.204.030
ft. of the rear lot line                                                       ft. [9]     ft. [9]     (F)
   All other garages                                                        20 ft.      20 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Interior side no alley                                                                                 (E);
                                                                                                       155.308.030 
   All structures                                                           15 ft. [8]  5 ft. [8]
Interior side alley adjacent [10]
                                                                               0 ft. - 4   0 ft. - 4
   First story                                                              ft. or 10   ft. or 10
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Second story and above                                                   0 ft.       0 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Rear alley adjacent [10][11]                                                                           (G);
                                                                                                       155.308.030 
                                                                               0 ft. - 4   0 ft. - 4
   First story                                                              ft. or 10   ft. or 10
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Second story and above                                                   0 ft.       0 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Rear no alley [11]                                                                                     (G);
                                                                                                       155.308.030 
   First story                                                              5 ft.       5 ft.
   Second story and above                                                   10 ft.      10 ft
NOTES:
[1] Minimum lot area standard applies only to new lots created through the subdivision or lot line adjustment
process after June 20, 2019. Lots existing as of June 20, 2019 are not subject to a minimum lot size standard. See §
155.332.040 (Conservation Subdivisions) and §
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions) for exceptions to these minimum lot area standards.
[2] Excludes accessory dwelling units in conformance with §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units).
[3] Up to four units are allowed on a single lot (except for lots resulting for urban lot split subdivisions
described in Table 204-2.1 below). The four units must include one single-family home and up to three of the
following: a second single-family home (attached or detached); two accessory dwelling units (attached or detached);
and/or one junior accessory dwelling unit.
[4] For the purpose of calculating the maximum number of lots created through conservation subdivisions, the maximum
density in RE is 4 du/acre and maximum in R1 is 8.5 du/acre.
[5] The setbacks for accessory dwelling units and SB 9 residential developments shall be the same as those required
for primary structures in the applicable zoning district, except as provided by §
155.316.060 (for accessory dwelling units) and §
155.204.040 (for SB 9 residential developments).
[6] Provided the setbacks as proposed are sufficient for fire and safety as determined by the Building Official.
[7] Or average of adjacent lots, whichever is less. See §
155.204.030(D) (Average Setback Alternative).
[8] A residential addition of habitable floor area may encroach into the setback if extending a nonconforming
building wall. See §
155.204.030(E) (Established Side Setbacks for Building Additions).
[9] Garages must be set back either zero feet or 20 feet or more from the lot line. Garages may not be setback any
distance between 0 ft. and 20 feet from the lot line. See
Figure 204-4. This applies only to garages, not to carports.
[10] Eaves, gutters, and other building features may project across a lot line into an alley only when allowed by
the Building Code and with an easement and/or encroachment permit.
[11] See
Figure 204-5 in §
155.204.030(G) (Rear Setbacks).
 
Table 204-2.1: Urban Lot Split Development Standards
Standard Zoning District                          Additional Standards
         Estate Residential RE Residential Low R1
Table 204-2.1: Urban Lot Split Development Standards
                                                                               Zoning District
Standard                                                                       Estate      Residential Additional
                                                                               Residential Low R1      Standards
                                                                               RE
Minimum lot area [1]                                                                                   155.308.010
   Minimum square footage                                                   1,200 sq.   1,200 sq.
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Minimum lot area as a percentage of original lot area                    40%         40%
Maximum floor area ratio [1] (FAR)
   Residential structures only                                              1.3         1.3
   Residential structures and covered parking (garage and/or carport)       1.67        1.67
Maximum units per lot [2]                                                      3 du/lot    3 du/lot
Maximum site coverage                                                          100%        100%
Maximum building height                                                        35 ft.      35 ft.      155.308.020
Minimum property line setbacks [3][4]
New interior property line [5]                                                 0 ft.       0 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Front                                                                                                  (D);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   Building walls                                                           10 ft. [6]  10 ft. [6]
   Porches and stoops                                                       5 ft. [6]   5 ft. [6]
   Garage doors and carport entrances                                       0 ft. or 20 0 ft. or 20
                                                                               ft.         ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Exterior side                                                                                          (D) and
                                                                                                       (E);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   Building walls; porches and stoops                                       4 ft. [6]   4 ft. [6]
                                                                               [7]         [7]
   Garages on a corner lot facing a side street and entirely located within 0 ft. or 20 0 ft. or 20 155.204.030
ft. of the rear lot line                                                       ft. [8]     ft. [8]     (F)
   All other garages                                                        20 ft.      20 ft.
Interior side no alley
                                                                                                       155.204.030
   All structures                                                           4 ft. [7]   4 ft. [7]   (E);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
Interior side alley adjacent [9]
                                                                               0 ft. - 4   0 ft. - 4
   First story                                                              ft. or 10   ft. or 10
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Second story and above                                                   0 ft.       0 ft.
Rear alley adjacent [9]                                                                                155.308.030
                                                                               0 ft. - 4   0 ft. - 4
   First story                                                              ft. or 10   ft. or 10
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Second story and above                                                   0 ft.       0 ft.
Rear no alley                                                                                          155.308.030
   All structures                                                           4 ft.       4 ft.
NOTES:
[1] Excludes accessory dwelling units in conformance with §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units).
[2] A maximum of one single-family home, one junior accessory dwelling unit and either one additional single-
family home or one accessory dwelling unit are allowed on a lot that is subdivided using the authority contained
in §
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions).
[3] Provided the setback is sufficient for fire and safety as determined by the Building Official.
[4] The setbacks for accessory dwelling units and SB 9 residential developments shall be the same as those
required for primary structures in the applicable zoning district, except as provided by §
155.316.060 (for accessory dwelling units) and §
155.204.040 (for SB 9 residential developments).
[5] "New interior property line" means a property line created pursuant to §
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions) that does not abut an existing parcel outside of the property subject
to the urban lot split.
[6] Or average of adjacent lots, whichever is less. See §
155.204.030(D) (Average Setback Alternative).
[7] A residential addition of habitable floor area may encroach into the setback if extending a nonconforming
building wall. See §
155.204.030(E) (Established Side Setbacks for Building Additions).
[8] New garages must be set back either zero feet or 20 feet or more from the lot line. New garages may not be
setback any distance between 0 ft. and 20 feet from the lot line. See
Figure 204-4. This applies only to garages, not to carports.
[9] Eaves, gutters, and other building features may project across a lot line into an alley only when allowed by
the Building Code and with an easement and/or encroachment permit.
 
   (B)   R2 and R3 Zoning Districts. 
Table 204-3 shows development standards in the R2 and R3 Zoning Districts.
Standards apply to both primary and accessory buildings unless otherwise noted.
Table 204-3: R2 and R3 Development Standards
Standard Zoning District                           Additional Standards
         Residential Medium R2 Residential High R3
Table 204-3: R2 and R3 Development Standards
                                                                               Zoning District         Additional
Standard                                                                       Residential Residential Standards
                                                                               Medium R2   High R3
Minimum lot area [1]                                                           2,000 sq.   2,000 sq.   155.308.010
                                                                               ft.         ft.
Density [2]
   Maximum units per acre                                                   22 du/acre  44 du/acre
   Minimum lot area per unit                                                2,000 sq.   1,000 sq.
                                                                               ft.         ft.
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR) [2]                                             1.25        1.25
Maximum site coverage [2]
   Lots less than 4,000 sq. ft.                                             50%         60%
   Lots 4,000 - 5,999 sq. ft.                                               60%         70%
   Lots 6,000 sq. ft. and above                                             70%         80%
Maximum building height                                                                                155.308.020
Primary building                                                               35 ft. [3]  35 ft. [3]
Detached accessory building [3]
   Lots less than 4,000 sq. ft.                                             24 ft.      24 ft.
   Lots 4,000 - 5,999 sq. ft.                                               28 ft.      28 ft.
   Lots 6,000 sq. ft. and above                                             35 ft.      35 ft.
Minimum property line setbacks [4][5][6]
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Front                                                                                                  (D);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   Building walls                                                           10 ft. [7]  10 ft. [7]
   Porches and stoops                                                       5 ft. [7]   5 ft. [7]
   Garage doors and carport entrances                                       20 ft.      20 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Exterior side                                                                                          (D) and
                                                                                                       (E);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   Building walls; porches and stoops                                       5 ft. [7]   5 ft. [7]
                                                                               [8]         [8]
   Garages on a corner lot facing a side street and entirely located within 0 ft. or 20 0 ft. or 20 155.204.030
ft. of the rear lot line                                                       ft. [9]     ft. [9]     (F)
   All other garages                                                        20 ft.      20 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Interior side no alley                                                                                 (E);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   All structures                                                           5 ft. [8]   5 ft. [8]
Interior side alley adjacent [10]
                                                                               0 ft. - 4   0 ft. - 4
   First story                                                              ft. or 10   ft. or 10
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Second story and above                                                   0 ft.       0 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Rear alley adjacent [10][11]                                                                           (G);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
                                                                               0 ft. - 2   0 ft. - 2
   First story                                                              ft. or 10   ft. or 10
                                                                               ft.         ft.
   Second story and above                                                   0 ft.       0 ft.
                                                                                                       155.204.030
Rear no alley [11]                                                                                     (G);
                                                                                                       155.308.030
   First story                                                              5 ft.       5 ft.
   Second story and above                                                   10 ft.      10 ft
NOTES:
[1] Minimum lot area standard applies only to new lots created through the subdivision or lot line adjustment
process after June 20, 2019. Lots existing as of June 20, 2019 are not subject to a minimum lot size standard. See
§
155.332.040 (Conservation Subdivisions) for an exception to these minimum lot area standards.
[2] Excludes accessory dwelling units in conformance with §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units).
[3] The maximum height for an accessory building attached to a primary building is the same as the maximum height
of the primary building.
[4] The setbacks for accessory dwelling units shall be the same as those required for primary structures in the
applicable zoning district, except as provided by §
155.316.060(F).
[5] No minimum setback is required from lot lines within a small lot subdivision that do not abut a lot outside of
the small lot subdivision. See §
155.332.020 (Small Lot Subdivisions).
[6] Provided the setbacks as proposed are sufficient for fire and safety as determined by the Building Official
and pursuant to the California Building or Residential Code.
[7] Or average of adjacent lots, whichever is less. See §
155.204.030(D) (Average Setback Alternative).
[8] A residential addition of habitable floor area may encroach into the setback if extending a nonconforming
building wall. See §
155.204.030(E) (Established Side Setbacks for Building Additions).
[9] Garages must be set back either zero feet or 20 feet or more from the lot line. Garages may not be setback any
distance between 0 ft. and 20 feet from the lot line. See
Figure 204-4. This applies only to garages, not to carports.
[10] Eaves, gutters, and other building features may project across a lot line into an alley only when allowed by
the Building Code and with an easement and/or encroachment permit.
[11] See
Figure 204-5 in §
155.204.030(G) (Rear Setbacks).
 
   (C)   Lot area and dimensions. See §
155.308.010 (Lot Standards).
   (D)   Average setback alternative. Minimum required front and exterior side
setbacks in Tables
204-2,
204.2-1, and
204-3 may be reduced as provided below.
      (1)   Interior lots.
         (a)   For interior lots adjacent to two developed lots, the minimum
front setback for building walls, porches, and stoops may be reduced to the
average existing front setback of buildings of all developed lots on the same
block face. See
Figure 204-1.
         (b)   For lots not on a standard block configuration, the minimum
setback may be reduced to the setback equal to the adjacent developed lots. New
multi-lot subdivisions must comply with the minimum setbacks in Tables
204-2 and
204-3.
      (2)   Corner lots. For corner lots, the minimum front and exterior side
setbacks may be reduced to the average setback of all developed lots on the
same block face, including alley-separated lots. See
Figure 204-2.
      Figure 204-1: Alternative Front Setback - Interior Lots
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7744.png]
 
      Figure 204-2: Alternative Front and Exterior Side Setback - Corner Lots
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7746.png]
 
   (E)    Established side setbacks for building additions.
      (1)   A building wall nonconforming to an interior or exterior side
setback, if established prior to June 20, 2019, may be extended by-right to
accommodate a residential addition of habitable floor area, including accessory
dwelling units. See
Figure 204-3. This allowance does not apply to garages and other non-habitable
buildings or portions of a building.
      (2)   Eaves and other building projections may not extend across a lot
line. The Director may require a boundary survey to verify the lot line
location.
      Figure 204-3: Established Setbacks for Building Additions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8200.jpg]
 
   (F)    Exterior side setbacks for garages. As stated in Tables
204-2 and
204-3, if a street-facing garage is entirely located within 30 feet of the rear
lot line, the garage must be setback either zero feet or 20 feet or more from
the exterior lot line. See
Figure 204-4. This provision applies only to garages, not to carports.
      Figure 204-4: Exterior Street Garage Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7750.png]
 
   (G)   Rear setbacks.
      (1)   As stated in Tables
204-2 and
204-3, the first story of a building must be setback either zero to four feet
or ten feet or more from an alley-adjacent rear lot line. No setback is
required for the second story and above. See
Figure 204-5.
      (2)   For rear lot lines that are not adjacent to any alley, a five-foot
setback is required for the first story and a ten-foot setback is required for
the second story and above. See
Figure 204-5.
      Figure 204-5: Minimum Rear Setback Elevations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8008.png]
 
   (H)    Setback projections. See §
155.308.030(A) (Building Features) for building projections and site
improvement allowed within minimum setbacks.
   (I)   Accessory dwelling units. See §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units) for development standards that apply to
accessory dwelling units (ADUs).
   (J)   Accessory structures and site features - setback encroachments. See §
155.308.030(B) (Site Features) for site features and accessory structures
allowed in minimum setback areas.
   (K)   Subdivision alternatives. See §
155.332 (Residential Subdivision Alternatives) for allowed modifications to
development standards for small lot subdivisions, conservation subdivisions,
and urban lot split subdivisions.
   (L)   Design standards. See §
155.312 (Design Standards) for building entry, architectural relief, and garage
door width standards that apply to new primary buildings except single-family
homes.
   (M)   Parking. See §
155.324 (Parking).
   (N)   Landscaping. See §
155.328 (Landscaping).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.204.040 SB 9 HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This division establishes standards for SB 9 housing
developments in conformance with Cal. Government Code § 65852.21. SB 9 housing
developments consist of applications for two new single-family homes on one
parcel or for a second single-family home on a parcel with an existing single-
family home in the RE or R1 Zoning Districts.
   (B)   Relationship to urban lot split subdivisions. Applicants may use the
multiple dwelling unit provisions of this division and the urban lot split
provisions of § 156.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions) either independently
or in combination, provided all applicable regulations are met.
   (C)   Eligibility requirements. Up to two primary dwelling units are allowed
on one parcel in the RE or R1 Zoning Districts provided the following
eligibility requirements are met:
      (1)   Compliance with Zoning Code. The SB 9 housing development complies
with all applicable requirements of this chapter for primary structures, except
as modified by the provisions of this subsection. This includes maximum height,
FAR, and site coverage standards as outlined in Tables
204-2 and
204-2.1.
      (2)   Environmental resources and hazards. The parcel satisfies the
requirements of Cal. Government Code § 65913.4(a)(6), subparagraphs (B) to (K),
which prohibit development on sites subject to specified environmental
resources and hazards.
      (3)   Affordable and rental housing.
         (a)   The SB 9 housing development will not require demolition or
alteration of housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law
that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of moderate,
low, or very low income;
         (b)   The SB 9 housing development will not require demolition or
alteration of housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years; and
         (c)   No current or previous parcel owner has exercised the owner's
rights under Cal. Government Code §§ 7060 et seq. (the Ellis Act) to withdraw
accommodations from rent or lease within 15 years before the date of
application for the SB 9 housing development.
      (4)   Historic resources. The parcel is not listed on the State or Local
Register of Historic Places or located within a designated historic district.
   (D)   Permitting process.
      (1)   Zoning clearance. An SB 9 housing development consistent with the
requirements of this section is allowed by-right with a zoning clearance (i.e.,
building permit approval).
      (2)   Time limit to act. An SB 9 housing development shall be approved or
denied within 60 days of submission of a complete application.
      (3)   Nonconforming zoning conditions. Establishing a dwelling unit shall
not require the correction of an existing legal nonconforming zoning condition
on the property.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Maximum number of dwelling units.
         (a)   Project without urban lot split. Accessory dwelling units in
compliance with §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units) are allowed in conjunction with an SB
housing development, provided the total number of dwelling units does not
exceed four on any given lot in the RE or R1 zoning district.
         (b)   Project with urban lot split. When a lot split occurs under Cal.
Government Code § 66411.7 and §
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions), each resulting parcel is limited to
three dwelling units: one single-family home, one junior accessory dwelling
unit, and either one additional single-family home or one accessory dwelling
unit.
      (2)   Density. Second single-family homes created by SB 9 housing
developments are not considered for the purposes of evaluating the density
requirements established by the general plan, but may count as a dwelling unit
for purposes of identifying adequate sites for housing.
      (3)   Minimum setbacks from property lines. The setbacks for dwelling
units created through an SB 9 housing development shall be the same as those
required for other primary structures in the applicable zoning district, except
as provided below:
         (a)   Side and rear setbacks. The minimum side or rear setback shall
be four feet, unless the applicable zoning district permits a smaller minimum
setback for primary structures, in which case that smaller setback applies.
         (b)   Setback exception. No setback shall be required for an existing
structure or a structure constructed in the same location and to the same
dimensions as an existing structure.
      (4)   Parking. On-site parking is not required for dwelling units created
through an SB 9 housing development.
      (5)   Separation between dwelling units.
         (a)   No minimum separation is required between dwelling units on a
parcel.
         (b)   Dwelling units may be attached if the structures meet Building
Code safety standards and are sufficient to allow separate conveyance.
      (6)   Guaranteed allowance. A standard of this chapter must be waived if
the applicant demonstrates it would prohibit up to two single-family homes,
each with up to 800 square feet of floor area, as long as the units comply with
all other applicable standards.
   (F)   Use restrictions.
      (1)   Vacation rental prohibition. Rental of any dwelling unit created
through an SB 9 housing development must be for a term longer than 30 days.
      (2)   Residential uses only.
         (a)   The primary use of dwelling units created through an SB 9
housing development must be residential. A dwelling unit may not be utilized
for a non-residential primary use otherwise permitted in the RE or R1 Zoning
Districts as identified in
Table 204-1.
         (b)   Home occupations and other accessory uses are permitted in a
dwelling unit consistent with §
155.304.070 (Home Occupations) and §
155.304.020 (Accessory Uses).
(Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.208 MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 155.208.010 PURPOSE OF MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General. The purposes of the mixed-use zoning districts are to:
      (1)   Protect, enhance and build upon Eureka’s unique identity, historic
character and sense of community;
      (2)   Promote a compact development pattern with high-intensity activity
centers, infill development, adaptive reuse of existing buildings and
redevelopment of vacant lots and underutilized properties;
      (3)   Encourage a mix of commercial, residential, professional office and
civic land uses;
      (4)   Accommodate a broad range of commercial uses to serve the community
and allow properties to quickly respond to evolving market opportunities over
time;
      (5)   Promote a diversity of multi-family housing choices in higher
density mixed-use settings, especially on upper floors;
      (6)   Provide a pedestrian-friendly environment while accommodating the
needs of automobiles where appropriate;
      (7)   Promote transportation alternatives, reduce the reliance on
automobiles and increase opportunities to walk, bike or take transit to
destinations;
      (8)   Foster a diverse and resilient local economy, friendly to new
business investment and the creation and retention of quality jobs;
      (9)   Encourage growth in the city’s tax base to support city services
and infrastructure; and
      (10)   Provide attractive and well-designed streetscapes, buildings,
parking and public spaces.
   (B)   Specific.
      (1)   Downtown (DT). The DT Zoning District maintains, promotes, enhances
and builds upon Eureka’s Downtown as a vibrant center for residents,
businesses, the arts, local/regional visitors and out-of-town tourists.
Vertical mixed-use development with a diversity of uses promote daytime and
evening activity, including residential, cultural, lodging, civic, professional
office, entertainment, retail and other customer-serving and employment-
intensive uses. Multi-story buildings built to lot lines fully utilize
available land and support a high-intensity economic and cultural center for
the surrounding region. Existing buildings are fully utilized with uses that
serve residents, employees, visitors and the broader region. A diversity of
building types and architectural styles, many with active ground-floor uses,
support a vibrant pedestrian environment and active and inviting public spaces.
      (2)   Downtown West (DW). The DW Zoning District is an extension of the
Downtown (DT) Zoning District with a broader range of allowed land uses to
further encourage investment and development and to provide a transition zone
from Broadway to Downtown.
      (3)   Service Commercial (SC). The SC Zoning District is an intensive
commercial district primarily located in or adjacent to highly visible areas,
and provides for local, regional and visitor needs. Development accommodates
vehicles in a manner that supports an attractive streetscape and pedestrian-
friendly environment. The SC Zoning District allows a broad variety and scale
of retail, office, restaurants, lodging, entertainment, outdoor sales, large
product retail sales, storage, warehousing, wholesale and limited residential
uses.
      (4)   Henderson Center (HC). The HC Zoning District is a pedestrian-
oriented limited-scale neighborhood shopping district primarily serving
residents in nearby neighborhoods. Pedestrian-scale buildings with active
street-facing storefronts close to the sidewalk create an active and inviting
public realm. Single-family residential homes converted to retail and office
uses retain their residential character and buffer nearby residences from
higher intensity uses.
      (5)   Neighborhood Commercial (NC). The NC Zoning District provides
places for limited-scale convenience retail, restaurants, offices, professional
services and other customer-serving uses to meet the daily needs of nearby
residents, workers and visitors. The form and intensity of development supports
an active pedestrian environment and is compatible with neighboring residential
properties. Limited residential mixed-use development contributes to
neighborhood vitality and safe and attractive streetscapes.
      (6)   Wabash Avenue (WA). The WA Zoning District provides an area for
limited-scale commercial uses to serve the community in the western half of
Eureka. Over time, existing properties will be modified and redeveloped to
create a more robust neighborhood-oriented and pedestrian-friendly shopping and
professional service-related corridor.
      (7)   Office Residential (OR). The OR Zoning District provides areas for
customer-serving and non-customer-serving professional offices, clinics and
related retail and services, as well as residential uses. The OR District
allows a mix of single-family and multi-family housing, offices, converted
residential buildings and lodging where the intent is to generally retain the
character, scale and form of the residential neighborhood. The OR Zoning
District provides a mix of office and residential uses in an environment with a
different character and lower intensity than the other mixed-use commercial
districts of the city.
      (8)   Hospital Medical (HM). The HM Zoning District provides a
centralized and consolidated regional hub for hospitals, medical offices and
clinics, other health care-related uses and restricted commercial development
that supports these uses.
   (C)   Coastal zoning districts.
      (1)   The following mixed-use zoning districts are located exclusively in
Eureka’s coastal zone:
         (a)   Old Town - Coastal (OT-CZ);
         (b)   Bayfront Commercial - Coastal (BC-CZ);
         (c)   Library District - Coastal (LD-CZ);
         (d)   Marina District - Coastal (MD-CZ);
         (e)   Service Commercial - Coastal (SC-CZ);
         (f)   Gateway North - Coastal (GN-CZ); and
         (g)   Bridge District - Coastal (BD-CZ).
      (2)   Purpose statements, allowed land uses and development standards for
coastal zoning districts are found in Municipal Code
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.208.020 ALLOWED LAND USES.
   (A)   General. 
Table 208-1 identifies allowed land uses and required permits in the mixed-use
zoning districts.
Table 208-1: Allowed Land Uses in the Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Conditional Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
     Zoning District
Land Downtown Downtown Service    Henderson Neighborhood Wabash Office      Hospital Additional
Use  DT       West DW  Commercial Center HC Commercial   Avenue Residential Medical  Standards
                       SC                   NC           WA     OR          HM
Table 208-1: Allowed Land Uses in the Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Conditional Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
                                 Zoning District
Land Use                         Downtown Downtown Service    Henderson Neighborhood Wabash Office      Hospital Additional
                                 DT       West DW  Commercial Center HC Commercial   Avenue Residential Medical  Standards
                                                   SC                   NC           WA     OR          HM
Residential                                                                                                      155.208.040
Accessory dwelling unit (ADU)    P [1]    P [1]    P [1]      P [1]     P [1]        P [1]  P [1]       P [1]    155.316
Medical care housing             C [2]    C [2]    C          C [2]     C            C      C           C
Micro/shared housing             P [2]    P [2]    P          P [2]     P            P      P           C
Multi-family dwellings           P [2]    P [2]    P          P [2]     P            P      P           C        155.304.100
Non-medical care housing, large  P [2]    P [2]    P          C [2]     P            P      P           C
Non-medical care housing, small  P [2]    P [2]    P          P [2]     P            P      P           P
Single-family attached home      P [3]    P [3]    P          P [3]     P            P      P           C
(townhome)
Single-family detached home, new P        P        P          P         P            P      P           C
Single-family detached home,     P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
existing [8]
Commercial - Sales
Bars and nightclubs              P        P        P          M         C            C      -           -
Drive-thru facility, food-       -        C        P          -         -            -      -           -
serving [4]
Drive-thru facility, non-food    C        M        P          C         -            -      -           C
serving [4]
Fuel and service stations        -        M        P          -         -            -      -           -
General retail - indoor, very    -        C        C          -         -            -      -           -
large
General retail - indoor, large   C        C        P          -         -            -      -           -
General retail - indoor, small   P        P        P          P         P            P      C           M [5]
General retail-outdoor [4]       C [6]    C        P          P [6]     C            C      -           -
Heavy equipment sales and        -        C        M          -         -            -      -           -
service
Mobile vendors                   P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P        155.304.090
Restaurants, cafés and beverage P        P        P          P         P            P      C           M [5]
sales
Vehicle sales and rental         P        P        P          -         -            -      -           -
(indoor)
Commercial - Service and Office
Business services and heavy      -        P        P          -         -            -      -           -
commercial
Car share facility               P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
Check cashing                    C        C        C          -         -            -      -           -
Commercial lodging               P        P        P          P         P            P      C           C [5]
Day care facility                P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
Family day care home, small or   P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P        155.304.060
large [4]
Fitness, dance or health         P        P        P          -         -            -      -           -
facility, large
Fitness, dance or health         P        P        P          P         P            P      C           C [5]
facility, small
General services                 P        P        P          P         M            M      C           -
Hospitals                        -        -        -          -         -            -      -           P
Kennel-anim al boarding          -        C        M          -         -            -      -           -
Medical offices and clinics      P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
Offices                          P        P        P          P         P            P      P           -
Outdoor commercial recreation    C        M        P          M         M            M      -           -
Parking lots and structures      C        M        M          C         C            C      C           M [5]
Personal service                 P        P        P          P         P            P      P           C [5]
Vehicle cleaning and repair      C        M        P          -         -            -      -           -
Vehicle towing and impound       -        -        C          -         -            -      -           -
Industrial and Storage
Manufacturing, artisan           P        P        P          P         P            P      C           -
Manufacturing, light             -        M        C          -         -            -      -           -
Outdoor storage, non-retail      -        -        M [9]      -         -            -      -           -        155.304.110
                                                                                                                 (H)
Warehousing, wholesale and       -        C        C          -         -            -      -           -
distribution
Civic and Recreation
Civic institutions               P        P        P          P         P            P      P           -
Colleges and trade schools       P        P        P          P         C            C      C           C [5]
(upper floor)
Colleges and trade schools       C        C        C          C         C            C      C           C [5]
(ground floor)
Instructional services           P        P        P          P         P            P      P           C [5]
Emergency shelter                -        -        P          -         -            -      -           -        155.304.050
Government facilities            P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
Non-commercial places of         P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
assembly
Parks and playgrounds            P        P        P          P         P            P      P           P
Recreational vehicle parks       -        -        C          -         -            -      -           -        155.304.120
Schools, public and private      C        C        -          -         -            -      -           -
Social services                  C        C        C          -         -            -      -           C
Infrastructure and Utilities
Public utility                   C        C        C          C         C            C      C           C
Recycling collection facility    -                 C          -         -            -      -           -
Other Uses
Accessory uses                   See
                                 155.304.020
Cannabis uses                    See Municipal Code
                                 Ch. 158
Home occupations                 See
                                 155.304.070
Temporary uses                   See
                                 155.336
Wireless telecommunication                                                                                       Municipal
facilities                       P [7]    P [7]    P [7]      P [7]     P [7]        P [7]  C           P [7]    Code
                                                                                                                 Ch. 159
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] An accessory dwelling unit is allowed in conformance with §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Unit).
[2] See § 155.208.040 (Pedestrian-focused Frontages) for ground-floor use limitations that apply to residential uses facing
a pedestrian-focused frontage as shown in Figure 208-4.
[3] Prohibited when facing a pedestrian-focused frontage as shown in Figure 208-4.
[4] Allowed only as a secondary use when combined with an allowed primary use. See §
155.108.050(C) (Types of Uses).
[5] Limited to uses intended to primarily serve employees, patients and visitors of medical uses in the zoning district as
determined by the minor use or conditional use permit process.
[6] New general retail - outdoor uses established after June 20, 2019, are prohibited. General retail-outdoor uses
established before June 20, 2019, may remain. See §
155.208.020(C) (General Retail - Outdoor in the Downtown Zoning District).
[7] Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of a residential zoning district require a CUP.
[8] Reconstruction of a damaged or destroyed single-family detached home is allowed, provided reconstruction is commenced
within two years of the date the building was damaged or destroyed.
[9] Until October 1, 2031, metal shipping containers used for outdoor storage are principally permitted for both retail and
non-retail when in compliance with §
155.304.110(H). After October 1, 2031, shipping containers in the SC zone must either be removed on or before October 31,
2031, or will continue as a non-conforming use and structure, and will be subject to the requirements in 155.424
(Nonconformities).
 
   (B)   Additional permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 208-1,
proposed projects in the mixed-use zoning districts may require additional
permits and approvals as described in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals).
   (C)   General Retail - Outdoor in the Downtown Zoning District. The
following requirements apply to general retail - outdoor (including outdoor
vehicle sales and rental establishments) in the Downtown (DT) Zoning District.
      (1)   Secondary use only. General retail - outdoor is allowed only as a
secondary use when combined with a permitted primary use. See §
155.108.050(C) (Types of Uses).
      (2)   New uses prohibited. New general retail - outdoor (including
outdoor vehicle sales and rental uses) established after June 20, 2019, are
prohibited.
      (3)   Existing uses may remain. An existing general retail - outdoor
facility (including vehicle sales and rental establishments) is an allowed use
subject to the following requirements:
         (a)   The general retail - outdoor use (including vehicle sales and
rental uses) applies to the entire lot;
         (b)   The use may not be enlarged or expanded to a new lot unless the
new lot already contain a general retail - outdoor use;
         (c)   Existing buildings occupied by the general retail - outdoor use
may be repaired, improved and enlarged. New buildings may be constructed to
serve the use;
         (d)   Other uses that comply with the DT Zoning District standards may
be added to a site while the general retail - outdoor use remains in operation;
         (e)   Existing general retail - outdoor uses may be replaced by
another conforming use at any time; and
         (f)   If a general retail - outdoor use is discontinued for 12
consecutive months or more, the use may not be reestablished.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
925-C.S., passed 9-7-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.208.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. Table 208-2 identifies development standards in the mixed-use
zoning districts.
Table 208-2: Development Standards - Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
         Zoning Districts
Standard Downtown Downtown Service    Henderson Neighborhood Wabash Office      Hospital Additional
         DT       West DW  Commercial Center HC Commercial   Avenue Residential Medical  Standards
                           SC                   NC           WA     OR          HM
Table 208-2: Development Standards - Mixed-Use Zoning Districts
           Zoning Districts
Standard   Downtown Downtown Service    Henderson Neighborhood Wabash Office      Hospital Additional
           DT       West DW  Commercial Center HC Commercial   Avenue Residential Medical  Standards
                             SC                   NC           WA     OR          HM
Minimum    No min.  No min.  No min .   No min.   No min.      No min No min.     No min.
lot area                                                       .
Maximum
density    No max.  No max.  No max .   No max.   No max.      No max No max.     No max.
(du/acre)                                                      .
[1]
Maximum
floor area
ratio
(FAR)
Minimum    1.0      1.0      No min .   No min.   No min.      No min No min.     No min.
                                                               .
Maximum    6.0      6.0      2.5        2.5       3.0          3.0    2.5         2.5
Building                                                                                   155.308 020
height
Accessory                                                      See
dwelling   See [4]  See [4]  See [4]    See [4]   See [4]      [4]    See [4]     See [4]  155.316
unit [3]
All other
structures
Minimum    2 stori  2 stor   No min .   2 stori   2 stori es   2 sto  No min.     No min.
(stories)  es       ies                 es                     rie s
Maximum    100 ft.  80 ft.   55 ft.     55 ft.    45 ft.       45 ft. 45 ft.      45 ft.
(feet)                                                                            [2]
Front                                                                                      155.308 030
setbacks
Accessory                                                      See
dwelling   See [5]  See [5]  See [5]    See [5]   See [5]      [5]    See [5]     See [5]  155.316
unit [3]
All other
structures
Minimum    0 ft.    0 ft.    0 ft.      0 ft.     0 ft.        0 ft.  0 ft.       10 ft.
Maximum    10 ft.   10 ft.   No max     15 ft.    15 ft.       15 ft. 15 ft.      No max.  155.308.030 
                                                                                           (B)
Minimum                                                                                    155.308.030
side                                                                                       (C);
setbacks                                                                                   155.308.030
Accessory                                                      See
dwelling   See [5]  See [5]  See [5]    See [5]   See [5]      [5]    See [5]     See [5]  155.316
unit [3]
All other
structures
Exterior   0 ft.    0 ft.    0 ft.      0 ft.     0 ft.        0 ft.  0 ft.       10 ft.
Interior   0 ft.    0 ft.    0 ft.      0 ft.     0 ft.        0 ft.  5 ft.       5 ft.
Minimum                                                                                    155.208 030
rear                                                                                       (C);
setbacks                                                                                   155.308 030
Non-alley  0 ft.    0 ft.    0 ft.      0 ft.     0 ft.        0 ft.  0 ft.       0 ft.
Alley      0 ft.    0 ft.    0 ft.      0 ft.     0 ft.        0 ft.  0 ft.       0 ft.
Maximum                                                        No max
site       No max.  No max.  No max .   No max.   No max.      .      No max.     No max.
coverage
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] While there is no maximum residential density in the mixed-use zoning districts, the number of
residential units on a lot will be limited by the maximum FAR, maximum building height, required parking,
minimum unit size requirements in the building code and other applicable development standards.
[2] Maximum hospital height: 100 feet.
[3] Only applies to new construction or an increase in footprint of an existing structure for an
accessory dwelling unit.
[4] Maximum 16 feet as measured according to § 155.112.070 (Height), or height of existing or proposed
single- or multi-family residential structure, whichever is higher.
[5] Four feet, or setback of existing residential structure, whichever is less, provided the setbacks as
proposed are sufficient for fire and safety as determined by the Building Official and pursuant to the
California Building or Residential Code.
 
   (B)   Maximum front setbacks. The following applies to new buildings in
zoning districts with a maximum front setback requirement as shown in Table
208-2.
      (1)   Buildings shall be constructed at or within the required maximum
front setback for a minimum of 50% of the lot’s linear street frontage. See
Figure 208-1.
      (2)   The Director may modify or waive this requirement with an
administrative adjustment. To approve the administrative adjustment, the
Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and the following additional findings:
         (a)   Unique physical conditions on the site require the modified
standard to accommodate a development project consistent with the purpose of
the applicable zoning district; and
         (b)   The project incorporates a front-facing courtyard or privately-
owned public space between the front building wall and front lot line to
provide a pedestrian-oriented environment. See Figure 208-2.
         Figure 208-1: Maximum Front Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7754.png]
 
   Figure 208-2: Front-Facing Courtyard or Privately-Owned Public Space
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7756.png]
   (C)   Setbacks adjacent to residential zoning districts. All new buildings
and additions to existing buildings adjoining a lot in a residential zoning
district must comply with the setback standards in
Table 208-3. See
Figure 208-3.
Table 208-3: Setbacks Adjacent to Residentially-zoned Lot
Lot Line Minimum Setback
Table 208-3: Setbacks Adjacent to Residentially-zoned Lot
Lot Line                    Minimum Setback
Interior side
   Accessory dwelling uni4 ft.
   First and second stori5 ft.
   Third story and above 10 ft.
Alley rear                  0 ft.
Non-alley rear
   Accessory dwelling uni4 ft.
   First story           5 ft.
   Second story          10 ft.
   Third story and above 15 ft.
 
   Figure 208-3: Setbacks Adjacent to Residential Zoning Districts (Elevations)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8817.png]
 
   (D)   Building design. See §
155.312 (Design Standards) for building design standards that apply to all new
primary buildings in the DT, DW, HC, SC, WA, NC and OR Zoning Districts.
   (E)   Parking. See §
155.324 (Parking).
   (F)   Landscaping. See §
155.328 (Landscaping).
   (G)   Signs. See §
155.340 (Signs).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S.,
passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.208.040 PEDESTRIAN-FOCUSED FRONTAGES.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. Figure 208-4 shows the location of
pedestrian-focused frontages outside of the coastal zone. The façades of
buildings facing these street frontages are subject to special land use
regulations and development standards to maintain and enhance an active and
engaging pedestrian environment. These standards do not apply to façades that
do not front the street (e.g., multi-story building façades that can be seen
over shorter buildings).
   (B)   Design review required. Any exterior modification to a building façade
that faces a pedestrian-focused frontage requires design review in accordance
with §
155.412.040 (Design Review), unless the Director determines the modification is
so minor in nature that it would not be noticeable by a pedestrian, and the
modification does not result in a decrease in ground-floor storefront
transparency. "Exterior modification" includes the addition of a new sign, but
does not include refacing of an existing sign when there is no change in the
size of the sign, and does not include a new, or refacing of an existing sign
painted directly on the façade. Design review is not required for signs allowed
without permits listed under §
155.340.030.
   (C)   Ground floor ceiling height. A new building with non-residential
ground-floor uses facing the street must provide a minimum floor to ceiling
height of 12 feet on the ground floor.
   (D)   Ground floor residential use limitations.
      (1)   New residential development with less than 66 dwelling units per
acre must be part of a mixed-use project where the residential use is located
above or behind a ground-floor non-residential use facing the street. For
example, on a 6,000 square foot lot, a new residential development with less
than nine units cannot have ground-floor street-facing residential units.
      (2)   For projects with 66 dwelling units per acre or more, ground-floor
residential uses facing the street are permitted. For example, on a 6,000
square foot lot, a new residential development with nine or more units may have
street-facing residential units.
      (3)   For shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom
facilities for each room or unit (e.g., micro/shared housing, non-medical care
housing, or emergency shelters), ground-floor residential uses facing the
street are permitted if the project serves 99 persons or more per acre.
      (4)   When allowed, ground-floor residential uses facing the street are
not subject to the transparency requirement in §
155.208.040(E) (Ground Floor Storefront Transparency).
Figure 208-4: Pedestrian-Focused Frontages (both sides of each street)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8821.png]
 
   (E)   Ground floor storefront transparency. Non-residential ground-floor
uses facing the street shall comply with the following transparency
requirement.
      (1)   The ground-floor street-facing building walls of non-residential
uses must provide transparent windows or doors with views into the building for
a minimum of 65% of the building frontage located between three and seven feet
above the sidewalk. See
Figure 208-5.
      (2)   Window and door area must be transparent to allow views into the
building, but may be translucent for privacy purposes, provided that the
windows can be returned to a transparent state.
Figure 208-5: Storefront Transparency (between three and seven feet above the
sidewalk)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8825.png]
 
      (3)   The Director, or Design Review Committee when design review is
required pursuant to §
155.412.040 (Design Review), may allow exceptions to this transparency
requirement with an administrative adjustment. To approve the administrative
adjustment, the Director or Design Review Committee must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and the following additional findings:
         (a)   The proposed use has unique operational characteristics that
preclude building openings, such as for a cinema or theater; and
         (b)   Street-facing building walls will exhibit architectural relief
and detail, and will be enhanced with landscaping in such a way as to create
visual interest at the pedestrian level.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.212 INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 155.212.010 PURPOSE OF INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General. The purposes of the industrial zoning districts are to:
      (1)   Provide land for a broad range of viable industrial, manufacturing
and assembly uses to attract new industries and retain and expand existing
uses;
      (2)   Protect industrially-designated lands from encroachment by
incompatible uses and activities that could conflict with or limit industrial
activities;
      (3)   Accommodate non-conforming industrial uses relocated from other
locations;
      (4)   Encourage the new use and redevelopment of properties that have
been previously used for industrial purposes;
      (5)   Strengthen Eureka’s role as a regional manufacturing and industrial
center;
      (6)   Foster a diverse and resilient local economy, friendly to new
business investment and the creation and retention of quality jobs; and
      (7)   Provide locations for non-coastal related industrial uses outside
of the coastal zone, with access to necessary transportation routes and
infrastructure.
   (B)   Specific.
      (1)   Hinge (HN) Industrial Zoning District. The HN Zoning District
provides an area for low-intensity manufacturing and very limited commercial
uses close to Eureka’s historic Core Area. The primary purpose of the HN Zoning
District is to provide a location for manufacturing uses. The HN Zoning
District secondarily allows upper-floor residential and office uses to increase
housing opportunities and support a dynamic employment area that can evolve and
adapt over time.
      (2)   Light Industrial (LI) Zoning District. The LI Zoning District
provides an area for lower-intensity manufacturing, assembly, wholesaling,
service commercial and other employment-generating uses. The LI Zoning District
accommodates industrial and heavy commercial uses in proximity to residential,
retail and commercial service uses without adverse impacts to these uses.
Existing office uses are permitted.
      (3)   Heavy Industrial (HI) Zoning District. The HI Zoning District
provides an area for intensive manufacturing, assembly, packaging, processing,
wholesaling, warehousing, distribution, research and development and other
employment-generating uses. The HI Zoning District locates industrial uses away
from residential, commercial and visitor serving uses due to the potential for
loud noise, noxious odors and emissions, vibrations and high volumes of truck
traffic.
      (4)   Coastal zoning districts.
         (a)   The following industrial zoning districts are located
exclusively in Eureka’s coastal zone:
            1.   Hinge Industrial - Coastal (HN-CZ);
            2.   Light Industrial - Coastal (LI-CZ);
            3.   Heavy Industrial - Coastal (HI-CZ); and
            4.   Coastal Dependent Industrial (CDI-CZ).
         (b)   Purpose statements, allowed land uses and development standards
for coastal zoning districts are found in Municipal Code Ch. 156 (Coastal
Zoning).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.212.020 ALLOWED LAND USES.
   (A)   General. Table 212-1 identifies allowed land uses and required permits
in the industrial zoning districts.
Table 212-1: Allowed Land Uses in the Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
         Zoning Districts                                            Additional
Land Use Hinge Industrial HN Light Industrial LI Heavy Industrial HI Standards
Table 212-1: Allowed Land Uses in the Industrial Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
                  Zoning Districts                             Additional
Land Use          Hinge         Light         Heavy Industrial Standards
                  Industrial HN Industrial LI HI
Residential
Micro/shared      C [1]         -             -                 
housing
Multi-family      C [1]         -             -                 
dwellings
Non-medical care  C [1]         -             -                 
housing
Commercial - Sales
Bars              C             -             -                 
Fuel and service  C             M             M                 
stations
Heavy equipment   P             P             P                 
sales and service
Mobile vendors    P             P             P                155.304.090
Commercial - Service and Office
Adult             C [2]         C             -                155.304.030
entertainment
Business services
and heavy         P             P             P                 
commercial
Fitness, dance,
or health         C             C             -                 
facility, large
Fitness, dance,
or health         M             M             -                 
facility, small
Indoor commercial C             C             -                 
recreation
Kennel - animal   M             M             -                 
boarding
Offices, existing P [3]         P [3]         P [3]             
Offices, new      C [1]         -             -                 
Parking lots and  P             M             C                 
structures
Vehicle cleaning  P             P             P                 
and repair
Vehicle towing    P             P             P                 
and impound
Industrial and Storage
Manufacturing,    C             -             -                 
artisan
Manufacturing,    P             P             P                 
light
Manufacturing,    -             -             P                 
heavy
Mini-storage      -             C             C                 
Outdoor storage,  P             P             P                155.304.110
non-retail
Warehousing,
wholesale, and    P             P             P                 
distribution
Agricultural and Natural Resources
Animal processing -             -             C                 
Civic and Recreation
Emergency shelter P             P             -                155.304.050
Government        C             C             C                 
facilities
Social service    M             M             -                 
providers
Infrastructure and Utilities
Freight terminals C             C             P                 
and transfer
Public agency     P             P             P                 
corporation yard
Public utility    C             C             C                 
Recycling
collection        P             P             P                 
facility
Recycling
processing        C             C             P                 
facility
Other Uses
Accessory uses    See                                           
                  155.304.020
Cannabis uses     See Municipal Code                            
                  Chapter 158
Home occupation   See                                           
                  155.304.070
Temporary uses    See                                           
                  155.336
Wireless                                                       Municipal Code
telecommunication P [4]         P [4]         P [4]            Chapter 159
facilities
Notes:
[1] Residential and office uses must be located either above ground floor
commercial and/or industrial in a vertical mixed-use building or to the rear
of a separate street-fronting building on the site. Residential and office
uses must be designed in compliance with §
155.212.030(D) (Standards for Residential and Office Uses in Mixed-Use
Projects).
[2] Prohibited on lots fronting Fourth Street.
[3] Existing offices established as of June 20, 2019 as a primary use on a lot
may continue as a permitted use. New office uses are allowed only on lots
where an office use was a primary use on the lot as of June 20, 2019. New
office uses are not permitted on a lot if an office use was not present as a
primary use on the lot as of June 20, 2019.
[4] Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of a
residential zoning district require a CUP.
 
   (B)   Additional permits. In addition to permits identified in
Table 212-1, proposed projects in the industrial zoning districts may require
additional permits and approvals as described in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.212.030 RESIDENTIAL AND OFFICE USES IN INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes standards for new residential and
office uses in the Hinge (HN) Zoning District to:
      (1)   Protect existing and new manufacturing uses in the industrial
zoning districts;
      (2)   Ensure that manufacturing uses are recognized as the primary
purpose of the industrial zoning districts; and
      (3)   Ensure that residential and office uses can functionally co-exist
in a mixed-use development in the industrial zoning districts.
   (B)   Where allowed. Residential and office uses are allowed in the
industrial zoning districts only as provided in Table 212-1.
   (C)   Nuisance protection for non-residential uses.
      (1)   If a residential or office use (excluding caretaker units) is
established in Hinge (HN) Zoning District, existing non-residential uses in the
HN Zoning District are considered a protected use.
      (2)   A protected use may not be considered a nuisance pursuant to the
Municipal Code if:
         (a)   The use was not a nuisance when it began;
         (b)   The use is conducted and/or maintained in a manner consistent
with proper and accepted customs and standards, as established and followed by
similar uses in Eureka;
         (c)   The use is consistent with the purposes of the applicable zoning
district as described in §
155.212.010 (Purpose of Industrial Zoning Districts); and
         (d)   The use complies with the requirements of all applicable
federal, state and city statutes, ordinances, rules, regulations, approvals and
permits.
      (3)   The nuisance protections in this division (C) do not apply where a
nuisance results from the negligent or improper management or operation of a
protected use.
   (D)   Standards for residential and office uses in mixed-use projects. The
following standards apply to new residential and office uses proposed as part
of a mixed-use development project in the Hinge (HN) Zoning District.
      (1)   General standard. The city may approve a new residential or office
use only upon finding that the new use will not interfere with existing or
anticipated future industrial operations within an industrial zoning district.
      (2)   Noise. Proposed new residential and office development must prepare
an assessment of existing and anticipated future noise at the site and
incorporate construction measures as needed to meet the interior noise levels
described in Table N-2 of the Noise Element of the General Plan.
      (3)   Vibration. Proposed new residential and office development must
prepare an assessment of existing and anticipated future vibration on the site
and incorporate construction measures as needed to reduce the effects of
vibration to acceptable levels for the proposed new land use.
      (4)   Odors, dust and fumes. Proposed new residential and office
development must prepare an assessment of existing and anticipated odor/dust/
fumes at the site and incorporate construction measures as needed to reduce the
effects of odor/dust/fumes to acceptable levels for the proposed new land use.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.212.040 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Table 212-2 identifies development standards in the industrial zoning
districts.
Table 212-2: Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts
Standard Zoning District Additional Standards
Table 212-2: Development Standards - Industrial Zoning Districts
                 Zoning District                                    Additional
Standard         Hinge Industrial Light Industrial Heavy Industrial Standards
                 HN               LI               HI
Minimum lot area No min.          6,000 sq. ft.    6,000 sq. ft.    155.308.010
[1]
Maximum density  44 du/acre       N/A              N/A
(du/acre)
Maximum floor    2.0              2.0              2.0
area ratio (FAR)
Maximum building 50 ft.           50 ft.           50 ft. [2]       155.308.020
height
Minimum setbacks                                                    155.308.030
   Front      0 ft.            0 ft.            0 ft.
   Exterior si0 ft.            0 ft.            0 ft.
   Interior si0 ft.            0 ft.            0 ft.
   Rear       0 ft.            0 ft.            0 ft.
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Minimum lot area standard applies only to new lots created through the
subdivision process after June 20, 2019. Lots existing as of June 20, 2019, are
not subject to a minimum lot size standard.
[2] 100 feet allowed with a conditional use permit.
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.216 PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 155.216.010 PURPOSE OF PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General. The purpose of the public zoning districts is to accommodate
government facilities and services, public and private institutional uses and
non-commercial community facilities in convenient and appropriate locations for
residents, employees and visitors.
   (B)   Specific.
      (1)   Public Facilities (PF). The PF Zoning District provides locations
for schools, governmental offices and facilities, community assembly uses,
courthouses, social services, cemeteries, fairgrounds, airports, marinas and
wharves, utility facilities and other similar public and civic uses.
      (2)   Parks and Recreation (PR). The PR Zoning District provides areas
for public parks, playgrounds, golf courses, active/programmable public
recreational facilities, passive/self-directed public recreational facilities
and other public open space uses.
      (3)   Coastal zoning districts.
         (a)   The following public zoning districts are located exclusively in
Eureka’s coastal zone:
            1.   Public Facilities - Coastal (PF-CZ);
            2.   Parks and Recreation - Coastal (PR-CZ); and
            3.   Woodley Island - Coastal (WI-CZ).
         (b)   Purpose statements, allowed land uses and development standards
for coastal zoning districts are found in Municipal Code Ch. 156 (Coastal
Zoning).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.216.020 ALLOWED LAND USES.
   (A)   General. 
Table 216-1 identifies allowed land uses and required permits in the public
zoning districts.
Table 216-1: Allowed Land Uses in the Public Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Use Permit Required
Land Use Zoning District                              Additional Standards
         Public Facilities PF Parks and Recreation PR
Table 216-1: Allowed Land Uses in the Public Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Use Permit Required
                    Zoning District
Land Use            Public Facilities Parks and Recreation Additional Standards
                    PF                PR
Commercial - Sales
Mobile vendors      P                 P                    155.304.090
Commercial - Service and Office
Parking lots and    P [1]             C                     
structures
Agricultural and Natural Resources
Resource protection P                 P                     
and restoration
Civic and Recreation
Civic institutions  P                 C                     
Colleges and trade  P [2]             -                     
schools
Emergency shelter   P                 -                     
Government          P                 C                     
facilities
Instructional       P [2]             -                     
services
Parks and           P                 P                     
playgrounds
Schools, public and P [2]             -                     
private
Social services     C                 -                     
Infrastructure and Utilities
Airport             P                 -                     
Public agency       P                 -                     
corporation yard
Public utility      C                 -                     
Recycling           C                 -                     
collection facility
Other Uses
Accessory uses      See                                     
                    155.304.020
Temporary uses      See                                     
                    155.336
Wireless                                                   Municipal Code
telecommunication   C                 C                    Chapter 159
facilities
Notes:
[1] City owned or operated only.
[2] Public schools only.
 
   (B)   Incidental commercial use. With a minor use permit, the Director may
allow in the PF and PR Zoning Districts a retail, commercial service, office or
other use not listed in
Table 216-1 if:
      (1)   The use is incidental to a permitted use; and
      (2)   The establishment of the use would have a public benefit as
determined by the Director.
   (C)   Additional permits. In addition to permits identified in
Table 216-1, proposed projects in the public zoning districts may require
additional permits and approvals as described in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.216.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Table 216-2 identifies development standards in the public zoning districts.
Table 216-2: Development Standards - Public Zoning Districts
Standard Zoning District Additional Standards
Table 216-2: Development Standards - Public Zoning Districts
                   Zoning District
Standard           Public Facilities Parks and Recreation Additional Standards
                   PF                PR
Maximum floor area 4.0               4.0
ratio
Maximum building   75 ft.            50 ft.               155.308.020
height
Minimum setbacks                                          155.308.030
   Front        0 ft.             0 ft.
   Exterior Side0 ft.             0 ft.
   Interior side0 ft. [1]         0 ft. [1]
   Rear         0 ft. [2]         0 ft. [2]
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] 10 ft. min when abutting a residential zoning district.
[2] 20 ft. min when abutting a residential zoning district.
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.220 RESOURCE-RELATED ZONING DISTRICTS.
§ 155.220.010 PURPOSE OF RESOURCE-RELATED ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General. The purpose of the resource-related zoning districts is to
protect agricultural lands, open space and natural habitats with important
economic, cultural and environmental value to Eureka and the broader region.
   (B)   Specific.
      (1)   Agricultural (A). The purpose of the A Zoning District is to
protect and conserve agricultural lands and to support agricultural activities
as an important contributor to the local and regional economy. The A Zoning
District allows the production of crops, livestock grazing, animal and poultry
raising, apiaries, dairies, stables and associated residences and farmworker
housing. The A Zoning District is intended to protect land, including farmed or
grazed wetlands, that is primarily suitable for long-term agricultural and
wildlife habitat uses and to ensure adequate separation from adjacent
development.
      (2)   Natural Resources (NR). The purpose of the NR Zoning District is to
protect and restore land-based habitats and natural resources in Eureka. The NR
Zoning District protects land that is primarily suitable for permanent habitat
preservation, compatible resource-related uses, nature study and natural
resource-related recreation. Public access, passive recreation, active
recreation and visitor-related facilities are allowed to the extent such
activities do not negatively impact or degrade natural resources. The NR Zoning
District aims to protect surface water resources, riparian habits, ground water
and water quality, sensitive biological resources and open space.
      (3)   Coastal zoning districts.
         (a)   The following resource-related zoning districts are located
exclusively in Eureka’s coastal zone:
            1.   Agricultural - Coastal (A-CZ);
            2.   Natural Resources - Coastal (NR-CZ);
            3.   Water Development - Coastal (WD-CZ); and
            4.   Water Conservation - Coastal (WC-CZ).
         (b)   Purpose statements, allowed land uses and development standards
for coastal zoning districts are found in Municipal Code
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.220.020 ALLOWED LAND USES.
   (A)   General. Table 220-1 identifies allowed land uses and required permits
in the resource-related zoning districts.
Table 220-1: Allowed Land Uses in Resource-Related Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Conditional Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
Land Use Zoning District                    Additional Standards
         Agricultural A Natural Resource NR
Table 220-1: Allowed Land Uses in Resource-Related Zoning Districts
P = Permitted Use
M = Minor Use Permit Required
C = Conditional Use Permit Required
- = Prohibited
Land Use                Zoning District                    Additional Standards
                        Agricultural A Natural Resource NR
Residential
Accessory dwelling unit P              -                   155.316
(ADU)
Farmworker housing      P              -
Single-family detached  P              -
home
Commercial - Service and Office
Kennel-animal boarding  P              -
Outdoor commercial      -              -
recreation
Agricultural and Natural Resource
Agricultural processing C              -
Agriculture             P              P [1]
Resource protection and P              P
restoration
Timber production and   -              C
harvesting
Civic and Recreation
Parks and playgrounds   -              C [2]
Infrastructure and Utilities
Public utility          C              -
Other Uses
Accessory uses          See
                        155.304.020
Animal keeping          See Municipal Code
                        Ch. 91
Cannabis uses           See Municipal Code
                        Ch. 158
Home occupation         See
                        155.304.070
Temporary uses          See
                        155.336
Wireless                                                   Municipal Code
telecommunication       C              -                   Ch. 159
facilities
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Limited to grazing-related uses only.
[2] Only recreation with limited improvements is permitted. Allowed
improvements include informational kiosks, parking areas, play structures and
other similar improvements.
 
   (B)   Additional permits. In addition to permits identified in Table 220-1,
proposed projects in the natural resource zoning districts may require
additional permits and approvals as described in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.220.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   General. Table 220-2 identifies development standards in the resource-
related zoning districts.
Table 220-2: Development Standards - Resource-Related Zoning Districts
Standard Zoning District                    Additional Standards
         Agricultural A Natural Resource NR
Table 220-2: Development Standards - Resource-Related Zoning Districts
Standard              Zoning District                    Additional Standards
                      Agricultural A Natural Resource NR
Minimum lot area [1]  20 acres       No min.             155.308.010
Maximum density (du/  2 units per 20 N/A
acre)                 acres [2]
Maximum building                                         155.308.020
height
   Residential     35 ft.         N/A
structures
   Non-residential 50 ft.         50 ft.              155.220.030(B)
structures
Minimum setbacks                                         155.308.030
   Front           30 ft.         No min.
   Exterior side   30 ft.         No min.
   Interior side   30 ft.         No min.
   Rear            30 ft.         No min.
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Minimum lot area standard applies only to new lots created through the
subdivision process after June 20, 2019.
[2] Excludes allowed farm worker housing.
 
   (B)   Height exceptions for non-residential structures.
      (1)   With Director approval of an administrative adjustment, water
tanks, agricultural processing equipment and silos, aggregate processing
equipment, granaries, barns, pole buildings, electronic towers, antennas and
similar structures associated with agricultural and natural resource uses may
exceed 50 feet in height.
      (2)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find the structure does not exceed
the maximum height necessary to perform its intended function.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.224 OVERLAY ZONES.
§ 155.224.010 PURPOSE OF OVERLAY ZONES.
   (A)   General. An overlay zone is a defined geographic area shown on the
Zoning Map where special requirements or limitations apply, in addition to the
underlying base zoning district requirements.
   (B)   Conflicting requirements. Whenever a requirement of an overlay zone
conflicts with a requirement of the underlying base zoning district, the
overlay zone requirement controls.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.224.020 QUALIFIED OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Qualified (QO) Overlay Zone is to limit
the land uses allowed in a zoning district when applied to a specific property.
The QO Overlay Zone is intended for unique circumstances where use limitations
are necessary to reduce impacts and promote compatibility between neighboring
properties.
   (B)   Allowed restrictions. When the QO overlay is applied to a property,
the ordinance establishing the overlay may:
      (1)   Prohibit land uses that are otherwise allowed in the applicable
base zoning district;
      (2)   Impose more stringent development standards on allowed use; and/or
      (3)   Require a use permit for allowed land uses that are otherwise
permitted by-right.
   (C)   Limitations; general plan compliance. Land use and development
restrictions established by the QO Overlay Zone must be consistent with the
General Plan. For example, the QO Overlay Zone may not prohibit multi-family
dwellings on a site where multi-family housing is expressly allowed by the
applicable General Plan land use designation.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.224.030 NEIGHBORHOOD MARKET OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Neighborhood Market (Nmo) Overlay Zone is
to allow for the continuation, re-establishment or creation of new
neighborhood-serving commercial uses in residential zoning districts. These
neighborhood-serving commercial uses are intended to:
      (1)   Protect the historic character and unique identity of Eureka’s
neighborhoods;
      (2)   Increase opportunities for social interaction and community-
building in neighborhoods;
      (3)   Promote economic vitality by expanding opportunities for locally-
owned businesses;
      (4)   Promote public safety by increasing pedestrian activity in
residential neighborhoods;
      (5)   Increase opportunities for residents of all ages and abilities to
easily access stores and services;
      (6)   Reduce vehicle trips and decrease traffic congestion by increasing
opportunities for residents to walk to destinations; and
      (7)   Provide opportunities for neighborhood-based healthy food
opportunities.
   (B)   Applicability. The NMO designation applies to properties shown on the
Zoning Map and identified in this section.
   (C)   Neighborhood-serving commercial uses defined.
      (1)   Included uses. Permitted neighborhood-serving commercial uses are
exclusively limited to the following:
         (a)   General retail, limited to:
            1.   Establishments serving the daily needs of neighborhood
residents (e.g., markets selling food products and household products such
cleaning supplies, paper towels, laundry products);
            2.   Retail bakeries and other establishments primarily selling
specialized foods prepared on-site; and
            3.   Bookstores.
         (b)   Restaurants, cafés and beverage sales;
         (c)   Instructional services;
         (d)   Small fitness, dance or heath facilities;
         (e)   Personal services, limited to barbershops, hair salons, nail
salons and health spas; and
         (f)   Other similar uses as determined by the Director that meet the
purpose of the NMO designation.
      (2)   Upper floor residential. Residential units are permitted on upper
floors above a neighborhood-serving commercial use.
      (3)   Excluded uses. Neighborhood-serving commercial uses exclude the
following, as defined in §
155.504 (Land Use Classifications):
         (a)   Bars;
         (b)   Drive-thru facilities;
         (c)   Fuel and service stations;
         (d)   Adult entertainment;
         (e)   Business services and heavy commercial;
         (f)   General retail outdoor;
         (g)   General services, including banks, funeral parlors, laundromats
and other general services as defined in §
155.504 (Land Use Classifications);
         (h)   Offices;
         (i)   Medical offices and clinics;
         (j)   Vehicle repair, towing and sales; and
         (k)   Other similar uses as determined by the Director.
   (D)   Existing neighborhood-serving commercial uses.
      (1)   Table 224-1 lists properties with an NMO designation where a
neighborhood-serving commercial use was present as of June 20, 2019.
Table 224-1: Historical NMO Properties with Neighborhood-Serving Commercial
Uses
Existing as of June 20, 2019
NMO Zone # APN Address Existing Use
Table 224-1: Historical NMO Properties with Neighborhood-Serving Commercial
Uses
Existing as of June 20, 2019
NMO Zone # APN          Address                Existing Use
                                               Retail establishment serving the
NMO-1      009-125-0 02 2100 California Street daily needs of neighborhood
                                               residents (market)
                                               Instructional services for
NMO-2      005-022-0 07 1011 H Street          personal enrichment (dance
                                               studio)
                                               Retail establishment serving the
NMO-3      010-111-0 04 3500 F Street          daily needs of neighborhood
                                               residents (market)
                                               Retail establishment serving the
NMO-4      005-145-0 07 1201 11th Street       daily needs of neighborhood
                                               residents (market)
                                               Retail establishment serving the
NMO-5      011-185-0 01 3100 K Street          daily needs of neighborhood
                                               residents (market)
                                               Retail establishment serving the
NMO-6      009-022-0 26 2338 Albee Street      daily needs of neighborhood
                                               residents (market)
 
      (2)   An existing neighborhood-serving commercial use may continue as a
permitted land use without Department approval if the use continues as the
existing use described in Table 224-1.
      (3)   An existing neighborhood-serving commercial use on a property in
Table 221-4 may change to a different (new) type of neighborhood-serving
commercial use with approval of a conditional use permit.
      (4)   If a neighborhood-serving commercial use on a property in Table
224-1 ceases operations for 12 consecutive months or more, re-establishing a
neighborhood-serving commercial use requires a conditional use permit.
   (E)   New neighborhood-serving commercial uses.
      (1)   Table 224-2 lists properties with an NMO designation where a
neighborhood-serving commercial use previously existed, though some were not
present as of June 20, 2019.
      (2)   Establishing or re-establishing a neighborhood-serving commercial
use on a property in Table 224-2 requires a conditional use permit.
Table 224-2 Neighborhood Commercial Overlay NMO Properties with Prior
Neighborhood-Serving Commercial Uses
NMO Zone # APN Address
Table 224-2 Neighborhood Commercial Overlay NMO Properties with Prior
Neighborhood-Serving Commercial Uses
NMO Zone # APN         Address
NMO-7      004-021-012 1100 California Street
NMO-8      004-101-007 1037 B Street
NMO-9      004-116-001 1305 California Street
NMO-10     004-251-013 1505 F Street
NMO-11     005-015-008 931 H Street
NMO-12     005-134-011 1833 J Street
NMO-13     010-024-002 2304 A Street
NMO-14     008-014-008 2329 Fairfield Street
NMO-15     018-181-026 3911 Campton Road
NMO-16     004-234-006 405 13th Street
 
   (F)   Performance standards. All new neighborhood-serving commercial uses
must comply with the following performance standards.
      (1)   Noise. Neighborhood serving commercial uses must comply with
Municipal Code §§
94.01 et seq. (Noise).
      (2)   Hours of operation. A neighborhood-serving commercial use may be
open to the public only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. unless
extended hours of operation are approved with a conditional use permit.
      (3)   Live entertainment. Live entertainment may include only unamplified
music, book readings and other similar quiet activities appropriate for
residential neighborhoods. Amplified live entertainment is prohibited.
      (4)   Deliveries. Deliveries and pick-ups may not involve the use of
commercial vehicles greater than 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, except for
FedEx, UPS or USPS-type deliveries and pick-up.
      (5)   Solid waste and recycled materials.
         (a)   Location. Solid waste/recyclable material collection and storage
areas must be located a minimum of 15 feet from any adjoining residential lot
line.
         (b)   Screening. All outdoor collection and waste storage areas must
be screened from view from an adjoining residential property by a fence or
enclosure, compatible with adjacent architecture, with a minimum height of five
feet for carts/cans and seven feet for dumpsters.
   (G)   Building and site standards. Neighborhood-serving commercial uses must
comply with the following building and site standards.
      (1)   Indoor areas for customers and clients may not exceed 2,000 square
feet.
      (2)   Establishments that provide food and/or beverage service are
limited to seating for 30 people.
      (3)   Exterior sales windows (e.g., concession stands) without interior
customer space are not permitted.
      (4)   No more than three on-site parking spaces may be added to the site
for customer parking. Parking areas must comply with design standards in §
155.324 (Parking).
   (H)   Development standards.
      (1)   (a)   Notwithstanding §
155.224.030(G) (Building and Site Standards), an NMO property is subject to
either:
            1.   The development standards of the applicable base zoning
district; or
            2.   The existing conditions of the site and building at the time
of NMO designation, whichever is less restrictive.
         (b)   For example, if an existing NMO building has a five-foot front
setback and the applicable zoning district requires a ten-foot setback, the NMO
building is subject to a minimum five-foot front setback requirement. If an NMO
building has a height of 20 feet in a zoning district with a 35-foot maximum
height, the NMO building is subject to the 35-foot maximum height standard.
      (2)   The development standards in this division (H) apply only to
buildings occupied by a neighborhood-serving commercial use and upper floor
residences above a neighborhood-serving commercial use. Buildings occupied by
any other allowed use must comply with the development standards of the
applicable zoning district.
   (I)   Applying the NMO to additional properties.
      (1)   In addition to properties identified in Tables 224-1 and 224-2, the
City Council may apply the NMO designation to any property in a residential
zoning district, regardless of the property size, location or current use.
      (2)   To apply the NMO designation to additional properties, the City
Council must approve a Zoning Code amendment (Zoning Map and text) in
conformance with §
155.432 (Zoning Code and General Plan Amendments).
      (3)   To approve the Zoning Code amendment, the City Council must make
the findings in §
155.432.070 (Findings for Approval) and find the proposed NMO use(s) will
substantially advance the purpose of the NMO overlay as described in §
155.224.030(A) (Purpose).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.224.040 SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS OVERLAY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the special considerations (SCO) Overlay Zone
is to allow for high-quality development that deviates from the Zoning Code
while remaining consistent with the General Plan. The SCO Overlay Zone is
intended to promote creativity in building design, flexibility in permitted
land uses and innovation in development concepts. The SCO Overlay Zone provides
the city with enhanced flexibility to address unique site characteristics and
allow projects that will provide public benefits for residents, employees and
visitors.
   (B)   Where allowed. The SCO Overlay Zone may be applied to any property in
Eureka.
   (C)   Designated properties. The SCO overlay applies to properties shown on
the Zoning Map and listed in Table 224-3. Each property subject to the SCO
Overlay Zone will be listed in Table 244-3 with property information, the city
ordinance applying the overlay to the property (“implementing ordinance”) and a
summary of the development allowed by the overlay on the property.
   (D)   Allowed modifications to regulations. When the SCO overlay is applied
to a property, the implementing ordinance may allow for modification to any
land use regulation or development standard in the Zoning Code, subject to the
limitations in §
155.224.040(E) (General Plan Compliance).
   (E)   General plan compliance. Modifications allowed by the SCO Overlay Zone
must be consistent with the General Plan. For example, the SCO Overlay Zone may
not allow a floor area ratio (FAR) on a property that is greater than the
maximum FAR for the applicable General Plan land use designation.
   (F)   Required approvals.
      (1)   Zoning Code amendment. To apply the SCO Overlay Zone to a property,
the City Council must approve a Zoning Code and Zoning Map Amendment in
accordance with §
155.432 (Zoning Code and General Plan Amendments).
      (2)   Subsequent approvals. A development project proposed in an SCO
Overlay Zone must receive all permits and approvals required by the Zoning
Code, unless specifically modified by the implementing ordinance.
   (G)   Conditions of approval. When the SCO overlay is applied to a property,
the City Council may identify in the implementing ordinance conditions of
approval that will apply to any proposed project on the property.
   (H)   Effect of designation.
      (1)   Development in the SCO Overlay Zone is allowed as specified in the
implementing ordinance for the property.
      (2)   Proposed projects in an SCO Overlay Zone must comply with all
Zoning Code requirements, except as specifically modified by the implementing
ordinance or as otherwise allowed by the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.224.050 GULCH GREENWAY OVERLAY ZONE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the Gulch Greenway (GG) overlay zone is to
preserve gulches and greenways as unique and valuable community assets.
   (B)   Definitions. Terms used in this subsection are defined as follows:
      DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following:
         (a)   Constructing or establishing a new structure.
         (b)   Moving, reconstructing, expanding, or demolishing an existing
structure.
         (c)   Subdivisions and lot line adjustments.
         (d)   Grading and temporary ground disturbance.
         (e)   Removing and trimming trees and other vegetation.
         (f)   Installing utilities and site development infrastructure,
including roads and driveways.
      FEASIBLE. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a
reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social,
and technological factors.
      GULCH GREENWAY BUFFER AREA.
         (a)   All areas:
            1.   Fifty feet beyond the break in slope adjacent to a stream or
edge of the riparian drip line, whichever is greater (See
Figure 224-1); and
            2.   One hundred feet from the edge of a seasonal or perennial
wetland.
         (b)   Distances from environmental features are measured using
horizontal distance, perpendicular to the feature, regardless of slope.
      Figure 224-1: Gulch Greenway Management Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9055.png]
      GULCH GREENWAY MANAGEMENT AREA (GGMA).
         (a)   Areas within the GG overlay zone with one or more of the
following features (excluding areas described in division (b) below):
            1.   Slopes of 20% or greater.
            2.   Stream channels and banks extending beyond the top of bank to
the adjacent break in slope.
            3.   Riparian habitat adjacent to streams, extending to the
outermost edge of the riparian dripline, determined using:
               a.   2023 aerial photography on file with the city; or
               b.   The most recent aerial photography in cases where legally
established development approved by the city modified the 2023 riparian
dripline.
            4.   Wetlands.
            5.   Gulch greenway buffer areas as defined in this division.
         (b)   GGMA does not include:
            1.   An improved outdoor area, as defined in this division,
associated with a legally established use; and
            2.   The footprint of a legally established structure.
      GULCHES AND GREENWAYS. The vegetated areas in and around a ravine or
valley, typically containing a stream or wetland.
      IMPROVED OUTDOOR AREA. An area that has experienced significant
alteration from its natural condition as a result of legally authorized
clearing, grading, paving, construction, landscaping, or other activities, as
determined by the Director. Includes yards, gardens, landscaping, and perimeter
fencing associated with a legally-established use.
      RIPARIAN HABITAT. Areas with plant communities contiguous to and affected
by surface and subsurface hydrologic features of perennial or intermittent
lotic and lentic water bodies (rivers, streams, lakes, or drainage ways).
RIPARIAN HABITAT has one or both of the following characteristics:
         (a)   Distinctly different vegetative species than adjacent areas.
         (b)   Species similar to adjacent areas but exhibiting more vigorous
or robust growth forms.
      STREAM. A perennial, intermittent, or ephemeral watercourse, whether
naturally or artificially created, identified by a qualified professional
through site inspection or on U.S. Geological Survey Maps.
      WETLAND. An area where, under normal circumstances, all of the following
occur:
         (a)   Continuous or recurrent saturation of the upper substrate,
caused by groundwater, or shallow surface water, or both.
         (b)   The duration of such saturation is sufficient to cause anaerobic
conditions in the upper substrate.
         (c)   Vegetation is either dominated by hydrophytes or lacks
vegetation.
         (d)   The State Water Resources Control Board's definition of waters
of the state applies.
      WHEELED MECHANIZED EQUIPMENT. Heavy construction equipment such as
tractors, excavators, skid steers, or similar machinery used for grading,
earthmoving, or substantial vegetation removal. Does not include wheelbarrows,
push or ride-on lawn mowers, or handheld landscaping tools.
   (C)   Permits required.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Development in the GG Overlay Zone requires permits shown in
Table 224-1. See division (C)(3) below for Gulch Greenway permit information.
         (b)   Required permits in
Table 224-1 are in addition to other permits and approvals required by the
Zoning Code.
Table 224-1: Permits Required in GGMA
C= Conditional Gulch Greenway permit ZC = Zoning clearance
M = Minor Gulch Greenway permit - = Prohibited
P = Permitted (no zoning clearance required)
 In GGMA
Table 224-1: Permits Required in GGMA
C= Conditional Gulch Greenway permit ZC = Zoning clearance
M = Minor Gulch Greenway permit - = Prohibited
P = Permitted (no zoning clearance required)
                                                                                 In GGMA
New Structures
Primary dwellings                                                                C
Accessory dwelling unit                                                          ZC [1]
Residential accessory structures, fences and walls                               C [8]
Hospitals and medical offices and clinics in the HM Zoning District              C
Other non-residential structures                                                 -
Existing Structures
Moving an existing structure                                                     M
Reconstructing an existing structure                                             C [9]
Repairing, maintaining, and remodeling an existing structure [2]                 ZC [3]
Additions that expand the footprint of an existing structure into GGMA
   Residential structures                                                     C
   Hospitals and medical offices and clinics in the HM zoning district        C
   Other types of non-residential structures                                  -
Demolishing an existing structure
   No wheeled mechanized equipment entering GGMA                              ZC
   Wheeled mechanized equipment entering GGMA                                 M
Land Divisions
Subdivisions and lot line adjustments                                            C [4]
Tree and Vegetation Removal [10]
Invasive and exotic plant removal [5]
   With neither wheeled mechanized equipment entering GGMA nor herbicide      P
   With wheeled mechanized equipment entering GGMA and/or herbicide [6]       M
Protected tree removal                                                           See
                                                                                 155.304.140
Native vegetation removal (no protected tree removal)
   Less than 1,000 sq. ft. with neither wheeled mechanized equipment entering P
the GGMA nor herbicide
   Less than 1,000 sq. ft. with wheeled mechanized equipment entering GGMA andM
or herbicide [6]
   1,000 sq. ft. or more with or without wheeled mechanized equipment or      C
herbicide
Site Disturbances
Grading less than 5 cubic yards and 500 sq. ft. disturbed area
   On slopes less than 20% and outside of wetlands and streams                ZC
   On slopes 20% or more or within a wetland or stream                        M
Grading more than 5 cubic yards or 500 sq. ft. disturbed area                    M
New or replaced buried utility lines
   Not crossing a stream or wetland                                           ZC
   Crossing a stream and/or wetland                                           M
New or expanded site improvements to serve on-site uses [7]                      C
Other Uses and Activities
Public trails and associated recreational amenities                              P
Trash removal                                                                    P
Resource management programs and habitat restoration projects approved by a      P
state or federal governmental agency
Public utilities                                                                 C
NOTES:
[1] Permitted in GGMA only if 1) physical constraints on the property preclude ADU
development outside of GGMA; and 2) the city must allow the ADU development in GGMA pursuant
to state law.
[2] Applies only to projects that do not expand the footprint of the structure into GGMA.
[3] Zoning clearance required only if a building permit is required.
[4] A subdivision or lot line adjustment in GGMA means the existing parcels to be subdivided
or adjusted contain GGMA. Conversely, if the entirety of the existing parcels to be
subdivided or adjusted do not contain GGMA, the subdivision or lot line adjustment is not in
GGMA.
[5] Includes associated trimming of native plants, performed without wheeled mechanized
equipment entering the GGMA.
[6] Targeted, spot application of herbicide in compliance with herbicide labels for the
purpose of removing invasive plant species may be permitted in the GGMA with a zoning
clearance.
[7] Includes improved yard areas, circulation infrastructure (e.g., roads, driveways,
sidewalks, trail, pathways), utility infrastructure (e.g., water, wastewater, stormwater,
electrical, gas, communications), stream crossings, bank stabilization, and flood control
improvements.
[8] Wildlife-friendly fences and walls, as determined by the Director in consultation with
the California Department of Fish and Wildlife and with reference to A Landowner's Guide to
Wildlife Friendly Fences (Montana Fish, Wildlife and Parks, 2012), may be allowed with a
zoning clearance. Exclusion fencing may be considered wildlife-friendly only if it is
limited to areas needed for safety or property protection (e.g., child play areas, gardens,
animal enclosures), sited to preserve habitat connectivity and migration routes, and
designed to avoid risk of entanglement and injury (e.g., no decorative spikes or barbs on
the top rail; narrow or no gaps between slats to prevent wildlife from attempting to squeeze
through).
[9] If a legally-existing structure is damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood, or
other calamity, the structure may be reconstructed with a zoning clearance provided the
reconstruction does not expand the structure's footprint further into GGMA.
[10] Vegetation removal required by the property owner's or prospective property owner's
insurance company as a condition of maintaining or obtaining coverage may be approved with a
zoning clearance, based on evidence of the requirement, regardless of whether the removal
would otherwise require a minor or conditional Gulch Greenway permit.
 
      (2)   Permits from other agencies.
         (a)   Obtaining a permit from the city does not preclude the need for
permits that may be required by other governmental agencies, including the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Regional Water Quality Control
Board, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
         (b)   Whenever a requirement in this subsection conflicts with a
requirement of another jurisdiction, the requirement most protective of natural
resources will apply.
      (3)   Gulch Greenway permits.
         (a)   Purpose. A Gulch Greenway permit is a discretionary permit to
ensure that development in GGMA minimizes and mitigates natural resource
impacts to the extent feasible.
         (b)   Types.
            1.   There are two types of Gulch Greenway permits: minor Gulch
Greenway permits approved by the Director and conditional Gulch Greenway
permits approved by the Planning Commission.
            2.   If a project triggers multiple Gulch Greenway permits as shown
in
Table 224-1, only one permit is required and shall be acted on by the highest
review authority. For example, if different aspects of a project require both a
minor Gulch Greenway permit and a conditional Gulch Greenway permit pursuant to
Table 224-1, only a conditional Gulch Greenway permit is required with this
permit acted on by the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Public notice and hearing.
            1.   
Table 224-2 shows the review authority and public notice and hearing
requirements for Gulch Greenway permits.
            2.   For projects that require a minor Gulch Greenway permit, the
Director may refer the application to the Planning Commission for public
hearing and decision.
 
Table 224-2: Gulch Greenway Permits
                     Review Authority    Public Notice     Public Hearing
Minor Gulch Greenway                     Notice of pending Only after receiving
permit               Director            action. See       written request. See
                                         155.408.090       155.408.090(C)
Conditional Gulch                        Notice of public  Required. See
Greenway permit      Planning Commission hearing. See      155.408.100.
                                         155.408.080
 
         (d)   Considerations. When evaluating a Gulch Greenway permit
application, the review authority shall consider the following:
            1.   Changes to the area (quantity) of Gulch Greenway habitat.
            2.   Continuity of and connections between habitat areas.
            3.   Impacts on habitat quality and complexity.
            4.   Water quality.
            5.   Scenic and visual impacts.
            6.   Public recreational opportunities.
            7.   Noise and light impacts on habitat.
            8.   Human and pet encroachment into habitat.
            9.   Erosion, runoff, flooding, and fire hazards.
            10.   Changes to the natural topography and existing landforms.
            11.   Changes to the natural course of waterways.
            12.   Impacts on slope stability.
         (e)   Findings for approval. To approve a Gulch Greenway permit, the
review authority must make the following findings:
            1.   The project complies with applicable standards in this
subsection.
            2.   The project minimizes and mitigates impacts to fish and
wildlife habitat and movement corridor values to the extent feasible.
            3.   The project minimizes risk of damage to development—both on
and outside the subject property—from erosion, flooding and fire hazards.
            4.   The project protects the water quality and hydrology of
Humboldt Bay and its tributaries.
   (D)   Permitting process.
      (1)   General. Applications for permits required by this subsection must
be filed and processed as required by §
155.408.
      (2)   Project plans.
         (a)   Project plans prepared by the applicant shall show the
boundaries of GGMA on the property and the location of all proposed development
as defined in this subsection.
         (b)   GGMA boundaries are subject to review and confirmation by the
Director.
      (3)   Consultant review. The city may require technical studies,
application review, and a site visit by a qualified professional with expertise
in hydrology, biology, or geology. The applicant is responsible for costs
associated with this review.
      (4)   CDFW referrals. The city shall refer all building and planning
applications in the GG Overlay Zone to the California Department of Fish and
Wildlife (CDFW) for review and comment.
      (5)   Conditions of approval.
         (a)   Pursuant to §
155.408.110, the city may attach conditions of approval to permits for
development in the GG Overlay Zone. Conditions of approval may be required to
avoid or reduce impacts to natural resources or to mitigate impacts such as by
improving the quality of GGMA.
         (b)   As a condition of approval, the city may require the applicant
to file with the County Recorder a deed restriction identifying conditions of
permit approval and limitations applying to the property pursuant to this
subsection. The deed restriction shall be binding upon any successor in
ownership of the property.
   (E)   Standards.
      (1)   Work in seasonal wetlands and streams; when permitted.
         (a)   Work in seasonal wetlands and streams is permitted only between
June 1 through October 31.
         (b)   The Director may grant an exception to this requirement when:
            1.   The applicant proceeds in good faith to complete the work
before November 1;
            2.   Circumstances outside the applicant's control prevent
completion of work before November 1; and
            3.   Measures are put in place to avoid adverse impacts to natural
resources to the extent feasible.
      (2)   Water quality. Development must comply with all applicable water
quality protection standards, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Municipal Code
Chapter 54 (Storm Water Quality Management and Discharge Control);
         (b)   Municipal Code §§
150.200 et seq. (Construction Site Erosion Control); and
         (c)   The City of Eureka MS4 permit and Low Impact Development
Stormwater Manual.
      (3)   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting must comply with standards in §
155.308.050.
      (4)   Trees. Tree removal must comply with §
155.304.140.
      (5)   Bird nesting sites.
         (a)   During the bird nesting season (March 15 through August 15),
disturbance to vegetation should be avoided except lawn mowing and weeding, and
active bird nests must be thoroughly checked for before trimming or removing
vegetation, to prevent harm to migratory birds in compliance with the Migratory
Bird Treaty Act.
         (b)   Tree removal must comply with requirements to protect bird
nesting sites in §
155.304.140(E).
      (6)   Rubbish and yard waste disposal. Properties are subject to existing
prohibitions on dumping, including the disposal of yard waste or other rubbish
into the gulch, as set forth in Municipal Code §§
94.15 et seq.
      (7)   Invasive plants and weeds.
         (a)   Development must comply with the invasive plant prohibition in §
155.328.050(E).
         (b)   Properties must comply with weed abatement requirements in
Municipal Code §§
94.15 et seq.
      (8)   Temporary ground disturbances.
         (a)   An area of temporary ground disturbance associated with a
construction project must be restored to its pre-disturbance state or to a
state of greater biological and hydrological function and value within two
years of project completion.
         (b)   If necessary, restoration measures may include decompacting
soil, site recontouring, and/or revegetation with locally-appropriate native
species.
      (9)   Subdivisions.
         (a)   A subdivision is permitted only if all parcels intended for
development contain a buildable area and access thereto located entirely
outside of GGMA except as allowed by division (E)(9)(b) below.
         (b)   The city may allow a subdivision with buildable area in GGMA if
the review authority finds all of the following:
            1.   One or both of the following apply:
               a.   Development in GGMA is necessary to accommodate new housing
on the property in compliance with state law, including but not limited to the
Housing Crisis Act (Cal. Government Code §§ 66300 et seq.).
               b.   The public benefits of development in GGMA outweigh any
unavoidable adverse impacts to natural resources.
            2.   The subdivision minimizes and mitigates adverse impacts to
natural resources to the maximum extent feasible.
            3.   A development alternative with all buildable area outside of
GGMA is infeasible.
         (c)   All undeveloped GGMA within a subdivision must be designated as
permanently protected open space.
         (d)   Designated open space areas must be identified on the tentative
map and recorded final map and must be guaranteed in perpetuity using one or
more of the following methods:
            1.   Dedication of a conservation easement to a public agency or a
public interest land trust;
            2.   Dedication of land in fee-title to a public agency; or
            3.   Recordation of a deed restriction with the County Recorder.
         (e)   Conservation subdivisions pursuant to §
155.332.040 are permitted, but not required, within the GG Overlay Zone.
(Ord. 961-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
CITYWIDE STANDARDS
§ 155.304 SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS.
§ 155.304.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.304 establishes supplemental standards that apply to specific land uses and
development in all zoning districts.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.304.020 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Relationship to primary use.
      (1)   An accessory use must be related to and serve the purpose of the
primary use on the site.
      (2)   An accessory use must be clearly incidental and subordinate to the
primary use on the site, which may be demonstrated by factors such as the floor
area of the use, economic importance of the use, and the number of customers/
visitors generated by the use.
      (3)   If the primary use is destroyed or removed, the accessory use is no
longer allowed.
   (B)   Maximum size. The following maximum size standards apply to all
accessory uses except accessory dwelling units (ADUs):
      (1)   When an accessory use other than a structure for residential
vehicle parking and/or storage is located within a building, the total floor
area of the accessory use may not exceed 49% of the habitable floor area of the
building containing the associated primary use.
      (2)   The floor area of a residential garage or a shed may not exceed
100% of the habitable floor area of the building containing the associated
primary use.
      (3)   The Director may allow the floor area of an accessory use to exceed
the limitation with an administrative adjustment. To approve the administrative
adjustment, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that:
         (a)   The accessory use complies with §
155.304.020(A) (Relationship to Primary Use); and
         (b)   Unique circumstances associated with the primary use warrant the
additional floor area for the accessory use.
   (C)   Location. An accessory use must be located on the same site as the
primary use.
   (D)   Timing of establishment. An accessory use may not be established
before the primary use is established.
   (E)   Residential accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily associated with
a place of residence on the same site are permitted. Allowed accessory uses
include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Home occupations in conformance with §
155.304.070 (Home Occupations);
      (2)   Garage and yard sales in conformance with §
155.336.040(B) (Garage Sales);
      (3)   Keeping of domestic pets in conformance with Municipal Code
Chapter 91 (Animals);
      (4)   Vehicle parking serving on-site uses in conformance with §
155.324 (Parking);
      (5)   Gardening, landscaping, and open space management in conformance
with Municipal Code §§
94.15 et seq. (Weeds, Rubbish and Debris);
      (6)   Storage of personal household property inside a permitted
structure; and
      (7)   Personal hobbies for non-commercial purposes.
   (F)   Non-residential accessory uses. Accessory uses customarily associated
with a primary non-residential use on the same site are permitted. Allowed
accessory uses include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Administrative offices for the primary use;
      (2)   Vehicle parking serving on-site uses in conformance with §
155.324 (Parking);
      (3)   Wholesale or retail sales to a buyer's custom order of goods
produced by the primary use;
      (4)   Back-of-the-house niche manufacturing of products sold in a retail
facility (such as chocolate production in the back of a candy store, craft beer
brewing in a restaurant/brewery, or guitar fabrication in the back of a music
instrument store);
      (5)   The storage of goods associated with the primary use in conformance
with §
155.304.110 (Outdoor Storage);
      (6)   Tasting rooms associated with a food or beverage production use;
      (7)   Caretaker units in the industrial and public zoning districts; and
      (8)   Other similar uses as determined by the Director through a zoning
clearance.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.030 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. This section establishes standards for the
location, approval and operation of adult entertainment as defined in §
155.304.030(B) (Definitions).
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
         (a)   A business which either:
            1.   Provides live entertainment or performances that involve the
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; or
            2.   Displays pornographic films, photographs or other still or
moving images with an emphasis on specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities.
         (b)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT includes, but is not limited to, strip
clubs, adult movie theaters, adult arcades, adult motels and places that engage
in or allow couch dancing, topless dancing, nude or semi-nude mud wrestling and
similar businesses.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Any of the following:
         (a)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areolae; and/or
         (b)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
         (a)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
         (b)   Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation or sodomy;
         (c)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
         (d)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; and
         (e)   Excretory functions.
   (C)   Exceptions. The following types of businesses are not considered adult
entertainment and are exempt from the requirements of this section:
      (1)   Retail sales. The sale of adult-oriented merchandise related to
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities as defined in §
155.304.030(B) (Definitions), including adult bookstores, adult video rental
stores, adult novelty stores and art galleries. All such uses must comply with
Cal. Penal Code Title 9, Ch. 7.5, (Obscene Matter) and other applicable
obscenity and indecent behavior laws (e.g., sexually-explicit merchandise may
not be visible from building exterior);
      (2)   Therapeutic massage. Massage conducted by a massage therapist
certified by the California Massage Therapy Council;
      (3)   Medical or psychological therapies. The medical or psychological
therapeutic activities of state-licensed doctors, psychologists, psychiatrists
or marital or sexual therapists;
      (4)   Modeling or theatrical performances. Nude modeling done in
connection with an educational program or artistic endeavor. Occasional
theatrical performances, either live or in motion picture theaters, in which
nudity is incidental to the content of the presentation; and
      (5)   Private non-commercial behavior. This section does not regulate the
private behavior of adults, which is otherwise permitted by law, where there is
no payment, gratuity, exchange of labor or goods or other consideration of a
transaction.
   (D)   Permit required. A conditional use permit is required to:
      (1)   Establish an adult entertainment use as a new business;
      (2)   Convert an existing business to an adult entertainment use; or
      (3)   Add activities that qualify as an adult entertainment use to an
existing business.
   (E)   Location.
      (1)   LI and HN Zoning Districts only. Adult entertainment is allowed
only within the Hinge (HN) and Light Industrial (LI) Zoning Districts.
      (2)   Prohibited on Highway 101. Adult entertainment is not permitted on
properties fronting Highway 101 (Broadway, 4th Street or 5th Street).
      (3)   Other adult businesses. An adult entertainment use may not be
established or located within 500 feet of any other adult entertainment use.
      (4)   Sensitive land uses. An adult entertainment use may not be
established or located within 500 feet of a sensitive land use. A SENSITIVE
LAND USE means any one of the following:
         (a)   A residential zoning district or residential use (not including
caretaker units);
         (b)   A religious institution, on land leased or owned by any church,
synagogue, mosque, temple or any school or meeting hall operated by such
institution;
         (c)   A public or private elementary, junior high or high school,
preschool or child day care center;
         (d)   A public park on which recreation games may be played, including
lawn and parking areas, but excluding natural open space areas where no
recreational facilities are present;
         (e)   A public assembly or public use civic building, including
libraries, community centers, post offices, but excluding police and fire
stations; and
         (f)   Other land uses oriented to youth/minors as determined by the
Director (e.g., toy stores, ice cream shops and the like).
   (F)   Application review/conditions of approval.
      (1)   Applications to establish adult entertainment shall be reviewed by
the City of Eureka Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall recommend to the
Planning Commission conditions of approval necessary to protect the public
health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   Conditions of approval may address hours of operation, lighting,
management supervision, security, visibility, signage, access by minors, live
performances, the configuration of interior spaces, and other development and
operational standards as needed.
      (3)   To approve an adult entertainment use, the Planning Commission must
make all findings in §
155.412.120(F) (Findings for Approval) and may attach any additional conditions
of approval in accordance with §
155.408.110 (Conditions of Approval).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.040 CAR SHARE FACILITIES.
   Car share facilities in the R2 and R3 Zoning Districts are subject to the
following.
   (A)   On-site employees and on-site servicing and repair of vehicles is
prohibited.
   (B)   Electric vehicles (EV) charging stations and covered parking is
allowed.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.304.050 EMERGENCY SHELTERS.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. This section establishes standards for emergency
shelters in compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65583(a)(4).
   (B)   Permitted zoning district. Emergency shelters are allowed in zoning
districts as shown in the allowed use tables in the Zoning District Standards
subchapter.
   (C)   Standards.
      (1)   Buildings and open space. An emergency shelter may be established
within one or more buildings or outside of buildings in open space areas.
      (2)   Number of residents. For emergency shelters occupying a building,
the Building Official and/or Fire Marshal will determine the maximum number of
residents permitted to occupy an emergency shelter based on Building Code
occupant loading requirements.
      (3)   Length of stay. The length of stay at an emergency shelter may not
exceed one year.
      (4)   Separation. An emergency shelter may be located no closer than 50
feet from another emergency shelter.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.060 FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES.
   (A)   License. Family day care home providers must obtain and maintain a
license from the State of California Department of Social Services.
   (B)   Separation; large family day care homes. A large family day care home
in a residential zoning district may not be located within 300 feet of another
family day care home (large or small) or a day care facility.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.070 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes standards for home occupations and
cottage food operations to allow residents to conduct business and employment
activities in their home in a manner compatible with a residential setting.
   (B)   Permits required.
      (1)   Home occupation permit. A home occupation that complies with all
standards in division (E) below is permitted by-right with a zoning clearance.
      (2)   Minor use permit. A home occupation that does not comply with one
or more standards in division (E) below may be allowed with a minor use permit.
   (C)   Business license. All persons conducting a home occupation must obtain
a City of Eureka business license.
   (D)   Applicant agreement. All applicants requesting approval of a home
occupation must sign a statement that they have read, understand and will
comply with the city’s home occupation requirements.
   (E)   Standards. The following standards apply to all home occupations:
      (1)   Accessory use. The home occupation must be clearly secondary to the
primary use of the property as a residence.
      (2)   Signs. See §
155.340.030(A)(7) (Home Occupation).
      (3)   Residential appearance. Except for a permitted sign, the existence
of the home occupation may not be apparent beyond the boundaries of the site,
and no permit to alter the exterior of the structure for the home occupation
may be approved.
      (4)   Off-site effects. A home occupation may not create dust, fumes,
odors, smoke, noise, vibration, or electrical interference that is perceptible
beyond the property line.
      (5)   Hazardous materials prohibited. The storage and use of flammable,
combustible, or explosive materials must receive approval from the Chief
Building Official. Typically, the only such materials that will be allowed are
limited to small quantities of fuel for landscaping equipment, contained mini-
torches used for sculpting glass, and other similar modest quantities of
materials associated with approved home occupation business types.
      (6)   Outdoor display or storage. Window displays, outdoor storage, or
display of equipment, materials, or supplies associated with the home
occupation are not allowed.
      (7)   Employees. A maximum of two on-site non-resident employees is
allowed.
      (8)   Client/customer visits. Except when allowed by division (E)(9)
below, only ten vehicle trips per day of clients or customers to the residence
are allowed. Client or customer visits are limited to the hours between 8:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
         (a)   For retail, commercial service, and office home occupations, no
more than one client or customer may be on-site at any given time.
         (b)   For instructional services, tutoring, gyms, and other similar
home occupations as determined by the Director, a maximum of ten students,
clients, or customers may be on-site at any given time.
      (9)   Special events. A home occupation may host up to four special
events per year where the client/customer limitations in division (E)(8) above
do not apply. Special events include music recitals, dance performances,
gallery open studios, and other similar events.
      (10)   Deliveries. Deliveries and pick-ups may not involve the use of
commercial vehicles greater than 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight except for
FedEx, UPS, or USPS-type home deliveries and pick-up.
      (11)   Parked vehicles. Commercial vehicles/trailers greater than 19,500
pounds gross vehicle weight used by the home occupation may not be parked on
site or on street.
      (12)   Number of home occupations per residence. More than one home
occupation per residence is allowed; however, all home occupations combined
must adhere to the home occupation standards. For example, regardless of the
number of home occupations permitted in association with a residence, only two
on-site non-resident employees would be allowed at the residence.
   (F)   Cottage food operations. Cottage food operations (CFO) as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 113758 and Cal. Gov’t Code § 51035 are a
permitted home occupation subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   The cottage food operation must comply with home occupation
standards in §
155.304.070(E) (Standards).
      (2)   All cottage food operations must be registered or permitted by
Humboldt County Department of Environmental Health before commencing business.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.080 MANUFACTURED HOUSING.
   (A)   General. A manufactured home certified under the National Manufactured
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et
seq.) may be used for residential purposes subject to the requirements of this
section.
   (B)   Development standards. A manufactured home must comply with all
development standards (e.g., height, setback, lot coverage) that would apply to
a conventional single-family home on the same lot.
   (C)   Design and construction standards. A manufactured home must be
compatible in design and appearance with residential structures in the vicinity
and meet the following standards.
      (1)   Foundation. A manufactured home must be built on a permanent
foundation system approved by the Building Official.
      (2)   Roof material. Roof material must consist of material customarily
used for conventional dwelling units, such as tile, composition shingles and
wood shakes and shingles.
      (3)   Siding material. Siding material must consist of exterior material
customarily used for conventional dwelling units, such as stucco, wood, brick,
stone or decorative concrete. Metal siding, if utilized, must be non-reflective
and horizontally lapping.
      (4)   Skirting. Skirting must extend to the finished grade. Siding
material utilized as skirting must be the same as the material used on the
exterior wall surface of the manufactured home.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.304.090 MOBILE VENDORS.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   This section applies to the production, sale and/or distribution of
retail products from a vehicle, while operating on private property. These
standards also apply to on-site incidental preparation by a mobile vendor
immediately before and after retail activity occurs on a site.
      (2)   This section does not apply to hand carts or any retailer traveling
from place to place by a non-vehicular type of conveyance, which are subject to
the regulations under Municipal Code
Ch. 118 (Peddlers and Solicitors).
      (3)   This section does not apply to mobile vendors operating on a
street, which are regulated under Municipal Code Ch. 75 (Mobile Vendors
Operating Upon a Street).
   (B)   Standards. All mobile vendors must comply with the following
standards.
      (1)   Obstructions. A mobile vendor may not directly obstruct pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or block a driveway or alleyway.
      (2)   Schools. A mobile vendor may not operate within 300 feet of any
property on which a K-12 school is located, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. of any school day. This prohibition does not apply if the school
provides the mobile vendor written authorization to park on school property.
      (3)   Waste. While in operation, a mobile vendor must maintain a clearly
designated waste receptacle in the immediate vicinity of the vehicle.
      (4)   Operation. When not engaged in on-site incidental preparations or
in operation, all mobile vendors, associated equipment and waste receptacles
must be removed from the site of operation.
      (5)   Compliance with other laws and regulations. Mobile vendors must
obey all local, state and federal laws.
      (6)   Business improvement districts. Mobile vendors that operate, or
intend to operate, within a business improvement district must pay associated
fees.
   (C)   City approvals.
      (1)   Council approval on city property. Permission for a mobile vendor
to operate on city-owned property, excluding public rights-of-way, requires
City Council approval. This requirement does not apply to mobile vendors
operating under a special event permit.
      (2)   Business license. Mobile vendors must acquire a city business
license.
      (3)   Mobile vendor agreement. Prior to receiving a business license,
each mobile vendor must sign a statement that they have read, understand and
will comply with the city’s mobile vendor requirements.
      (4)   Record of approved mobile vendors. The city will keep a list of
approved mobile vendors.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.304.100 MULTI-FAMILY LAUNDRY FACILITIES.
   All new construction of a multi-family residential use in any location must
provide either private laundry facilities in each dwelling unit or a common
laundry facility with at least one clothes washer and dryer for each six
dwelling units. Common washers and dryers may be coin operated.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.304.110 OUTDOOR STORAGE.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   The outdoor storage requirements in this section apply to the
storage of goods, materials, machines, equipment, vehicles or parts outside of
a building for more than 72 hours.
      (2)   These requirements apply only to lots occupied by a non-residential
primary use or undeveloped lots in a non-residential zoning district.
      (3)   These requirements do not apply to:
         (a)   Fleet and service vehicles associated with an allowed land use
when parked outdoors in a legally established parking area;
         (b)   Vehicle inventory parked outdoors as part of an allowed vehicle
sales and rental use; or
         (c)   Temporary storage of construction materials reasonably required
for construction work on the premises pursuant to a valid building permit.
   (B)   Non-conformities. Uses non-conforming to this section must be brought
into conformance when required by §
155.424.030 (Non-conforming Site Features).
   (C)   Where allowed. Outdoor storage is allowed as a primary use only in
zoning districts identified in the allowed use tables in the Zoning District
Standards subchapter. Outdoor storage is also allowed as an accessory use for
the storage of goods associated with a primary non-residential use in
accordance with §
155.304.020 (Accessory Uses).
   (D)   Screening.
      (1)   Outdoor storage areas must be screened with a minimum six-foot high
solid fence or wall so as not to be visible from any:
         (a)   Public street or highway; or
         (b)   Residential zoning district or use.
      (2)   Screening fences and walls may not exceed the maximum allowed
height identified in Table 320-1 of §
155.320 (Fences and Walls) and may not use prohibited fence materials
identified in Table 320-2.
   (E)   Surfacing.
      (1)    Outdoor storage areas must be surfaced with an all-weather
material (such as asphalt, concrete or comparable surfacing material approved
by the Public Works Director) and graded to provide adequate storm water
drainage.
      (2)   Outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with partially permeable
materials if adequate drainage, erosion and dust control are provided. Unpaved
outdoor storage areas are not subject to the parking lot landscaping
requirements contained in §
155.324.080 (Parking Lot Landscaping).
      (3)   Outdoor storage of hazardous materials requires a roof or awning
over the materials and either a dead-end sump to contain spills or containment
in the form of berms, dikes or curbs. All hazardous materials regulated by the
California Department of Toxic Substances Control must be placed on a surface
as deemed appropriate by the permitting agency. In addition, the surface must
conform to all applicable federal and state air and water quality standards.
   (F)   Shipping containers in industrial zoning districts. Metal shipping
containers (e.g., CONEX boxes) qualify as outdoor storage and are permitted in
all industrial zoning districts. Shipping containers are subject to all of the
outdoor storage standards provided in this subsection.
   (G)   Standards for shipping containers.
      (1)   A metal shipping container must be located at least five feet from
a property line, and shipping containers that are accessory to the main
occupancy use, and are located less than ten feet from the primary structure,
are limited to no more than 10% of the floor area of the primary structure.
      (2)   The size of a shipping container shall not exceed 45 feet in
length, ten feet in height, and the storage area shall not exceed 400 square
feet.
      (3)   When a metal shipping container is located within ten feet of a
property line adjoining an alley, the side of the container parallel to the
alley may not be longer than one-half the length of the alley frontage. For
example, when a shipping container is placed within ten feet of a property line
adjoining an alley on a 50-foot-wide parcel, the side of the shipping container
parallel to the alley may not be more than 25 feet long, or ½ the width of the
alley frontage. See Figure 304-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8695.jpg]
 
      (4)   When a permanent structure and a proposed metal shipping container
are located within ten feet of a property line adjoining an alley, the side of
the container parallel to the alley may not be longer than one-half the length
of the open alley frontage. Open alley frontage is that portion of the alley
frontage where no permanent structure is located on the site within ten feet of
the property line adjoining the alley. For example, on a 50-foot-wide parcel,
if a 28-foot-wide structure already exists within ten feet of the property line
adjoining an alley, and the metal shipping container is proposed within ten
feet of the alley property, the side of the shipping container parallel to the
alley may not be more than 11 feet long, or ½ the width of the open alley
frontage (50 - 28 = 22/2 = 11 ft). See Figure 304-2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8697.jpg]
 
      (5)   When a proposed metal shipping container is located ten or more
feet from a property line adjoining an alley, the width of the side of the
container facing the alley is limited only by Building and Fire Code standards.
See Figure 304-3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8699.jpg]
 
      (6)   When a shipping container is used for the storage of hazardous
materials, quantities of hazardous materials may not exceed those listed in
California Building Code Table 307.1(1), or Table 307.1(2), and must be stored
in compliance with the California Building and Fire Codes.
      (7)   Installation of a metal shipping container may require a Building
Permit as required by the California Building Code.
   (H)   Shipping containers in the SC zoning district. Metal shipping
containers (e.g., CONEX boxes) qualify as outdoor storage and are permitted in
the SC zoning district. Shipping containers are subject to all of the outdoor
storage standards provided in this subsection.
      (1)   Metal shipping containers in the SC zoning district must:
         (a)   Be located behind the primary structure when space permits.
Where it is physically impossible to locate the shipping container behind the
primary structure, the container must be located as close to the rear of the
site as possible. A metal shipping container may not be located within the area
between the front or exterior side property line and the plane of the primary
structure wall.
         (b)   Painted to match or complement the existing primary structure on
the site and must be maintained in good condition and avoid conditions that
contribute to blight, including but not limited to, rust, peeling paint, and
other visible forms of deterioration. Inclusion or installation of public art
on the shipping container is permissible and is not required to match or
complement the existing primary structure.
         (c)   Be located on the ground, and may not be stacked on top of
another shipping container.
      (2)   Section
155.304.110(H) (Shipping Containers in the SC zoning district) is effective
only until October 1, 2031, at which time it will expire and be of no further
effect. Shipping containers existing in the SC zoning district as of the
expiration of this section must either be removed from the site on or before
October 31, 2031, or will continue as a non-conforming use and structure, and
will be subject to the requirements in §
155.424 (Nonconformities).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 925-
C.S., passed 9-7-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.120 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.
   (A)   General. All RV parks must conform to Cal. Code of Regulations Title
25, Ch. 5, Cal. Health and Safety Code Div. 13 and all other state laws and
regulations that apply to RV parks.
   (B)   Length of occupancy. The maximum length of occupancy in an RV park is
180 days in any consecutive 365-day period.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.304.130 TINY HOUSE ON WHEELS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes regulations to allow for tiny houses
on wheels within residential zoning districts. These regulations are intended
to:
      (1)   Minimize adverse impacts that could result from tiny houses on
wheels in residential neighborhoods;
      (2)   Ensure tiny houses on wheels do not significantly impact the supply
of permanent housing available to Eureka residents; and
      (3)   Provide opportunities for homeowners to generate supplemental
income by allowing tiny houses on wheels.
   (B)   Development standards. A tiny house on wheels must comply with all
development standards applicable to a conventional accessory dwelling unit as
allowed by §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units), except as modified by this subsection.
      (1)   Where allowed. A tiny house on wheels is allowed as an accessory
dwelling unit in any residential zoning district subject to the requirements of
this subsection.
      (2)   Maximum number per lot. One tiny house on wheels is allowed per
lot, in lieu of one attached or detached accessory dwelling unit located on a
permanent foundation.
      (3)   Unit size.
         (a)   A tiny house on wheels may be up to 102 inches wide and 40 feet
long.
         (b)   A tiny house on wheels shall not be smaller than 150 square
feet.
         (c)   A tiny house on wheels may be up to 14 feet in height.
      (4)   Location on lot.
         (a)   A tiny house on wheels may not be located between the primary
dwelling and the street, except on a through lot.
         (b)   A tiny house on wheels may not be located in, or block access
to, a required off-street parking space.
      (5)   Relationship to other residential structures. A tiny house on
wheels must be setback from other structures the distance required by the
Building Code.
      (6)   Short-term rental. A tiny house on wheels may not be converted to,
or utilized as, a short-term, transient vacant rental.
   (C)   Design and construction standards. A tiny house on wheels must be
compatible in design and appearance with residential structures and meet the
following standards:
      (1)   Parking surfacing. The surface material under wheels and/or
leveling or support jacks must be consistent with §
155.324.060(F) (Surfacing). Bumper guards, curbs, or other installations
adequate to prevent movement of the unit are required.
      (2)   Skirting. Undercarriage, including the wheels, tongue, axle, and
hitch, must be hidden from view using materials or features such as lattice,
fencing, planter boxes, detached decks, and the like.
      (3)   Mechanical equipment. All mechanical equipment must be incorporated
into the structure and may not be located on the roof unless screened.
      (4)   Construction code requirements. A tiny house on wheels must comply
with at least one of the following:
         (a)   National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1192 RV standards or
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 119.5 Park Model standards.
Certification for NFPA or ANSI compliance must be made by a qualified third-
party inspector. Proof of compliance must be submitted with the tiny house on
wheels permit application.
         (b)   State building standards for dwellings as determined by the
Chief Building Official, including 2019 Cal. Residential Code Appendix Q Tiny
Houses or other adopted alternatives. A building permit must be obtained to
demonstrate compliance with state building standards.
   (D)   Utilities. A tiny house on wheels must be connected to water, sewer,
and electric utilities to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official and
Public Works Director. Holding tanks incorporated into the original design of
the structure may not be used for the purposes of waste storage.
   (E)   DMV registration. A tiny house on wheels must be licensed and
registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles.
   (F)   Permit required. A tiny house on wheels permit is required prior to
and for the duration of occupancy of the tiny house on wheels. The permit is a
ministerial approval by the Director to confirm the proposed tiny house on
wheels complies with all applicable standards.
      (1)   Not transferrable. The permit shall be issued for a specific tiny
house on wheels (based on DMV registration number) to occupy a specific
location on a designated property as indicated on a required site plan. The
permit may not be transferred to authorize relocation of the permitted tiny
house on wheels, and/or installation of a different tiny house on wheels at the
authorized location.
      (2)   Property owner approval. Authorization by the owner of the
residential lot is required.
      (3)   Annual renewal. The permit shall lapse and become void one year
following the date the permit became effective unless renewed or revoked for
violation of the terms of the permit application. If a lapse in permit occurs,
the structure is no longer considered a tiny house on wheels and cannot be used
or inhabited as an accessory dwelling unit until a new permit is obtained.
      (4)   Inspection. A tiny house on wheels shall be inspected by the
Building Department prior to final approval of a tiny house on wheels permit,
to verify the unit is in good working order for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation, including adequate connection to utilities. Additional
inspections may be required at the discretion of the Chief Building Official.
The cost of any required inspection shall be borne by the tiny house on wheels
owner.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.304.140 TREE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Purpose. This subsection establishes permit requirements to remove or
alter a tree. These regulations are intended to:
      (1)   Protect and preserve trees that are important to the character of
the city and its neighborhoods;
      (2)   Protect the public's safety by allowing hazardous tree removal; and
      (3)   Allow for tree removal and mass reduction as necessary to allow for
residential developments and supporting solar arrays.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALTERING A TREE. Relocating, reducing the crown by more than 20%, or any
action that kills or destroys a tree.
      MASS REDUCTION. Mass reduction of a tree means actions taken to reduce
the volume of a tree's branches or foliage.
      PROTECTED TREES.
         (a)   Outside GGMA. Outside gulch greenway management areas (GGMA) as
defined in §
155.508.020, a PROTECTED TREE means any tree native to coastal Northern
California, as identified in the Calflora database or USDA Plants Database,
with a 24-inch diameter, or a circumference of 75 inches, or greater, as
measured 4.5 feet above the ground.
         (b)   Inside GGMA. In GGMA, a PROTECTED TREE means any tree native to
coastal Northern California, as identified in the Calflora database or USDA
Plants Database, with a 12-inch diameter, or a circumference of 38 inches, or
greater, as measured 4.5 feet above the ground.
   (C)   Permits required.
      (1)   General. 
Table 304-1 identifies permits required to remove or alter a protected tree. No
permit is required for actions affecting a non-protected tree.
      (2)   Inside GGMA. Inside GGMA, removing or altering a protected tree
requires either a minor or conditional gulch greenway permit. See §
155.224.050 for Gulch Greenway permit requirements.
      (3)   Outside GGMA. Outside GGMA, removing or altering more than five
protected trees requires a tree permit. Removing or altering five or fewer
protected trees requires a zoning clearance.
Table 304-1: Protected Tree Removal Permit Requirements
P = Permitted by-right (no permit)      Location
ZC = Zoning Clearance
MGG = Minor Gulch Greenway Permit       Inside GGMA Outside GGMA Reference
CGG - Conditional Gulch Greenway Permit
TP = Tree Permit
Table 304-1: Protected Tree Removal Permit Requirements
P = Permitted by-right (no permit) Location
ZC = Zoning Clearance
MGG = Minor Gulch Greenway Permit                           Reference
CGG - Conditional Gulch Greenway   Inside GGMA Outside GGMA
Permit
TP = Tree Permit
Hazardous                          ZC          ZC           155.304.140(C)(4)
Within 15 ft. of structure         MGG         ZC           155.304.140(C)(5)
Blocks solar access                MGG [1]     ZC           155.304.140(C)(6)
Five or fewer [2]                  MGG         ZC            
More than five every 10 years [2]  CGG         TP           155.304.140(D)
With a CalFire-approved THP [3]    ZC          ZC            
Required by insurance company [4]  ZC          ZC            
[1] Tree removal and alteration allowed with zoning clearance if needed to
comply with a solar access easement recorded prior to adoption of this
subsection.
[2] Excludes hazardous trees in all areas and trees removed for solar access
with a zoning clearance and trees removed within 15 feet of a structure
outside GGMA.
[3] This applies only to tree removal conducted under and in compliance with
a valid timber harvesting plan (THP) approved by the California Department of
Forestry and Fire Protection (CalFire). It does not apply to tree removal
under a CalFire exemption.
[4] A protected tree may be removed or altered with a zoning clearance when
required by the property owner's or prospective property owner's insurance
company as a condition of maintaining or obtaining coverage, based on
evidence of the requirement.
 
      (4)   Hazardous trees in all areas. Removing or altering a hazardous
protected tree is allowed in all areas with a zoning clearance as follows:
         (a)   Emergencies. In cases of emergency, a protected tree may be
removed or altered if the tree:
            1.   Presents an immediate danger of collapse; and
            2.   Poses an imminent threat to the public safety or general
welfare.
         (b)   Dead/dying trees. A hazardous protected tree may be removed or
altered if the tree is dead, or dying with no hope of recovery; is a danger to
public safety, general welfare, and/or the health of adjacent trees; and the
issue cannot be addressed by mass reduction that does not remove or alter the
tree.
         (c)   Determination of hazardous condition. A determination that the
conditions in divisions (C)(4)(a) or (C)(4)(b) are met may be made by the
Eureka Police Department; Humboldt Bay Fire Department; the Public Works
Director or designee; Development Services Director or designee; Parks
Superintendent or designee; or by an arborist or Registered Professional
Forester (RPF).
      (5)   Within 15 feet of structures - outside GGMA. A protected tree
outside GGMA may be removed or altered with a zoning clearance as part of
project to construct a new structure if the tree is:
         (a)   Within 15 feet of the footprint of a proposed new structure or
within the boundary of the associated access road; and
         (b)   Identified on the site plan of the proposed project.
      (6)   Solar access.
         (a)   Outside GGMA. If a protected tree outside GGMA hinders direct
sunlight for a solar energy system, the tree may be removed or altered with a
zoning clearance. The city may approve the zoning clearance only if a report
prepared by an arborist or RPF finds that the removal or alteration is
necessary to provide solar access, and the solar access cannot be achieved with
more minimal mass reduction.
         (b)   Inside GGMA. A protected tree inside GGMA may be removed or
altered with a zoning clearance only when necessary to comply with a solar
access easement recorded prior to the adoption of this subsection based on
evidence of the easement. All other tree removal or alteration for solar access
requires a minor Gulch Greenway permit, with a report prepared by an arborist
or RPF that finds the removal or alteration is necessary to provide solar
access, and the solar access cannot be achieved with more minimal mass
reduction.
   (D)   Tree permits.
      (1)   Review authority. The Planning Commission reviews and takes action
on tree permit applications.
      (2)   Required report. Tree permit applications and Gulch Greenway permit
applications to remove a protected tree must include a report prepared by an
arborist or RPF that recommends measures, if needed, to:
         (a)   Avoid or minimize adverse impacts to remaining trees on the
property that would not be removed.
         (b)   Address issues associated with drainage, erosion, land
stability, windscreen, and visual buffers along roads and between neighbors
resulting from the tree removal.
      (3)   Findings for approval. To approve a tree permit, the Planning
Commission must find that the project:
         (a)   Complies with requirements of this subsection; and
         (b)   Incorporates adequate measures to minimize and mitigate adverse
impacts resulting from the tree removal.
   (E)   Nesting bird protection. The following nesting bird protections apply
in all areas.
      (1)   Trees to be removed or altered from March 15 through August 15
shall be surveyed by a qualified biologist to determine the presence or absence
of nesting birds.
      (2)   If the biologist encounters an active nest, no work may begin until
the biologist, in consultation with the California Department of Fish and
Wildlife (CDFW), prepares species-specific measures to avoid nest abandonment
or other harm, and the measures are approved by city staff and implemented.
   (F)   Other approvals. Removing or altering any tree, including a non-
protected tree, may require an encroachment permit approved by the Public Works
Department and approval from CalFire and/or other governmental agencies.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 911-C.S., passed 12-15-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S.,
passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed
7-15-25)
§ 155.304.150 VACATION RENTAL.
   (A)   Purpose. This subsection establishes regulations to allow for short-
term vacation rentals within residential zoning districts. These regulations
are intended to:
      (1)   Minimize adverse impacts that could result from vacation rental
uses in residential neighborhoods;
      (2)   Ensure that vacation rentals do not significantly impact the supply
of permanent housing available to Eureka residents;
      (3)   Provide opportunities for homeowners to generate supplemental
income by renting individual rooms or entire residential units to visitors;
      (4)   Provide visitors with a range of lodging options to support the
local tourism economy; and
      (5)   Ensure the city is able to collect transient occupancy taxes (TOT)
and other taxes as required by city ordinances.
   (B)   Applicability.
      (1)   This subsection applies to dwelling units, or portions thereof,
located in a residential zoning district that are rented to transient patrons
for 30 consecutive days or less.
      (2)   This subsection does not apply to lodging uses in a residential
unit in a mixed-use or other non-residential zoning district. All lodging uses
outside of a residential zoning district are regulated as a commercial lodging
use, regardless of whether the lodging use occupies or replaces an existing
residential or commercial use.
   (C)   Types of vacation rentals. This subsection allows for two types of
vacation rentals:
      (1)   Proprietor on-site. The rental of an entire dwelling unit, or any
portion of a dwelling unit, with the proprietor in residence on the site for
the duration of the rental. Includes bed and breakfast establishments where
meals are provided.
      (2)   No proprietor on-site. The rental of an entire dwelling unit, or
any portion of a dwelling unit, when the proprietor is not a resident on-site
during any portion of the duration of the rental.
   (D)   Rental of accessory dwelling units, second single-family homes in the
RE and R1 zoning districts, and new single-family homes resulting from urban
lot split subdivisions.
      (1)   An accessory dwelling unit that received a certificate of occupancy
after January 1, 2020 may not be utilized as a vacation rental.
      (2)   A second single-family home created on a parcel in the RE or R1
zoning district pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.21 may not be utilized as a
vacation rental.
      (3)   A single-family home created on a parcel resulting from an urban
lot split subdivision may not be utilized as a vacation rental.
   (E)   Maximum number per year.
      (1)   The number of vacation rentals with no proprietor on-site
permitted/licensed each year may not exceed the annual limit set by the City
Council. Alternatively, the total number of vacation rentals with no proprietor
on-site permitted/licensed by the city may not exceed the total limit set by
City Council.
      (2)   Vacation rentals with a proprietor on-site are exempt from the
annual limit for new vacation rentals.
   (F)   Permits required.
      (1)   Vacation rental permit. A vacation rental permit is a ministerial
approval by the Department to confirm that a proposed vacation rental complies
with all applicable standards.
      (2)   Minor use permit. See Table 204-1 in §
155.204 (Residential Zoning Districts) for types of vacation rentals that
require a minor use permit.
      (3)   Home occupation permit. Vacation rental operators may require a
home occupation permit. See §
155.304.070 (Home Occupations).
      (4)   Business license. Vacation rental operators must acquire and
maintain a city business license.
      (5)   Vacation rental agreement. Prior to receiving a business license,
each vacation rental operator must sign a statement that they have read,
understand, and will comply with the city's vacation rental requirements.
   (G)   City taxes. All vacation rental uses are subject to a transient
occupancy tax ("TOT") and any other mandated taxes. Each vacation rental owner,
proprietor, and/or manager must comply with Municipal Code §
35.070, which addresses the collection, record keeping, reporting and
remittances of applicable TOT.
   (H)   Standards for all vacation rental uses. The following standards apply
to vacation rental uses.
      (1)   Inspections.
         (a)   All vacation rental uses must be inspected to residential
standards by the Building Department prior to approval.
         (b)   If the dwelling unit was previously inspected by the Building
Department within one year of the vacation rental application, the Building
Official may waive the requirement for a new inspection.
      (2)   Parking.
         (a)   No on-site parking is required to utilize an existing
residential use as a vacation rental use.
         (b)   Except to allow conversion to an accessory dwelling unit as
provided by §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units), if on-site parking exists at the time the
vacation rental use is established, that parking may not be removed while the
vacation rental use remains in operation.
      (3)   Events. Vacation rentals are limited to six events (e.g., wedding
receptions, graduation parties) per year. Event attendance may not exceed the
total occupant limit for the property as allowed by the Building Code and may
not create a noise nuisance in violation of Municipal Code §
94.02 (Loud Noises Unlawful). Vacation rental operators may further limit the
number of events.
      (4)   Signs. See §
155.340.030(A)(8) (Vacation Rental).
      (5)   Maximum number per lot. The number of residential units and/or
vacation rentals on a lot may not exceed the maximum allowed by the density
established in Tables 204-2 and 204-3 in §
155.204 (Residential Zoning Districts).
      (6)   Maximum occupants. The maximum number of occupants allowed in a
vacation rental may not exceed two persons per bedroom plus an additional two
persons (e.g., a two-bedroom unit may have six occupants). Children aged 12 and
under are not counted toward the occupancy total.
      (7)   Emergency contact.
         (a)   Each applicant for a vacation rental with no proprietor on-site
must designate a local emergency contact person on the application form,
including a 24-hour-emergency contact phone number.
         (b)   The emergency contact person may be the property owner, property
manager, or designee, and must live within 50 miles of the city limits.
         (c)   The Department will provide the emergency contact information to
all neighboring properties within 200 feet of the use and to the Eureka Police
Department.
         (d)   The property owner must immediately notify the Department in
writing of any changes to the designated emergency contact information.
      (8)   Fire Department access. Properties with gated entries must have a
Fire Department approved device that allows emergency response vehicles and
personnel to enter the property.
      (9)   Lapse of vacation rental permit.
         (a)   Vacation rental permits shall be subject to annual review and
no-fee renewal by the Department.
         (b)   A vacation rental permit shall lapse and become void by February
1 of each year, unless the business license for the vacation rental is renewed
and in good standing, all applicable taxes and fees are paid, and there are no
outstanding Police, Fire, or Building Department violations.
         (c)   If a vacation rental permit lapses, a new vacation rental permit
shall be required.
         (d)   Unless a lapse occurs, approval of a vacation rental permit
shall run with the land and shall be fully transferable to the new property
owner, provided the new property owner obtains a business license within two
months of the purchase of the property.
   (I)   Enforcement. A permit or approval for any vacation rental use may be
revoked in accordance with §
155.428 (Enforcement and Penalties) and as follows:
      (1)   The Director may revoke a permit for a vacation rental use upon
finding one or more of the following:
         (a)   The proprietor, property owner, or emergency contact has been
negligent in responding to an emergency situation more than two times in a
rolling 12-month period.
         (b)   More than two documented law enforcement violations related to
the vacation rental have occurred in a rolling 12-month period.
         (c)   The vacation rental use has been chronically non-compliant with
the requirements of this subsection.
         (d)   The vacation rental owner has failed to pay required transient
occupancy taxes despite warnings from the Finance Department.
         (e)   The proprietor or property owner has failed to correct noted
Building or Fire Code violations.
      (2)   Documented, significant violations may include copies of citations,
written warnings, or other documentation maintained by law enforcement, Fire
Department, Finance Department, or Building Department.
(Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22)
§ 155.308 GENERAL STANDARDS.
§ 155.308.010 LOT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Minimum lot area.
      (1)   All newly-created lots must comply with the minimum lot area
requirements for the applicable zoning district in the Zoning District
Standards subchapter unless otherwise allowed by the Zoning Code. Minimum lot
area requirements do not apply to existing lots.
      (2)   Minimum lot area requirements do not apply to individual
condominiums or townhouse units, but instead apply to the creation of the
entire site that is the location of the condominium or townhouse project.
      (3)   A lot line adjustment may not:
         (a)   Reduce the area of an existing lot to less than the minimum area
for the applicable zoning district; or
         (b)   Further reduce the lot area for existing lots that do not comply
with the minimum lot area for the applicable zoning district.
   (B)   Lot dimensions and configuration.
      (1)   Lots are not subject to minimum width and depth requirements.
      (2)   To approve a lot line adjustment or subdivision, the Director (or
Planning Commission for subdivisions creating five or more lots) must find that
the resulting lots, excluding remainder parcels, are “buildable.” A BUILDABLE
LOT means a lot with a building site that can reasonably accommodate a
structure in compliance with the minimum setbacks, lot coverage and other
development standards for the applicable zoning district.
   (C)   Street frontage and access.
      (1)   Residential lots.
         (a)   Newly created lots in a residential zoning district must have
frontage on and take direct access from a public street, an alley or recorded
access easement.
         (b)   If vehicle access is not possible due to the location of
existing buildings or other physical site features, the lot must be served by a
minimum four-foot wide dedicated pedestrian accessway. Such cases must receive
approval from the Fire Marshal of Humboldt Bay Fire District.
      (2)   Commercial or industrial lots. Commercial or industrial lots must
either have public-street frontage or appropriate access provided by way of
common/reciprocal easement (e.g., a vehicle access easement in a shopping
center parking lot).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.308.020 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Additional story - mixed-use zoning districts. In all mixed-use zoning
districts, up to 20% of the building footprint may contain one additional story
with habitable space above the maximum permitted building height. In no case
may the project exceed the maximum floor area ratio in the applicable zone.
   (B)   Projections allowed by-right. The following building features may
project above the maximum permitted building height in the applicable zoning
district. These projections are permitted by-right, with no discretionary
permit required:
      (1)   Non-habitable decorative features such as spires, steeples,
belfries, cupolas and domes;
      (2)   Parapets, fire escapes, catwalks and open guard rails required by
law;
      (3)   Skylight, chimneys and vent stacks;
      (4)   Photovoltaic panels and wind energy systems;
      (5)   Rooftop equipment and enclosures;
      (6)   Elevator shafts and stair towers;
      (7)   Building-mounted wireless telecommunications facilities as allowed
by
Ch. 159 (Wireless Telecommunication Facilities);
      (8)   Amateur radio facilities and receive-only radio and television
antennas;
      (9)   Flag poles; and
      (10)   Other similar building features as determined by the Director.
   (C)   Maximum height. A projection above the maximum permitted building
height may not exceed the maximum height necessary to perform its intended
function as determined by the Director.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.308.030 SETBACK EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Building features.
      (1)   In residential zoning districts, the following building features
may project a maximum of three feet into required setbacks, but may not cross
property lines without an easement or encroachment permit:
         (a)   Cornices, awnings, eaves, and other similar roof projections;
         (b)   Bay windows, balconies, sills, louvers, fireplaces, chimneys,
and similar wall projections;
         (c)   Unenclosed balconies, decks, stairways, fire escapes, and other
emergency egress structures (all unenclosed); and
         (d)   On demand water heaters, utility meters and/or connections, and
other equipment normally associated with a structure.
      (2)   In residential zoning districts, the total length of all building
wall projections (excluding eaves and other roof projections) in required
setback areas may not exceed 50% of the length of the wall to which the
projection is attached. See
Figure 308-1.
Figure 308-1: Maximum Length of Setback Projection
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8841.png]
 
      (3)   In non-residential zoning districts, a building feature may extend
across a property line into the public right-of-way with an encroachment
permit.
   (B)   Site features.
      (1)   The following site features and accessory structures may be located
within required setbacks:
         (a)   At-grade flatwork such as concrete paving and patios;
         (b)   Landing places, patios, steps and decks 18 inches or less above
grade;
         (c)   Wheelchair ramps and similar features for the disabled;
         (d)   Trellis structures and arbors up to ten feet in height and at
least 50% transparent. See Figure 508-1 and 508-8 in §
155.508 (Glossary) for examples of a trellis and an arbor;
         (e)   Retaining walls, seating, planter boxes and other similar
landscaping features up to four feet in height;
         (f)   Decorative ornamental features up to six feet in height;
         (g)   Children’s play equipment, movable dog house and similar
moveable objects;
         (h)   Movable sheds, greenhouses and other similar buildings without a
foundation, less than 120 square feet, and without electrical, water or sewer
connections;
         (i)   Rain harvest tanks up to eight feet in height; and
         (j)   Ground-mounted mechanical and utility equipment up to 36 inches
in height.
      (2)   The following accessory structures must be set back a minimum of
five feet from side and rear property lines, and may not be located within a
front or exterior side setback:
         (a)   Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, fire pits, outdoor kitchens and
other similar entertainment features.
         (b)   Emergency generators.
         (c)   Pergolas. See
Figure 508-6 in §
155.508 (Glossary) for an example of a pergola.
      (3)   Fences and walls within required setbacks must comply with maximum
height limitations in §
155.320 (Fences and Walls).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.308.040 VISION CLEARANCE AREA.
   (A)   General. For the purpose of traffic safety, properties must provide
vision clearance areas (also known as sight visibility triangles) at the
intersections of streets, driveways and alleys as required by this section and
Municipal Code §
71.55 (Height of Obstructions). These requirements apply only to fences, walls,
landscaping, trees, signs and other similar objects. These requirements do not
apply to homes, garages and other buildings that comply with the minimum
setback standards of the applicable zoning district.
   (B)   Non-conformities. Properties non-conforming to this section must be
brought into conformance when required by §
155.424.030 (Non- conforming Site Features).
   (C)   Vision clearance areas defined.
      (1)   Streets intersections. The intersection vision clearance area is
the area formed by measuring 20 feet along the two intersecting corner lot
lines from the point of intersection and diagonally connecting the ends of the
two lines. See
Figure 308-2.
      (2)   Driveways/alleys. The driveway/alley vision clearance area is the
area formed by measuring five feet along the edge of the driveway/alley and the
lot line from the point of intersection, and diagonally connecting the ends of
the two lines. See
Figure 308-2.
Figure 308-2: Vision Clearance Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8845.png]
   (D)   Maintenance of sight lines. No fence, wall, landscaping, vehicle or
object over 36 inches in height may be placed within a vision clearance area,
except as allowed by division (G) below.
   (E)   Pruned trees. Trees pruned at least ten feet above the established
grade of the curb so as to provide clear view by motor vehicle drivers are
permitted within a vision clearance area.
   (F)   One-way streets. Vision clearance areas are required at the
intersection of one or more one-way streets where sight visibility triangles
are needed for traffic safety purposes, as determined by the Director.
   (G)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The Director, in consultation with, and concurrence by the Public
Works Director and Chief of Police, may approve an administrative adjustment to
allow an exception to the vision clearance area requirement.
      (2)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that compliance with the vision
clearance area standard is unnecessary for traffic safety.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.308.050 OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   (A)   Purpose. This division establishes standards for outdoor lighting to
minimize light pollution, maintain enjoyment of the night sky, and reduce light
impacts on adjacent properties.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards in this division apply to all outdoor
lighting in Eureka.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Lighting installed and maintained by the city, another public
agency, or a public utility;
      (2)   Athletic field lights used within a school campus or public or
private park;
      (3)   Temporary construction and emergency lighting;
      (4)   Seasonal lighting displays related to cultural or religious
celebrations; and
      (5)   Low intensity string lights.
   (D)   Administrative adjustments. The Director may approve an administrative
adjustment to allow deviations from the standards in this division. To approve
the administrative adjustment, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and one of the following additional
findings:
      (1)   The modification to the lighting standard is necessary for public
safety or security purposes; or
      (2)   The modification allows for creative accent lighting of building
and/or site features visible from public vantage points, and the lighting has
been designed to minimize light pollution.
   (E)   Nonconformities. Properties nonconforming to this division must be
brought into conformance when required by §
155.424.030 (Non-conforming Site Features). This standard does not apply to
single-family uses or interior remodels with no exterior changes to the
structure.
   (F)   Fixture types. All lighting fixtures must be shielded or recessed so
the lighting source is not directed toward other structures, wildlife habitat,
adjoining properties, or the public right-of-way. All fixtures must meet the
International Dark Sky Association's (IDA) requirements for reducing waste of
ambient light ("dark sky compliant") and the California Green Building
Standards Code.
   (G)   Light trespass.
      (1)   Lights must be directed downward and away from adjacent lots and
nearby wildlife habitat to minimize illumination of adjacent properties, nearby
wildlife habitat, and the public right-of-way to the maximum extent possible.
      (2)   Direct or sky-reflected glare from floodlights may not be directed
into an adjacent property or the public right-of-way.
      (3)   No lighting may produce an illumination level greater than one
foot-candle on any adjacent residential property.
   (H)   Prohibited lighting. The following types of exterior lighting are
prohibited:
      (1)   Bare bulbs without fixtures or hoods;
      (2)   Mercury vapor lights; and
      (3)   Searchlights, laser lights, or any other lighting that flashes,
blinks, alternates, or moves.
   (I)   Parking lot lighting. See §
155.324.060(I) (Lighting).
   (J)   Residential zoning districts.
      (1)   Light fixtures in any residential zoning district may not exceed a
height of 16 feet. Motion sensor lights, light fixtures used to light upper
floor decks and balconies, and exterior stairs leading to upper floors, must be
directed downward and away from adjoining properties and the right-of-way, and
may exceed the 16-foot height limitation.
      (2)   Multi-family residential development with more than four units must
provide lighting along all on-site vehicular access ways and pedestrian
walkways.
      (3)   Lighting of at least one-foot candle must be provided within all
covered and enclosed parking areas serving multi-family uses.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.308.060 SCREENING FOR RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Screening requirement. In the mixed-use and industrial zoning
districts, a solid wall or fence at least six feet high must be provided on all
interior side and rear lot lines that abut a residential zoning district.
Bushes, vines and other vegetation may be incorporated into the design of
required fences.
   (B)   Non-conformities. Properties non-conforming to division (A) above must
be brought into conformance when required by §
155.424.030 (Non-Conforming Site Features).
   (C)   Parking lot screening. See also §
155.324.060(K) (Screening) for parking lot screening standards.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.308.070 SOLID WASTE/RECYCLABLE MATERIAL STORAGE.
   (A)   Purpose. This division establishes standards for solid waste and
recyclable material collection and storage areas.
   (B)   Applicability. The standards in this subsection apply to all multi-
family residential and non-residential uses.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Uses that do not store solid waste/recyclable materials outdoors.
      (2)   Structures with an existing site coverage of 100%.
   (D)   Non-conformities. Uses nonconforming to the standards in §
155.308.070(E) (Standards) must be brought into conformance when required by §
155.424.030 (Non-conforming Site Features).
   (E)   Standards.
      (1)   Location. Collection and storage areas may not be located in a
required parking space or landscape area, and must be located as far back from
the front and exterior side lot lines as feasible.
      (2)   Screening. All outdoor collection and storage areas must be
screened from view from any parking lot, street, or adjoining residential
zoning district, residential use, or commercial business by a fence or
enclosure, compatible with adjacent architecture, with a minimum height of five
feet for carts/cans, and seven feet for dumpsters.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.312 DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 155.312.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.312 establishes design standards for new development in the residential and
mixed-use zoning districts.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.312.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   When required. This section applies to the following new development:
      (1)   All new primary buildings in the R2 and R3 zoning districts and all
new non-residential primary buildings in the R1 zoning district;
      (2)   All new primary buildings in the DT, DW, HC, SC, WA, NC, HM and OR
zoning districts; and
      (3)    Additions adding 30% or more floor area to the total existing
floor area of a primary building in the R2 or R3 zoning districts, a primary
building in a mixed-use zoning district, or a non-residential primary building
in the R1 zoning district.
   (B)   Exempt projects. Projects exempt from this section include the
following:
      (1)   Single-family homes, including accessory dwelling units and other
structures accessory to a single-family home;
      (2)   Hospitals, medical offices and clinics, and other health care-
related uses in the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district; and
      (3)   Public infrastructure and public utility uses in any zoning
district.
   (C)   Street-facing. The standards in this section apply to all exterior
street-facing portions of a building.
   (D)   Equivalent degree.
      (1)   For buildings located on sites with multiple street frontages, such
as buildings on corner or double frontage lots, each side of the building
facing a street must feature:
         (a)   An equivalent quality of materials; and
         (b)   An equivalent degree and quality of detailing.
      (2)   For example, on a corner lot, the quality and design detail of
windows on the side of the building that faces the side street must be
comparable to windows on the front building wall.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-
C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.312.030 EXTERIOR MATERIALS.
   (A)   Materials allowed. All exterior materials used for additions and new
construction of any primary building in the multi-family residential and mixed-
use zoning districts, and non-residential primary buildings in the R1 Zoning
District, must allow for long-term durability and appearance. The use of
uninterrupted plywood siding, unfaced particle board, OSB and/or vinyl as
exterior siding material is prohibited.
   (B)   Board and batten. Vertically-oriented board and batten must consist of
separate boards and battens that are installed together onto the building wall.
Pre-fabricated sheathing or siding that simulates the board and batten
appearance is not allowed.
   (C)   Stucco. For all multi-family and non-residential buildings, stucco may
be used for a maximum of 50% of the street-facing building wall. The
calculation of the building wall area excludes windows, doors and other
building openings. This standard applies to all forms of exterior plaster,
including stucco, concrete plaster, elastomer and other related materials.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.312.040 BUILDING ENTRIES.
   (A)   Buildings with one primary entry. For buildings with one primary
entrance that provides interior access to multiple individual dwelling units or
non-residential tenant spaces, the primary building entrance must face the
street. See
Figure 312-1.
   (B)   Multiple independent entries. On lots where units/tenant spaces have
independent entrances, all ground floor units/tenant spaces with street
frontage must have an entrance that faces the street. If any wall of a ground
floor unit/tenant space faces the street, the unit/tenant space must comply
with this requirement. For units/tenant spaces that do not front the street,
entrances may face the interior of the lot. See
Figure 312-2.
Figure 312-1: Building Entry Orientation - Single Primary Entry
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8853.png]
Figure 312-2: Building Entry Orientation - Multiple Primary Entries
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8851.png]
 
   (C)   Entrance design.
      (1)    Residential projects. A street-facing primary entrance to
residential buildings must feature a porch, covered entry or recessed entry
clearly visible from the street to give the entrance prominence. Entrances must
be connected to the adjacent sidewalk with a pedestrian walkway. Recessed
entries must feature design elements that call attention to the entrance such
as ridged canopies, contrasting materials, crown molding, decorative trim or a
45-degree cut away entry. This standard does not apply to secondary or service
entrances.
      (2)   Non-residential projects. Primary entrances to non-residential and
mixed-use buildings must be emphasized and clearly recognizable from the
street. Methods to achieve this result include:
         (a)   Projecting non-fabric awnings or canopies above an entry
(covered entry);
         (b)   Taller building mass above an entry, such as a tower that
protrudes from the rest of the building surface;
         (c)   Special corner building treatments, such as rounded or angled
facets on the corner, or an embedded corner tower, above the entry;
         (d)   Special architectural elements, such as columns, porticos,
overhanging roofs and ornamental light fixtures;
         (e)   Projecting entries or projecting bays in the façade;
         (f)   Recessed entries or recessed bays in the façade; and
         (g)   Changes in roofline or articulation in the surface of the
subject wall.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Where a building or ground floor unit/tenant space has frontage on
two streets (e.g., on a corner), only one of the two sides must have an
entrance.
      (2)   The Director may allow an exception to the building entry
requirement in this section with an administrative adjustment.
      (3)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that:
         (a)   The street-facing building wall incorporates architectural
features and design details beyond the minimum requirements in §
155.312.050 (Architectural Features); and
         (b)   The exception allows for a clearly superior project to that
which can be achieved while complying with the building entry requirement.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.312.050 ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES.
   (A)   Options for architectural features. New buildings must incorporate at
least two of the following architectural features on the street-facing portions
of buildings (e.g., “roof form variation” and “horizontal articulation” or
“projecting bay windows” and “masonry facade”). See division (B) below for
rules to measure each type of architectural feature.
      (1)   Roof form variation.
         (a)   At least 25% of the linear frontage of the building’s street-
facing roof line incorporates at least one element of variable roof form that
is different from the remainder of the street-facing roof form. See
Figure 312-3. The following are examples of how to meet this requirement:
            1.   Recessed or projecting gabled roof elements;
            2.   Roof dormers;
            3.   Changes in roof heights;
            4.   Changes in direction or pitch of roof slopes; and
            5.   Other similar methods.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) above.
      (2)   Roof detail and ornamentation.
         (a)   At least 80% of the linear frontage of the building’s street-
facing roof line incorporates roof detail and/or ornamentation. The following
are examples of how to meet this requirement:
            1.   Parapet wall that is an average of at least one-foot tall and
has a cornice;
            2.   Periodic and articulated corbelling or dentils;
            3.   An ornamental soffit;
            4.   A projecting roof eave with decorative fascia and eave
returns;
            5.   A projecting roof eave with exposed rafters;
            6.   An offset gable clearstory;
            7.   A half story in which the building features a habitable
uppermost story lighted by dormer windows where a sloping roof replaces the
upper part of the front wall; and
            8.   Other similar methods.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (3)   Horizontal articulation.
         (a)   At least 25% of the linear frontage of the ground floor street-
facing building wall has a projection or recess of at least one-foot deep. If
located on a building with two or more stories, the articulated elements must
be greater than one story in height. See
Figure 312-3. Horizontal articulation may also include an articulated corner
tower, angled facet or other special articulated corner treatments.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
Figure 312-3: Roof Form Variation and Horizontal Articulation
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7772.png]
 
      (4)    Cantilevered upper story.
         (a)    For at least 25% of the linear frontage of the street-facing
building wall, an upper story building wall projects at least two feet from the
ground floor building wall.
         (b)   Traditional designs must include decorative features such as
knee braces. Contemporary, minimalistic designs do not require decorative
features.
         (c)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (5)   Balconies. At least 20% of the linear frontage of the street-facing
building wall contains at least one above-ground balcony.
         (a)   Each balcony must be either:
            1.   A traditional balcony that is at least four feet in depth; or
            2.   A Juliet balcony that is served by French doors and that
includes metal or glass railings that allow unobstructed visibility.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (6)   Projecting windows.
         (a)   At least 25% of all windows on the street-facing building wall
consist of projecting windows. The furthest extent of each projecting window
must project at least one foot from the building wall. This requirement may be
satisfied with bay windows, oriel windows, bow windows, canted windows and
other similar designs.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (7)   Window trim.
         (a)   At least 75% of all windows on the street-facing building wall
feature trim that surrounds the entire window and meets one or more of the
following criteria:
            1.   Crown molding projects at least two inches from the building
wall;
            2.   Trim material visually contrasts with the building wall; and
            3.   Sill projects at least two inches from the building wall.
         (b)   Trim material must be constructed of materials such as wood,
fiber cement board, brick, stone, stucco, concrete or cellular PVC. Foam does
not meet this requirement.
         (c)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (8)   Recessed windows.
         (a)   At least 75% of all windows on the street-facing building wall
are recessed at least four inches from the building wall.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (9)   Rigid window coverings.
         (a)   At least 50% of all windows on the street-facing building wall
have rigid window coverings, such as rigid awnings, shade devices, above-window
cornices or crowns, projecting arches or other window coverings of equivalent
quality. Flexible materials such as fabric and vinyl do not satisfy this
requirement.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (10)   Masonry façade.
         (a)   At least 40% of the street-facing building wall surface area is
covered in masonry such as brick, stone, terrazzo, ceramic tile, or comparable
material. Exposed cinder block does not satisfy this requirement.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (11)   Wood façade.
         (a)   At least 40% of the street-facing building wall surface area is
covered in high-grade wood that is finished with a clear sealer or semi-
transparent stain. Wood may not be painted or finished with an opaque stain.
Faux wood products made from synthetic materials, including vinyl, cellular PVC
and fiber cement do not satisfy this requirement.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (12)   Glass façade.
         (a)   At least 40% of the street-facing building wall surface area is
covered in glass, including window glass.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (13)   Cladding materials façade.
         (a)   At least 40% of the street-facing building wall surface area is
covered in, concrete tile, stone, ceramic, high-grade metal or comparable
material.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (14)   Living wall.
         (a)   At least 20% of the street-facing building wall surface area is
covered in a directly integrated living wall or building integrated vegetation.
Plans submitted for living walls and building integrated vegetation must
include a long-term maintenance plan that includes documentable evidence of on-
going maintenance and operation strategies to ensure the long-term viability of
the wall. Living walls and building integrated vegetation must include an
integrated water delivery system.
         (b)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
      (15)   Combination of materials facade.
         (a)   At least 40% of the street-facing building wall surface area is
covered in a combination of two or more of the following materials: masonry;
stone; high-grade wood; glass; metal/ceramic cladding; or living wall.
Materials used to satisfy this requirement must comply with requirements in
divisions(A)(9) through (A)(13) above (excluding wall area percentage
requirements in these paragraphs).
         (b)   The combination of materials facade option may not be double-
counted with any of the other façade materials options (i.e. masonry facade,
glass facade, cladding facade or living wall) to satisfy the architectural
features requirement. For example, a building wall that is 40% masonry and 10%
wood siding can qualify for combination of materials facade, but cannot
simultaneously qualify for masonry facade. However, a wall that is 20% masonry,
20% living wall and 40% glass may satisfy two architectural features
requirements, with the masonry and living wall satisfying the combination of
materials option and the glass satisfying the glass facade option.
      (3)   The rule to measure this architectural feature is provided in
division (B)(1) below.
   (B)   Rules for measurement of architectural features. The architectural
features in division (A) above (Options for Architectural Features) are
measured as follows.
      (1)   Percent of linear frontage.
         (a)   Percent of linear frontage is used to measure roof form
variation, roof detail and ornamentation, horizontal articulation, cantilevered
upper story and balconies.
         (b)   Percent of linear frontage is calculated by measuring the total
horizontal length of the frontage of a building’s street-facing wall relative
to the total horizontal length of the architectural feature to be evaluated.
For example, a three-story building with a street-facing wall that is 100 feet
long has a total horizontal length of 100 feet. If that building has a
cantilevered section on the second floor that has a 25-foot horizontal length,
then the cantilevered section constitutes 25% of the street-facing wall’s
linear frontage (25 divided by 100). In this case, the building meets the
criteria for cantilevered upper story. Alternatively, if a two-story building
with a 50-foot total horizontal length had two separate 20-foot long balconies
on the second floor, then 80% of the street-facing wall’s linear frontage
contains balconies (40 divided by 50). In this case, the building exceeds the
criteria for balconies.
      (2)   Percent of all windows.
         (a)   Percent of all windows is used to measure projecting windows,
recessed or protruding windows, window trim and rigid window coverings.
         (b)   Percent of all windows is calculated by counting the total
number of windows on the building’s street-facing wall and then dividing that
number into the architectural feature to be evaluated. For example, a building
wall that contains 100 windows, 75 of which are recessed from the building
wall, has 75% recessed windows. In this case, the building meets the criteria
for recessed windows.
      (3)   Percent of street-facing building wall surface area.
         (a)   Percent of street-facing building wall surface area is used to
measure masonry façade, wood façade, living wall, glass façade, cladding
materials façade and combination of materials façade.
         (b)   Percent of street-facing building wall surface area is the total
area of the building’s street-facing wall relative to the total surface area of
the architectural feature to be evaluated. The building wall area measurement
includes doors, windows and other openings within the wall area. For example, a
building wall that is 100 feet long and 30 feet high has a total surface area
of 3,000 square feet (including the wall’s windows and doors). If that same
wall includes a section of exposed brick that is 50 feet long and 30 feet high,
then 50% of the total wall surface area has a masonry facade. The 50%
calculation may include windows and doors inset into brick wall material. In
this example, the building meets the criteria for masonry facade. A street-
facing building wall that is at least 80% glass may double-qualify as
satisfying two architectural features. No other materials (such as masonry,
green wall or cladding) may double-qualify as satisfying two architectural
features.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22)
§ 155.312.060 BLANK WALLS.
   (A)   Maximum blank wall area. The area of a blank building wall fronting a
public street may not exceed a square area where the height and width are both
ten feet. See Figure 312-4.
   (B)   Breaks in blank walls.
      (1)   A break in a blank building wall may be provided by any of the
following:
         (a)   Doors, windows, or other building openings;
         (b)   Building projections or recesses, doorway and window trim, or
other details that provide architectural articulation and design interest;
         (c)   Varying wall planes where the wall plane projects or is recessed
at least six inches;
         (d)   Non-fabric awnings, canopies or arcades;
         (e)   Substantial variations in building material. For example, adding
brick or stone veneer to a stucco building or changing from vertically-oriented
board and baton style siding to horizontally-oriented lap siding; and
         (f)   A living wall as defined in §
155.312.050.
      (2)   The following do not qualify as a break in blank wall:
         (a)   Variation in exterior building wall color;
         (b)   Vegetation or landscaping;
         (c)   Mechanical appurtenances such as water heaters, vents, or
utility meters;
         (d)   Gutters;
         (e)   Signage; and
         (f)   Murals.
Figure 312-4: Blank Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8859.png]
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.312.070 GARAGE DOORS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   In residential zoning districts, garage doors may occupy no more than 40% of
a building’s street frontage. See
Figure 312-5.
Figure 312-5: Maximum Garage Door Width
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7776.png]
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.312.080 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   Roof- and ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from view
from public rights-of-way through the use of landscaping, building design and/
or other types of screening. Examples of screening include parapet walls for
roof-mounted equipment, and hedge planting for ground-mounted equipment. The
use of barbed wire, chain-link, or razor wire for screening is not permitted.
(Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.316 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
§ 155.316.010 PURPOSE.
   This section establishes standards for accessory dwelling units and junior
accessory dwelling units in conformance with Cal. Government Code §§ 66310 -
66324. See §
155.304.130 (Tiny Houses on Wheels) for regulations to use a tiny house on
wheels as an accessory dwelling unit.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-
C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.316.020 PERMITTING PROCESS.
   (A)   Zoning clearance. Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory
dwelling units consistent with the requirements of this section are allowed by-
right with a zoning clearance (i.e., building permit approval).
   (B)   Time limit to act.
      (1)   On lots with an existing single- or multi-family dwelling, an
accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit shall be approved or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application.
      (2)   If an applicant applies for both a new primary dwelling and an
accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit, the city may delay
approving or denying the accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling
unit the city approves or denies the primary dwelling.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord.
965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.316.030 WHERE ALLOWED.
   An accessory dwelling unit is permitted on any lot where single- or multi-
family dwellings are a permitted use, and where there is an existing or
proposed primary dwelling.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.316.040 NUMBER OF ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Single family dwelling.
      (1)   On a lot with an existing or proposed single-family dwelling, the
following maximum number of accessory dwelling units are allowed:
         (a)   Two attached or detached accessory dwelling units; and
         (b)   One junior accessory dwelling unit pursuant to Cal. Government
Code §§ 66333 - 66339.
      (2)   Relationship to SB 9 residential developments and urban lot split
subdivisions in the RE and R1 Zoning Districts.
         (a)   In no case shall the total number of primary dwellings,
accessory dwelling units, and junior accessory dwelling units exceed four on
any given lot in the RE or R1 Zoning Districts.
         (b)   When a lot split occurs under Cal. Government Code § 66411.7 and
§
155.332.030 (Urban Lot Split Subdivisions), each resulting lot is limited to
three dwelling units: one single-family home, one junior accessory dwelling
unit, and either one additional single-family home or one accessory dwelling
unit.
   (B)   Multi-family dwelling.
      (1)   On a lot with an existing multi-family dwelling, the following
maximum number of accessory dwelling units are allowed:
         (a)   Up to eight detached accessory dwelling units, provided the
number of accessory dwelling units does not exceed the number of existing
primary dwelling units on the lot (detached accessory dwelling units are not
required to be detached from each other but must be detached from the multi-
family dwelling); and
         (b)   One or more accessory dwelling units within portions of the
existing multi-family dwelling that are not used as liveable space. Examples of
such areas include garages, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics,
and basements that are not used as habitable space. The number of these
internal accessory dwelling units may not exceed 25% of the total number of
dwelling units in the existing structure, or at least one accessory dwelling
unit, whichever is greater.
      (2)   On a lot with a proposed multi-family dwelling, not more than two
attached or detached accessory dwelling units are allowed.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.316.050 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AS SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   An accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit in a
residential or mixed-use zoning district may not be converted to, or utilized
as, a short-term, transient, vacation rental or commercial lodging if the
accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit was granted a
certificate of occupancy after January 1, 2020.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-
C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.316.060 SITE AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   General standards.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units are
not considered for the purposes of evaluating the density requirements
established by the general plan; are considered residential uses; and may count
as a dwelling unit for purposes of identifying adequate sites for housing.
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units may be sold separately from the primary
dwelling unit(s) only as permitted by Cal. Government Code §§ 66341 or 66342.
      (3)   Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units must
comply with the state building standards for dwellings as determined by the
Building Official, except as provided by division (I)(2) below.
      (4)   The floor area of an accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory
dwelling unit may not be less than the floor area required for an efficiency
dwelling unit.
   (B)   Height, FAR, and site coverage.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units are subject to the same height standards
that apply to primary dwellings on the lot in the applicable zoning district.
      (2)   FAR and site coverage standards do not apply to accessory dwelling
units.
   (C)   Relationship to residential structures.
      (1)   An accessory dwelling unit may be within, attached to, or detached
from a single- or multi-family residential structure.
      (2)   A junior accessory dwelling unit must be contained entirely within
an existing or proposed single-family residence. For purposes of this standard,
enclosed uses within the residence, such as attached garages, are considered a
part of the residence.
      (3)   An accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit within
a proposed or existing primary residence must have its own separate exterior
access.
      (4)   An accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit must
have kitchen and bathroom facilities that are separate from the primary
dwelling, except as allowed by division (C)(5) below.
      (5)   A junior accessory dwelling unit may have an efficiency kitchen as
defined in Cal. Government Code § 66333(f). Bathroom facilities, but not the
efficiency kitchen, may be shared with the primary dwelling. If the bathroom is
shared with the primary dwelling, the junior accessory dwelling unit must have
an interior entry to the primary dwelling's main living area.
   (D)   Maximum unit size.
      (1)   Junior accessory dwelling unit. The floor area of a junior
accessory dwelling unit may not exceed 500 square feet in size. See §
155.112.050(B) (Floor Area Calculation for Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit) for
rules of measurement.
      (2)   Accessory dwelling unit.
         (a)   The floor area for an accessory dwelling unit (either attached
or detached) may not exceed 1,200 square feet.
         (b)   Accessory dwelling units that qualify for approval under Cal.
Government Code § 66323(a)(1), (3), or (4) are exempt from this maximum size
requirement.
      (3)   Calculating size. The floor area calculation for accessory dwelling
units and junior accessory dwelling units does not include covered parking.
   (E)   Existing home designated as accessory unit. If a lot contains an
existing single-family home 1,200 square feet in size or smaller, the existing
home may be designated as an accessory dwelling unit as part of a project to
construct a new single-family home on the lot.
   (F)   Setbacks; minimum setbacks from property lines. The setbacks for
accessory dwelling units shall be the same as those required for primary
structures in the applicable zoning district, except as provided below:
      (1)   Side and rear setbacks. The minimum side and rear setback for
accessory dwelling units is four feet, unless the applicable zoning district
permits a smaller minimum setback for primary structures, in which case that
smaller setback applies.
      (2)   Second floor or conversion. No additional setbacks are required
for:
         (a)   An existing structure that is converted to an accessory dwelling
unit;
         (b)   An accessory dwelling unit constructed above an existing
structure; or
         (c)   An accessory dwelling unit constructed in the same location as
an existing structure, provided any modifications to the dimensions do not
expand the footprint in the nonconforming setback area.
      (3)   Front setback exemption. No minimum front setback is required for:
         (a)    A new-construction accessory dwelling unit that is 800 square
feet or smaller in floor area and complies with minimum four-foot side and rear
yard setbacks.
         (b)   Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units
that qualify for approval under Cal. Government Code § 66323(a)(1) - (4).
   (G)   Parking.
      (1)   On-site parking is not required for accessory dwelling units or
junior accessory dwelling units.
      (2)   When an existing parking space (covered or uncovered) is eliminated
in conjunction with the creation of an accessory dwelling unit or junior
accessory dwelling unit, replacement parking is not required for the eliminated
parking space.
   (H)   Historic review. New construction, exterior alterations or additions
for an accessory dwelling unit on a property listed on the Local Register of
Historic Places shall comply with Eureka Municipal Code
Chapter 157, except the following types of accessory dwelling units are exempt
from Historic Preservation Review:
      (1)   A new-construction, detached accessory dwelling unit not located
between a historic building and the street.
      (2)   The conversion of an existing interior space or structure to an
accessory dwelling unit where no exterior alterations are proposed (interior
construction only).
      (3)   A new-construction attached accessory dwelling unit that is not
visible from the sidewalk, alley or street because it is blocked from view by
permanent structures.
      (4)   Accessory dwelling units that qualify for approval under Cal.
Government Code § 66323(a)(1) - (4).
   (I)   Nonconformities.
      (1)   New construction, exterior alterations or additions for an
accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit are not subject to §
155.424.030(B) (Required Compliance), and do not trigger the need to correct
nonconforming zoning conditions, building code violations, or unpermitted
structures that do no present a threat to public health and safety and are not
affected by the creation of the accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory
dwelling unit.
      (2)   An application for an unpermitted accessory dwelling unit or junior
accessory dwelling unit constructed before January 1, 2020 that violates
building or zoning standards shall be approved unless the Building Official
finds that correcting the violation is necessary to protect the health and
safety because the building is substandard pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 17920.3.
   (J)   Additional junior accessory dwelling unit requirements.
      (1)   The owner of the property must reside in either the remaining
portion of the single-family residence or the junior accessory dwelling unit,
except if the owner is a governmental agency, land trust or housing
organization.
      (2)   A deed restriction must be filed including:
         (a)   A prohibition on the sale of the junior accessory dwelling unit
separate from the sale of the single-family residence; and
         (b)   A restriction on the size and attributes of the junior accessory
dwelling unit in conformance with Government Code §§ 66333 - 66339.
(Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.316.070 INTERPRETATION.
   Any ambiguities in this section shall be interpreted to be consistent with
state law.
(Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-19-25)
§ 155.320 FENCES AND WALLS.
§ 155.320.010 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   This §
155.320 establishes standards for fences and walls in all zoning districts.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.320.020 REQUIRED PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   No department approval required. Fences and walls consistent with this
section are permitted by-right without the need to obtain a zoning clearance or
other Department approval, unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   Building permit. Fences and walls may require a building permit as
required by California Building Code.
   (C)   Encroachment permit. Fences and walls in the public right-of-way
require an encroachment permit approved by the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.320.030 MEASUREMENT OF FENCE AND WALL HEIGHT.
   (A)   Measurement of height.
      (1)   The height of a fence or wall is measured as the vertical distance
from the highest finished grade at the base of the fence or wall to the top
edge of the fence or wall. See Figure 320-1.
      (2)   Fence or wall height includes any materials directly attached to
the fence or wall.
   (B)   Variable height fences. If the height of a fence varies due to
features integral to the overall fence design, variable height elements of the
fence may exceed the allowed height by a maximum of one-foot six-inches. See
Figure 320-2.
      Figure 320-1: Measurement of Fence Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8014.png]
 
      Figure 320-2: Variable Fence Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7780.png]
 
   (C)   Fences on walls. If a fence is atop a wall, the fence height is
measured from the base of the wall or the sidewalk, whichever results in a
greater height, except as allowed by division (D) below.
   (D)   Different finished grades. If the adjacent finished grade is different
on opposite sides of a fence or wall, the height is measured from the side with
the highest finished grade to the highest point on the fence or wall.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.320.040 MAXIMUM HEIGHT.
   (A)   Maximum height. Fences and walls may not exceed the maximum height
shown in
Table 320-1 and
Figure 320-3.
Table 320-1: Allowed Fence Height
 Maximum Height [1] [3]
 Solid Fence Open Fence [2]
Table 320-1: Allowed Fence Height
                                                    Maximum Height [1] [3]
                                                    Solid Fence Open Fence [2]
Residential Zones
Front yard area between front building wall and     4 ft.       6 ft.
front lot line
All other areas on lot                              7 ft.       7 ft.
Mixed use zones - any location on lot               8 ft. [4]   8 ft.
Industrial, public facilities, and resource related 12 ft.      12 ft.
zones - any location on lot
Notes:
[1] Fences exceeding 7 feet require a Building Permit and engineered plans.
[2] Open fences must utilize decorative masonry, ornamental steel or wrought
iron, aluminum, brick, stone, or wood, and be at least 70% open to the passage
of light and air. Chain link and other woven wire fence materials smaller than
6 gauge are not allowed between a building and the street in the residential
and mixed-use zoning districts.
[3] See §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area) for height limitations at street
intersections and when adjacent to driveways and alleys.
[4] Solid fences taller than 3' (36") are not allowed between a building and
the street in a mixed-use zone district.
 
Figure 320-3: Allowed Fence Height - Residential Zoning Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8875.png]
   (B)   Vision clearance area. Walls and fences shall comply with the vision
clearance area requirements in §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.320.050 MATERIALS.
   Table 320-2 identifies prohibited fence materials.
 
Table 320-2: Prohibited Fence Material
Fence Material                          Where Prohibited
                                        All zoning districts except for
Barbed wire                             industrial and resource-related zoning
                                        districts
                                        All zoning districts, except when
Razor or concertina wire                protecting critical infrastructure as
                                        determined by the Public Works Director
Electrified fence                       All zoning districts except for
                                        resource-related zoning districts
Chain link and other woven wire fencing Between a building and the street in
smaller than 6 gauge                    residential and mixed-use zoning
                                        districts
Nails, broken glass, or other similar
hazardous objects on the top of fence   All zoning districts
or wall
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.320.060 NON-CONFORMING FENCES AND WALLS.
   Existing fences and walls that do not comply with this section may remain
and may be repaired and modified in accordance with §
155.424.030(D) (Repairs and Modifications). When an existing fence or wall
conflicts with §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area), the conflict must be corrected when
compliance with vision clearance area standards is triggered by §
155.424.030(B) (Required Compliance).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-
C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.324 PARKING.
§ 155.324.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.324 establishes on-site parking requirements to:
   (A)   Provide on-site parking spaces for existing and new land uses in a
manner that promotes infill development, supports a pedestrian-friendly
environment and maintains Eureka’s unique sense of place;
   (B)   Provide for functional on-site parking areas that are safe for
vehicles and pedestrians;
   (C)   Ensure that parking areas are well-designed and contribute to a high-
quality design environment in Eureka;
   (D)   Maintain a sufficient supply of parking on an area-wide basis, with
less concern for the number of parking spaces provided on each individual lot
or land use;
   (E)   Allow for flexibility in on-site parking requirements to support a
multi-modal transportation system and sustainable development pattern;
   (F)   Encourage the construction of new housing and conversion of existing
underutilized commercial properties to residential use;
   (G)   Support and encourage low carbon emission vehicles, bicycle
transportation, car sharing and other new and innovative transportation
options;
   (H)   Support a vibrant and dynamic local economy with flexible parking
requirements;
   (I)   Ensure that on-site parking areas do not adversely impact land uses on
neighboring properties; and
   (J)   Support a pedestrian-friendly streetscape design, walkable
neighborhoods and active and inviting mixed-use districts.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.324.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Parking required. On-site parking must be provided as required by this
section, except when:
      (1)   Exempted by this division (A); or
      (2)   Reduced by §
155.324.040 (Reductions and Alternatives to Automobile Parking).
   (B)   Residential use exemptions. The following residential uses are exempt
from on-site parking requirements:
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units;
      (2)   New residential units 500 square feet or less, regardless of the
size of the overall structure;
      (3)   New residential units that are deed restricted to households
earning 80 percent or less of the Humboldt County area median income, including
one, on-site, deed restricted or market rate, manager's unit;
      (4)   New construction or conversion of existing non-residential space to
create eight or fewer residential units in the Downtown (DT), Downtown West
(DW), and Hinge Industrial (HN) zoning districts. Where nine or more new units
are created, parking must be provided only for the units in excess of eight.
This parking exemption applies to exempt units in perpetuity regardless of
future development on the site;
      (5)   New construction or conversion of existing non-residential space to
create four or fewer residential units in the Henderson Center (HC),
Neighborhood Commercial (NC), Wabash Avenue (WA), Office Residential (OR),
Hospital Medical (HM), and Service Commercial (SC) zoning districts. Where five
or more new units are created, parking must be provided only for the units in
excess of four. This parking exemption applies to exempt units in perpetuity
regardless of future development on the site;
      (6)   Division of an existing residential unit to create one or more
additional residential units;
      (7)   Conversion of existing covered parking to create one or more
additional residential units. When a covered parking space is eliminated to
create an additional residential unit, replacement parking is not required for
the eliminated parking space;
      (8)   New second residential units in the RE and R1 zoning districts
created pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.21, and new residential units
created as a result of an R1 urban lot split subdivision pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66411.7; and
      (9)   Residential units on a lot with a dedicated pedestrian access in
lieu of vehicular access pursuant to §
155.308.010(C)(1)(b).
   (C)   Non-residential use exemptions. The following non-residential uses are
exempt from on-site parking requirements:
      (1)   New construction of a building less than 1,000 square feet;
      (2)   New construction on lots less than 4,000 square feet;
      (3)   Existing non-residential buildings enlarged by less than 1,000
square feet;
      (4)   All new construction in the Downtown (DT), Downtown West (DW),
Henderson Center (HC) and Hinge Industrial (HN) Zoning Districts and in the
Neighborhood Market (NMO) Overlay Zone;
      (5)   All new construction within the Parking Assessment District. See
Figure 508-5 in §
155.508 (Glossary) for parking assessment district boundaries; and
      (6)   In all zoning districts, a change from an existing non-residential
use to a different non-residential use within an existing building.
   (D)   Enlargements. Where parking is required for an enlarged building,
additional parking is required only to serve the enlarged area. Additional
parking is not required to remedy parking deficiencies existing prior to the
enlargement.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-
C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.324.030 NUMBER OF ON-SITE PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Vehicle spaces required. On-site parking for motor vehicles must be
provided in the quantities specified in Table 324-1, except as otherwise
provided in this section.
Table 324-1: Required Vehicle Parking Spaces
Land Use Number of Required Parking Spaces
Table 324-1: Required Vehicle Parking Spaces
Land Use                               Number of Required Parking Spaces
Residential
All residential uses except those      1 per unit
listed below [1]
   Accessory dwelling unit          None required
   Farm worker housing              0.25 per bed
   Medical care housing             0.5 per bedroom
   Micro/shared housing             0.25 per bedroom
   Non-medical care housing         0.25 per bedroom
Commercial and Office
All commercial uses, except those      1 per 500 sq. ft.
listed below [1]
   Day care facility                None
   Family day care home             None beyond that required for
                                       residential use
   Kennel-animal boarding           1 per 2,000 sq. ft.
   Commercial lodging               0.75 per room
   Vacation rental                  None beyond that existing for
                                       residential use
   Hospitals                        None
                                       For sites less than 1 acre, 1 per 5,000
                                       sq. ft. of outdoor space available to
   Outdoor commercial recreation    customers; for sites over one acre, 1
                                       per 15,000 sq. ft. of outdoor space
                                       available to customers
   Parking lots and structures      None required
                                       1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of non-service
   Vehicle repair, towing and impounbay floor area, plus 2 spaces per
                                       service bay
Industrial and Storage
All industrial and storage uses except 1 per 2,000 sq. ft.
those listed below [1]
   Manufacturing, artisan           1 per 1,000 sq. ft.
   Mini-storage                     1 per 4,000 sq. ft.
Civic and Recreation
All civic and recreation uses except   1 per 500 sq. ft.
those listed below [1]
                                       1.25 per classroom, plus 1 per 500
   Elementary and middle school     square feet of administrative office
                                       space
   High school                      5 per classroom
                                       1 per every 4 fixed seats or 1 per 200
   Colleges and trade schools       sq. ft. of assembly or classroom area,
                                       whichever is less
                                       As determined by the Director based on
   Emergency shelter                the demonstrated need for on-site
                                       parking
   Parks and playgrounds            None required
   Non-commercial places of assembly1 per 300 sq. ft.
Infrastructure and Utilities
   Airport                          As determined by parking demand study
                                       approved by the Director
   Freight terminals and transfer   1 per 2,500 sq. ft.
   Public agency corporation yard   1 per 2,500 sq. ft.
   Public utility                   None required
   Recycling collection facility    1 per 750 sq. ft.
   Recycling processing facility    1 per 1,000 sq. ft.
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] See §
155.504 (Land Use Classifications) for specific land uses included in category.
 
   (B)   Required electric vehicle spaces. See §
155.324.050(C) (Electric Vehicle Charging).
   (C)   Required bicycle parking spaces. See §
155.324.070 (Bicycle Parking).
   (D)   Calculation of required spaces.
      (1)   Floor area. Where a parking requirement is a ratio of parking
spaces to floor area, the floor area is assumed to be gross floor area, unless
otherwise stated. The floor area of a use is calculated as described in §
155.112.050 (Floor Area and Floor Area Ratio).
      (2)   Employees. Where a parking requirement is stated as a ratio of
parking spaces to employees, the number of employees is based on the largest
shift that occurs in a typical week.
      (3)   Seats. Where a parking requirement is stated as a ratio of parking
spaces to seats, each 24 inches of bench-type seating is counted as one seat.
      (4)   Fractional spaces. In determining the number of required parking,
fractions of spaces over one-half will be rounded down to the next whole
number.
   (E)   Unlisted uses. The parking requirement for land uses not listed in
Table 324-1 is determined by the Director based on the requirement for the most
comparable similar use, the particular characteristics of the proposed use and
any other relevant data regarding parking demand.
   (F)   Sites with multiple uses. Where more than one land use is conducted on
a site, the minimum number of required on-site parking spaces is the sum of the
number of parking spaces required for each individual use unless on-site shared
parking is allowed in accordance with §
155.324.040(D) (On-site Shared Parking).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.324.040 REDUCTIONS AND ALTERNATIVES TO AUTOMOBILE PARKING.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   This section identifies allowed reductions and alternatives to on-
site automobile parking spaces required by §
155.324.030  (Number of On-Site Parking Spaces Required).
      (2)   These reductions are allowed either by-right or require approval of
an administrative adjustment. If the reduction is requested as part of a
project subject to discretionary approval, the request is considered by the
review authority as part of the overall project.
   (B)   Calculation of parking reductions.
      (1)   Available reductions apply only to non-exempt parking spaces as
specified in §
155.324.020 (Applicability).
      (2)   Available reductions are additive (i.e., multiple reductions may be
combined for a single project). Each allowed reduction is calculated using the
number of parking spaces required before any other reduction is applied. For
example, parking for a development requiring 20 parking spaces that qualifies
for a 10% transit proximity reduction (division (C)(1) above) and a 25% low
demand reduction would be reduced by 35% (seven spaces).
   (C)   Available reductions. The following allow for the reduction of
required on-site parking spaces:
      (1)   Transit proximity. For projects in proximity to an active public
transit bus stop, required on-site parking may be reduced as shown in
Table 324-2. Public transit bus stops exclude school bus stops.
 
Table 324-2: Transit Proximity Parking Reduction
Proximity to Bus Stop Allowed Parking Reduction
600 feet              30%
900 feet              20%
1,200 feet            10%
 
      (2)   Bus pass.
         (a)   On-site parking is not required for a multi-family rental unit
within 900 feet of a public transit stop if the lease agreement includes a
complementary bus pass for use by the resident, paid for by the property owner
during the entire duration of the rental.
         (b)   The Department will authorize this reduction only after the
property owner or the property owner's authorized representative has submitted
to the Department a signed agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney
guaranteeing that the complementary bus pass will be provided as required for
the parking reductions.
      (3)   Bicycle facility proximity. Required on-site parking may be reduced
by up to 30% for projects located within 300 feet of an existing designated
Class I or Class II bicycle facility as shown in General Plan Figure M-2.
      (4)   Carpool spaces. For non-residential uses, two automobile parking
spaces may be exchanged for one carpool parking space. The carpool parking
space must be designated as such with signage and/or space markings.
      (5)   Electric vehicle charging stations. Two required parking spaces may
be exchanged for one space served by an electric vehicle charging station. To
receive reduction, electric vehicle charging stations must be in excess of the
minimum number of charging stations required by §
155.324.050(C) (Electric Vehicle Charging).
      (6)   Loss of on-street parking. If providing new on-site parking
requires a new curb cut through an existing sidewalk and thereby eliminates an
on-street parking space, the on-site parking is required only if the new on-
site parking provides at least two more spaces than the number of lost on-
street spaces. For example, if a new parking lot eliminates one on-street
parallel parking space, new off-street parking is required only if it contains
at least three spaces.
      (7)   Required disabled and electric vehicle spaces. Replacement parking
spaces are not required if retrofitting a required accessible parking space or
installing a required electric vehicle charging station eliminates one or more
required parking spaces (e.g., to accommodate accessible loading area).
      (8)   Bicycle and motorcycle spaces.
         (a)   Bicycle or motorcycle parking may replace up to two required
automobile spaces or 10% of the required number of on-site automobile parking
spaces, whichever is less.
         (b)   Each automobile parking space must be replaced by space for at
least six bicycles or four motorcycles. Bicycle parking spaces must comply with
development standards in §
155.324.070 (Bicycle Parking).
         (c)   Bicycle spaces replacing an automobile space must be in addition
to the minimum bicycle parking spaces required by §
155.324.070 (Bicycle Parking).
      (9)   In-lieu fees. Parking requirements may be satisfied through the
payment of in-lieu fees consistent with any in-lieu parking fee program
established by the City Council.
      (10)   On-site shared parking.
         (a)   Shared parking is the practice of allowing land uses with
different peak and off-peak parking demand schedules to share required on-site
parking spaces.
         (b)   Shared parking is allowed with an administrative adjustment for
uses on a single lot, on adjacent lots, and on lots within 100 feet of one
another.
         (c)   An applicant requesting shared parking must submit a parking
demand study justifying the shared parking. The study must be prepared by a
qualified transportation planning consultant or consist of materials that
provide satisfactory evidence as determined by the Director.
         (d)   The total number of parking spaces in a shared parking
arrangement must be equal to or greater than the number of spaces ordinarily
required for any one of the participating uses.
         (e)   To approve an administrative adjustment for shared parking, the
Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval).
         (f)   The Director may require that additional documents, covenants,
deed restrictions or other agreements are executed to ensure that:
            1.   The required parking spaces are maintained for the duration of
the uses served; and
            2.   Uses with similar hours and parking requirements as those uses
sharing the parking remain for the life of the building.
      (11)   Off-site parking.
         (a)   Required parking may be provided off-site if the parking is
located no more than 300 feet from the lot serving the use. An administrative
adjustment is required only if parking is to be provided on a non-adjoining
lot.
         (b)   To approve an administrative adjustment for off-site parking at
a non-adjoining lot, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that the off-site parking is
located and designed in a manner that will conveniently meet the parking needs
of the use that it serves.
         (c)   Prior to establishing any required parking off-site, a covenant
record ("parking indenture"), approved by the city, must be filed with the
County Recorder guaranteeing that off-site parking will be maintained
exclusively for the use served for the duration of the use.
      (12)   Low demand.
         (a)   The number of required parking spaces may be reduced by up to
25% with an administrative adjustment for uses with unique operating
characteristics that result in a lower parking demand than otherwise would be
required.
         (b)   An applicant requesting reduced parking for a low demand use
must submit evidence to the satisfaction of the Director that the use requires
fewer parking spaces than otherwise required by §
155.324.030 (Number of On-site Parking Spaces Required). Acceptable evidence
may include parking surveys, sales receipts, and examples of comparable uses in
Eureka or similar communities.
         (c)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and the following additional findings:
            1.   Evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the use
requires fewer parking spaces required by §
155.324.030 (Number of On-Site Parking Spaces Required) for the use; and
            2.   The use will provide a sufficient amount of on-site parking to
accommodate its expected parking demand.
      (13)   Low impact development.
         (a)   Required parking spaces may be reduced by up to 15%, not to
exceed four spaces, with an administrative adjustment in cases where the
parking requirement conflicts with the city's storm water system (MS4) permit
requirements.
         (b)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that providing all of the on-
site parking while complying with the city's storm water system (MS4) permit
requirements is not possible due to physical site constraints.
      (14)   Infill incentive permit reductions. Required parking spaces may
also be reduced through an infill incentive permit. See Table 412-2 in §
155.412.060 (Infill Incentive Permits).
   (D)   On-site shared parking.
      (1)   Shared parking is the practice of allowing land uses with different
peak and off-peak parking demand schedules to share required on-site parking
spaces.
      (2)   Shared parking is allowed with an administrative adjustment for
uses on a single lot, on adjacent lots and on lots within 100 feet of one
another.
      (3)   An applicant requesting shared parking must submit a parking demand
study justifying the shared parking. The study must be prepared by a qualified
transportation planning consultant or consist of materials that provide
satisfactory evidence as determined by the Director.
      (4)   The total number of parking spaces in a shared parking arrangement
must be equal to or greater than the number of spaces ordinarily required for
any one of the participating uses.
      (5)   To approve an administrative adjustment for shared parking, the
Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval).
      (6)   The Director may require that additional documents, covenants, deed
restrictions or other agreements are executed to ensure that:
         (a)   The required parking spaces are maintained for the duration of
the uses served; and
         (b)   Uses with similar hours and parking requirements as those uses
sharing the parking remain for the life of the building.
   (E)   Off-site parking.
      (1)   Required parking may be provided off-site on a non-adjoining lot
with an administrative adjustment if the parking is located no more than 300
feet from the lot serving the use. Required parking may be provided on an
adjoining lot by-right.
      (2)   To approve an administrative adjustment for off-site parking at a
non-adjoining lot, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that the off-site parking is
located and designed in a manner that will conveniently meet the parking needs
of the use that it serves.
      (3)   Prior to establishing the off-site parking, a covenant record
(“parking indenture”), approved by the city, must be filed with the County
Recorder guaranteeing that off-site parking will be maintained exclusively for
the use served for the duration of the use.
      (4)   The number of required parking spaces may be reduced by up to 25%
with an administrative adjustment for uses with unique operating
characteristics that result in a lower parking demand than otherwise would be
required.
      (5)   An applicant requesting reduced parking for a low demand use must
submit evidence to the satisfaction of the Director that the use requires fewer
parking spaces than otherwise required by §
155.324.030 (Number of On-Site Parking Spaces Required). Acceptable evidence
may include parking surveys, sales receipts and examples of comparable uses in
Eureka or similar communities.
      (6)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and the following additional findings:
         (a)   Evidence submitted by the applicant demonstrates that the use
requires fewer parking spaces required by §
155.324.030 (Number of On-Site Parking Spaces Required) for the use; and
         (b)   The use will provide a sufficient amount of on-site parking to
accommodate its expected parking demand.
   (F)   Low impact development.
      (1)   Required parking spaces may be reduced by up to 15%, not to exceed
four spaces, with an administrative adjustment in cases where the parking
requirement conflicts with the city’s storm water system (MS4) permit
requirements.
      (2)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that providing all of the on-
site parking while complying with the city’s storm water system (MS4) permit
requirements is not possible due to physical site constraints.
   (G)   Infill incentive permit reductions. Required parking spaces may also
be reduced through an infill incentive permit. See Table 412-2 in §
155.412.060 (Infill Incentive Permits).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.324.050 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Availability and use of spaces.
      (1)   Required parking spaces for multi-family and non-residential uses
must be permanently available and maintained to provide parking for the use
they are intended to serve.
      (2)   Required parking spaces for single-family homes may not be removed
unless specifically allowed by the Zoning Code. Immovable equipment, such as
water heaters and washer/dryers, may not be located within a required parking
space.
      (3)   Required parking spaces must be used exclusively for the temporary
parking of vehicles and not for the sale, lease, display, advertising or
storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise or
equipment, or for any other use not authorized by the Zoning Code, except as
allowed by division (A)(4) below.
      (4)   One vehicle or trailer owned by the lessee, owner or renter of a
property may be displayed within a required parking area for the purpose of
sale for a maximum of 30 days.
      (5)   Repair work or servicing of motor vehicles is not allowed in an
uncovered on-site parking facility, except for minor work commonly performed on
operating vehicles that are associated with a residential use.
   (B)   Parking location.
      (1)   On-site parking. Required parking must be located on the same lot
or site as the use which it serves, or on an adjoining lot, except as allowed
by §
155.324.040(C)(11) (Off-Site Parking).
      (2)   Vehicles contained on lot. Parked vehicles may not encroach onto or
over a sidewalk or public right-of-way.
   (C)   Electric vehicle charging.
      (1)   Number of charging stations. The number of required parking spaces
with an electric vehicle charging station is as required by the Building Code.
Two required parking spaces may be exchanged for one space served by an
electric vehicle charging station as allowed by
155.324.040(C)(5) (Electric Vehicle Charging Stations).
      (2)   Signage. Signage must designate spaces with required electric
vehicle charging stations as available only for electronic vehicle parking.
Signage is required only for electric vehicle changing stations required by
this division.
   (D)   Large vehicle parking. Recreational vehicles, boats and other large
vehicles may not be parked within a required front or exterior side setback in
a residential zoning district.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.324.060 PARKING DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Parking access.
      (1)   Alley access. The following alley access requirements apply to all
uses, except for detached single-family homes.
         (a)   For interior lots served by an alley, access to parking must be
from the alley unless the Director approves an administrative adjustment to
allow parking access from the street.
         (b)   To approve an administrative adjustment to access parking from a
street, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that access from a street is
necessary due to traffic, circulation or safety concerns.
         (c)   For corner lots served by an alley, parking may be accessed from
a side street without an administrative adjustment.
      (2)   Number of driveways.
         (a)   For residential uses in residential zoning districts, no more
than one driveway may serve lots less than 100 feet wide and no more than two
driveways may serve lots 100 feet wide or more. On corner lots, this rule
applies separately to each of the two street-facing sides.
         (b)    For non-residential uses in residential zoning districts and in
all other zoning districts, the maximum number of driveways will be the minimum
number necessary to serve the intended use. The Director, in consultation with
the Public Works Director, will determine the permitted number of driveways
based on the needs of the intended use and traffic, circulation and safety
concerns.
      (3)   Driveway drop curb width. Minimum and maximum allowed driveway drop
curb widths shall be as required by the Public Works Director.
      (4)   Separation of driveways. Separation between driveways will be the
minimum distance required by the Public Works Director.
      (5)   Shared driveways. Parking facilities on adjoining lots may share
access points and driveways provided reciprocal access easements are recorded
for all properties.
      (6)   Distance from street corner. New driveways must be located the
minimum distance from street corners required by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Parking placement on site.
      (1)   Applicability. The parking placement requirements in this division
apply only to new development and the parking areas that serve them.
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings. Surface parking spaces and carports for a
multi-family dwelling may not be located between a primary building and a front
or exterior side property line. See Figure 324-2.
Figure 324-2: Multi-Family Residential Parking Location
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8887.png]
      (3)    DT, DW, NC, HC, OR, SC Zoning Districts. Surface parking spaces
and carports may not be located between a building and a front or exterior side
lot line. Parking must be located to the rear or side of buildings. Corner
surface parking lots and carports are prohibited. See Figure 324-3.
Figure 324-3: Mixed Use District Parking
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8885.png]
      (4)    Modification to parking placement standard. The Director may
approve modification s to the parking placement standards in this section with
an administrati ve adjustment. To approve the administrative adjustment, the
Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that complying with the parking
placement standards is infeasible due to unique physical site conditions such
as parcel shape, topography, or traffic-related public safety risks.
   (C)   Forward entrance and exit. Parking areas of four or more spaces
adjacent to an arterial or collector roadway must provide sufficient
maneuvering area to allow vehicles to enter and access the roadway in a forward
direction.
   (D)   Controlled access. Parking areas must be designed to prevent vehicular
access to the public right of way at any point other than at designated
driveways.
   (E)   Parking space and lot dimensions.
      (1)   Parking areas with three or fewer spaces. For parking areas with
one to three parking spaces, spaces must have the following minimum dimensions:
         (a)   Uncovered parking space: eight feet six inches in width by 18
feet in length.
         (b)   Uncovered parking space parallel to an alley: eight feet six
inches in width by 20 feet in length.
         (c)   Covered parking space in a garage or carport: ten feet in width
by 18 feet in length.
         (d)   The width of a carport space may be reduced to eight feet six
inches if one side is open without a solid wall or physical barrier obstructing
a car door.
      (2)   Parking lots with four or more spaces. For parking lots with four
or more spaces, parking spaces, drive aisles, and other parking lot features
must comply with minimum dimensions shown in Figure 324-4.
      (3)   Compact spaces. Up to 50% of the required parking spaces in a
parking lot may be compact spaces.
Figure 324-4: Parking Dimensions
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7788.png]
   (F)   Surfacing.
      (1)   Standard materials.
         (a)     Except as allowed by division (F)(2) below, all parking areas
and drive aisles must be paved with an asphalt, concrete or comparable all-
weather surfacing material approved by the Public Works Director. Unpaved areas
may not be used for parking or maneuvering.
         (b)    Ribbon driveways (parallel strips of paved surface for tires
separated by an open, unpaved area) are allowed for single-family home
driveways.
         (c)   Permeable paving materials, such as porous concrete/asphalt,
open-jointed pavers and turf grids, are a permitted surface material, subject
to approval by the Public Works Director.
         (d)   Parking areas must be graded to dispose of all surface water
consistent with the city’s MS4 permit storm water requirements to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Director.
      (2)   Alternative materials.
         (a)   Parking areas and access ways may be surfaced with decomposed
granite or other similar all-weather compacted material when serving:
            1.   All uses in a residential zoning district;
            2.   All uses in the Hinge Industrial (HN) and Light Industrial
(LI) Zoning Districts; and
            3.    All uses in the Parks and Recreation (PR) and Public
Facilities (PF) Zoning Districts.
         (b)   Where alternative surface materials are allowed by division (F)
(2)(a) above, asphalt, concrete or comparable all-weather surfacing material
must be used for:
            1.   The first 20 feet of the access way from a public street
serving residential uses; and
            2.   The first 50 feet of the access way from a public street
serving uses in the Hinge Industrial (HN), Light Industrial (LI), Parks and
Recreation (PR) and Public Facilities (PF) Zoning Districts.
         (c)   Construction methods must be approved by the Public Works
Director.
      (3)   Wheel stops and curbs.
         (a)   Landscaped areas, walkways and walls must be protected by
either:
            1.   Parking space wheel stops; or
            2.   A curb at least six inches wide and six inches high designed
to allow storm water runoff to pass through.
         (b)   A paved sidewalk may be used as a wheel stop if the overhang
will not reduce the minimum required walkway width.
      (4)   Landscaped parking space. Up to two feet of the front of a parking
space as measured from a line parallel to the direction of the bumper of a
vehicle using the space may be landscaped with ground cover plants instead of
paving where wheel stops or curbs are provided. See Figure 324-5. Parking space
landscaping may be included in the required perimeter landscaping area required
by §
155.324.080(D) (Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping).
      Figure 324-5: Parking Space Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7790.png]
 
   (G)   Tandem parking spaces.
      (1)   When allowed. Tandem parking spaces are permitted for residential
uses and designated employee parking. See Figure 324-6.
      (2)   Residential uses. Parking spaces in a tandem configuration for
residential uses must be reserved for and assigned to a single dwelling unit.
      (3)   Non-residential uses. Tandem parking may be used only for employee
parking, in addition to parking spaces required by §
155.324.030 (Number of On-Site Parking Spaces Required).
      (4)   Configuration. Tandem parking spaces may not conflict with required
parking spaces or aisles providing access to other parking spaces located
within the parking area. For example, a tandem space may not project into the
minimum drive aisle width providing vehicle access to other parking spaces in a
parking lot.
      Figure 324-6: Tandem Parking Space
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7792.png]
 
   (H)   Parking lifts. Required parking may be provided using elevator-like
mechanical parking systems (“lifts”) provided the lifts are located within an
enclosed structure or otherwise screened from public view.
   (I)   Lighting. Parking area lighting must be provided in compliance with §
155.308.050 (Outdoor Lighting) and as follows.
      (1)   A parking area with six or more parking spaces must include outdoor
lighting that provides a minimum illumination of 1.0 foot-candles over the
entire parking area.
      (2)   Lighting must be pedestrian-scaled and may not exceed a maximum
height of 16 feet.
      (3)   Outdoor lighting as required above must be provided during
nighttime business hours.
      (4)   Parking structures must provide indoor lighting as required by the
California Building Code.
   (J)   Pedestrian access.
      (1)   Parking lots with more than 30 parking spaces must include a
pedestrian walkway outside of drive aisles. Only one walkway is required to
serve the entire parking lot; walkways for each parking row within the lot are
not required.
      (2)   The design of the pedestrian walkway must be clearly visible and
distinguished from parking and circulation areas through striping, contrasting
paving material or other similar method as approved by the Director. The
pedestrian walkway must be a minimum width of six feet.
   (K)   Screening. Parking lots of six spaces or more must comply with the
following screening standards. See also §
155.308.060 (Screening for Residential Zoning Districts):
      (1)   Location. Screening must be provided along the perimeter of parking
lots fronting a street and/or abutting a residential zoning district or ground
floor residential use.
      (2)   Height.
         (a)   Screening adjacent to streets must have a minimum height of
three feet.
         (b)   For parking lots within ten feet of a residential zoning
district or ground floor residential use, screening must have a minimum height
of six feet.
      (3)   Materials.
         (a)   Required screening adjacent to a street may consist of:
            1.   A low-profile wall constructed of brick, stone, stucco or
other durable solid material; or
            2.   An open fence combined with landscaping to form an opaque
screen. Open fences must be wrought iron or other high-quality decorative
material and at least 70% open to the passage of light and air. Chain link and
other wire fence materials are not allowed.
         (b)   Parking lots within ten feet of a residential zoning district or
ground floor residential use must be screened by a six-foot solid wall or
fence. Bushes, vines, and other vegetation may be incorporated into the design
of required fence or wall.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S.,
passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.324.070 BICYCLE PARKING.
   (A)   Applicability. All new multi-family and commercial construction must
provide bicycle parking as required by this section and the California Green
Building Standards Code.
   (B)   Nonconformities. Sites nonconforming to this subsection must be
brought into conformance when required by §
155.424.030 (Nonconforming Site Features).
   (C)   Types of bicycle parking.
      (1)   Short-term bicycle parking. Short-term bicycle parking provides
shoppers, customers, messengers and other visitors who generally park for two
hours or less a convenient and readily accessible place to park bicycles.
      (2)   Long-term parking. Long-term bicycle parking provides residents and
employees who live or work at a site a secure and weather-protected place to
park and store bicycles. Long-term parking may be located in garages or other
limited access areas for exclusive use by tenants, residents, and/or employees.
Long-term parking may not be located within an area of a dwelling unit
primarily intended to serve a different function (e.g., clothes closet or
bathroom).
   (D)   Number of spaces.
      (1)   Minimum requirement. Multi-family and commercial uses must provide
short-term and long-term bicycle parking as specified in Table 324-3.
Table 324-3: Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Land Use [1] Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
             Short-Term Spaces Long-Term Spaces
Table 324-3: Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
Land Use [1]                         Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
                                     Short-Term Spaces   Long-Term Spaces
Multi-family dwellings               1 per 6 units       1 per 3 units
Commercial uses
   Service Commercial (SC) Zoning 1 per 2,000 sq. ft.
District                                                 1 per 20 required
                                                         automobile spaces for
   All other zoning districts     1 per 1,000 sq. ft. uses 10,000 sq. ft. or
                                                         greater

NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] For mixed-use projects, required bicycle parking spaces is the combined
total for the residential and commercial components of the project.
 
      (2)   Calculations of less than one. When the calculation of required
bicycle parking results in less than one space, a minimum of one bicycle
parking space must be provided.
      (3)   Maximum spaces. In no case will more than 15 bicycle spaces be
required for any single use or development project.
      (4)   Reductions. The Director may allow reductions to the number of
required bicycle parking spaces with an administrative adjustment. To approve
the administrative adjustment, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and one or both of the following
additional findings:
         (a)   Adequate space is not available to provide the bicycle parking;
and/or
         (b)   Reduced bicycle parking is justified by reasonably anticipated
demand.
   (E)   Short-term bicycle parking standards.
      (1)   Location. Short-term bicycle parking must be located within 100
feet of the primary entrance of the structure or use it is intended to serve.
Parking may be located within required setbacks.
      (2)   Surfacing. Parking areas must be paved with asphalt, concrete or
other all-weather surface.
      (3)   Protection. When located in a parking area: for the protection of
bikes, automobiles and pedestrians, bicycle spaces must be protected by curbs,
fences, planter areas, bumpers or similar barriers.
   (F)   Parking space dimensions.
      (1)   Minimum dimensions of two feet by six feet must be provided for
each bicycle parking space. Spaces may be configured horizontally or
vertically. Minimum ceiling height is prescribed by the California Building
Code.
      (2)   An aisle of at least five feet must be provided behind all bicycle
parking to allow room for maneuvering.
      (3)   A minimum two feet of clearance must be provided between bicycle
parking spaces and adjacent walls, poles, landscaping, pedestrian paths and
other similar features.
      (4)   A minimum four feet of clearance must be provided between bicycle
parking spaces and adjacent automobile parking spaces and drive aisles.
   (G)   Rack design. Bicycle racks must be capable of locking both the wheels
and the frame of the bicycle, and of supporting bicycles in a secure position,
such as an “inverted-U” style rack. Alternative methods to secure bicycles are
allowed if they provide a level of security equivalent to conventional bicycle
racks.
   (H)   Long-term bicycle parking standards.
      (1)   Location. Long-term bicycle parking:
         (a)   Must be located on or within 250 feet of the use that it is
intended to serve;
         (b)   May be located within a garage;
         (c)   May not be located within required front setbacks; and
         (d)   Must be permanently available and maintained to provide bicycle
parking for the use they serve (e.g., immovable equipment, such as water
heaters and washer/dryers, may not be located within a required parking area).
      (2)   Security. Long-term bicycle parking spaces must be secured. Spaces
are considered secured if one or more of the following apply:
         (a)   The spaces are in a locked room or area enclosed by a fence with
a locked gate;
         (b)   The spaces are within view or within 100 feet of an attendant or
security guard; and
         (c)   The spaces are visible from employee work areas.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.324.080 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   New parking lots. All new parking lots with four or more spaces
must comply with this section as illustrated in Figure 324-7.
      Figure 324-7: Parking Lot Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7794.png]
 
      (2)   Non- conformities. An existing parking lot with four or more spaces
non-conforming to this section must be brought into conformance to the extent
possible when required by §
155.424.030 (Non-Conforming Site Features).
   (B)   Landscape materials. Except as otherwise specified in this section,
50% of required landscape area must be covered with groundcover, shrubs, turf
or other types of plants at maturity. The remaining area may be covered by
mulch, bark chip, crushed rock, pebbles, stone and similar non-plant materials.
   (C)   Interior parking lot landscaping.
      (1)   Amount of landscaping.
         (a)   All portions of a parking lot not occupied by a parking space,
drive aisle, pedestrian way or trash collection and storage area must be
landscaped.
         (b)   A minimum of one tree that reaches a mature height of at least
20 feet must be planted within the parking lot at a minimum ratio of one tree
for each 15 parking spaces.
         (c)   When the calculation of required trees results in less than one
tree (i.e., parking lots with fewer than 15 spaces), a minimum of one tree must
be provided.
      (2)   Location of landscaping.
         (a)   Where space permits, a landscaped island, at least four feet in
all interior dimensions, and containing at least one tree, must be provided at
each end of each interior row of automobile parking stalls and between every
eight consecutive automobile parking stalls. Horizontal curb surfaces may not
be included in the landscaped island area calculation. Trees in landscape
islands may count towards the required number of trees hereunder.
         (b)   Parking lots with more than 50 spaces must provide a
concentration of landscape elements at primary parking lot entrances, such as
trees, shrubs, flowering plants and enhanced paving.
         (c)   Landscaping must be located and designed so that pedestrians are
not required to cross landscaped areas to reach building entrances from parked
cars. This may be achieved through the orientation of the landscaped fingers
and islands, and by providing dedicated pedestrian access through landscaped
areas where needed.
   (D)   Perimeter parking lot landscaping.
      (1)   Adjacent to streets.
         (a)   Parking areas adjacent to a street must include a landscaped
planting strip between the street and parking area at least four feet wide with
at least 50% of the plant material attaining a minimum plant height at maturity
of 36 inches. See §
155.324.060(K) (Screening) for when a low-profile wall or fence is required
along the perimeter of a parking lot in addition to landscaping.
         (b)   Plantings and screening materials may include a combination of
plant materials, earth berms, solid decorative masonry walls, raised planters,
or other screening devices that are determined by the Director to meet the
intent of this requirement.
         (c)   Trees must be provided within the planting strip at a rate of at
least one tree for each 30 feet of street frontage with a minimum distance of
not more than 60 feet between each tree. Tree species must reach a mature
height of at least 20 feet. Planting strip tree requirements are in addition to
required interior parking lot trees.
         (d)   Landscaping must comply with intersection and driveway vision
clearance requirements in §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area).
      (2)   Stormwater runoff. When required, parking lot drainage plans will
be reviewed by the Public Works Director and must comply with all applicable
Low Impact Development (LID) standards.
   (E)   Alternative landscape designs.
      (1)   The Director may approve an administrative adjustment to allow
alternative landscape design that deviates from the requirement in this
section.
      (2)   To approve an administrative adjustment for an alternative
landscape design, the Director must make the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and find that adjustments to landscape
design requirements are warranted to provide relief for existing site
constraints or to achieve a superior aesthetic or environmental design.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.328 LANDSCAPING.
§ 155.328.010 PURPOSE.
   This section establishes landscaping standards to enhance the aesthetic
appearance of developed areas in Eureka and to promote the efficient use of
water resources.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.328.020 NONCONFORMITIES.
   Properties nonconforming to the standards in §
155.328.040 (Required Landscape Areas) and §
155.328.050 (General Landscape Requirements) must be brought into conformance
when required by §
155.424.030 (Nonconforming Site Features).
(Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.328.030 LANDSCAPE PLANS.
   (A)   Landscape plan required.
      (1)   An applicant must submit a landscape plan if new or modified
landscaping is required by this chapter.
      (2)   Required landscape plans must be submitted as part of the design
review application, if any, and subsequent building permit applications.
   (B)   Required contents. Landscape plans must include the following features
and information:
      (1)   Site boundaries.
      (2)   Existing conditions on the property, including contours and
existing structures.
      (3)   New structures and expansions proposed as part of the project.
      (4)   Existing landscaping, trees, and vegetation to be retained,
specifying plant location, species, and size. Details of existing trees must
also include approximate tree diameter measured 48 inches above existing grade
and approximate outer limit of tree canopy.
      (5)   New landscaping proposed as part of the development project,
specifying plant location, species, number, and size.
      (6)   Irrigation plan specifying the location, type, and size of all
components of the irrigation system (if proposed).
      (7)   Proposed grading if any.
      (8)   A landscape maintenance plan describing how the landscaping will be
maintained in a healthy and thriving condition, including provisions to replace
plant material as needed to maintain compliance with the approved landscape
plan.
      (9)   Additional information as determined by the Department to
demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Review and approval.
      (1)   For projects that do not require design review, the Department will
review all landscape plans to verify compliance with this section as part of
the zoning clearance approval.
      (2)   For projects that require design review, the review authority
responsible for approving design review must also approve the landscape plan.
   (D)   Changes to approved landscape plans.
      (1)   Only the review authority that approved the landscape plan may
allow substantial modifications to an approved landscape plan.
      (2)   The Director may approve minor changes to a landscape plan
previously approved by the City Council, Planning Commission, or Design Review
Committee. Minor changes are defined as modifications to a landscape plan that
do not alter the general design character of the landscaped area or alter a
feature of the landscaped area specifically required by the review authority.
The Director may also approve changes to a landscape plan required to comply
with Building Code or Fire Code requirements.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.328.040 REQUIRED LANDSCAPE AREAS.
   (A)   Applicability. The requirements of this subsection do not apply to
single-family homes in any zoning district.
   (B)   Parking lots. See §
155.324.080 (Parking Lot Landscaping) for required landscaping in parking lots.
   (C)   Residential zoning districts.
      (1)   The following areas, excluding areas required for access to the
property, must be landscaped and maintained:
         (a)   All required front and street side setback areas;
         (b)   All areas between a building and a front or exterior side lot
line; and
         (c)   Any area between the front or exterior side lot lines and the
sidewalk or edge of street curb. See
Figure 328-1.
      (2)   Landscaping is not required in setback or yard areas located behind
a four-foot or higher solid fence or wall or in areas not visible from the
sidewalk or street.
      (3)   Landscaping may consist of any combination of living plants, such
as trees, shrubs and grass or related natural features, such as rock, stone, or
mulch. Decorative hardscape featuring pervious materials, such as pervious
paver stones, gravel, and decomposed granite, is permitted within required
landscaping areas.
      Figure 328-1: Required Landscape Area in Residential Zoning Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7808.png]
 
   (D )   Mixed-use zoning districts. In mixed-use zoning districts, all areas
between a building and a front or exterior side lot line and all areas between
the front or exterior side lot lines and the sidewalk or edge of street curb
must be landscaped, excluding areas required for access to the property. See
Figure 328-2.
      Figure 328-2: Required Landscape Area In Mixed Use Districts
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8893.png]
   (E)    Other zoning districts. Parking lots in zoning districts other than
residential and mixed-use zoning districts must comply with the landscaping
requirements in §
155.324.080 (Parking Lot Landscaping). No additional landscaping is required.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord.
962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.328.050 GENERAL LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following requirements apply to all landscaping within the city.
      (1)   Vision clearance area. Landscaping must comply with the vision
clearance area requirements in §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area).
      (2)   Public safety. Plant species must be selected and located so that
at maturity they do not interfere with pedestrian, bicycle, or vehicular
circulation and do not conflict with utilities and overhead lights.
      (3)   Invasive plants. Planting species with a "High" rating in the
California Invasive Plant Council's Cal-IPC inventory of invasive plants and
plant species identified as invasive weeds by the Humboldt County Weed
Management Area are prohibited.
   (B)   The following requirements apply to landscaping installed as part of a
city-approved landscaping plan.
      (1)   Parking lots. See §
155.324.080 (Parking Lot Landscaping) for landscaping requirements that apply
to new parking lots with four or more spaces.
      (2)   Native plants. At least 75%, by count, of all new in-ground shrubs,
groundcover, and trees will involve only the use of species native to Eureka as
listed by the California Native Plant Society, with the remainder being
noncompeting exotic species.
      (3)   Trees.
         (a)   New trees must be a minimum 15-gallon size unless the reviewing
authority determines that a smaller size is sufficient for the site.
         (b)   Trees in landscape planters less than ten feet in width or
located closer than five feet from a public sidewalk, street, or permanent
structure on an adjacent property must be planted with root barriers or root
barrier panels to prevent damage to adjacent structures or pavement.
      (4)   Groundcover and shrubs.
         (a)   A minimum of 50% of required landscape area must be covered with
groundcover, shrubs, turf, or other types of plants at maturity.
         (b)   Groundcover must be provided throughout the landscaped area and
must be spaced to achieve full coverage of the groundcover area within one
year.
         (c)   A maximum of 50% of the required landscape area may consist of
mulch, bark chip, crushed rock, pebbles, stone, or similar non-plant materials.
         (d)   Landscaped areas must be top dressed with bark, chip, mulch, or
other similar material to cover exposed bare soil.
      (5)   Timing of installation. Required landscaping must be installed
prior to receiving a temporary or final certificate of occupancy.
      (6)   The Director may defer the installation of landscaping for a
maximum of 180 days after project occupancy/completion in cases of delays
caused by inclement weather, unavailability of plant materials, construction
scheduling, or other similar issues. The Director may require the applicant to
provide adequate security to guarantee the landscaping installation in
accordance with §
155.420.070 (Performance Guarantees).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 962-C.S.,
passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.328.060 WATER EFFICIENCY IN LANDSCAPING ORDINANCE (WELO).
   (A)   General. In addition to the requirements of this section, all
applicable development in Eureka must also comply with the California Model
Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (WELO) as required by California Water
Conservation in Landscaping Act (Cal. Government Code §§ 65591 et seq.).
   (B)   When required. The following landscape projects must comply with the
WELO requirements:
      (1)   New construction projects requiring a building permit that have an
aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet.
      (2)   Rehabilitated landscape projects requiring a building permit that
have an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.
   (C)   Conflicts. If conflicts occur between the Cal. Government Code or WELO
and this section, the more restrictive will control.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.328.070 MAINTENANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The following maintenance requirements and enforcement procedures apply to
landscaping installed as part of a city-approved landscaping plan:
   (A)   Maintenance required.
      (1)   Dead and dying plants. All landscaping must be maintained free of
physical damage or injury from lack of water, excess chemical fertilizer or
other toxic chemical, blight, or disease. Dead or dying plants must be removed
and replaced with landscaping of similar size and maturity.
      (2)   Weed removal. Landscaping must be kept free from weeds.
      (3)   Irrigation systems. Irrigation systems must be maintained in a
fully functional manner as approved by the city and required by this section.
Watering schedules should be adjusted periodically to reflect seasonal
variations.
   (B)   Violations. Failure to maintain landscape areas in compliance with
this section will be deemed a nuisance subject to the enforcement procedures in
§
155.428 (Enforcement and Penalties).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.332 RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION ALTERNATIVES.
§ 155.332.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.332 establishes requirements for residential small lot, conservation, and
urban lot split subdivisions to accommodate a diversity of infill housing
types, allow for development on constrained lots and preserve open space and
other natural resources.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22)
§ 155.332.020 SMALL LOT SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes standards for small lot subdivisions
in the multi-family zoning districts. The intent of these standards is to:
      (1)   Facilitate the development of infill housing on vacant and
underutilized properties;
      (2)   Increase opportunities for fee-simple home ownership in higher
density areas of Eureka;
      (3)   Expand the types of housing available for purchase in Eureka,
including lower-cost housing for first-time homebuyers and seniors looking to
downsize; and
      (4)   Ensure that development on small lot subdivisions is well designed
and minimizes impacts on neighboring properties.
   (B)   Where allowed. Small lot subdivisions are allowed only in the R2 and
R3 Zoning Districts.
   (C)   Optional/not mandatory. Small lot subdivisions are an available
option, not a mandatory requirement. Lots in the R2 and R3 Zoning Districts may
also be subdivided using generally applicable subdivision requirements.
Conventional subdivisions, however, are not eligible for relaxed development
standards in §
155.332.020(E) (Development Standards).
   (D)   Approvals required. Small lot subdivisions require city approval of a
tentative and final or parcel map as required by the California Subdivision Map
Act and Municipal Code
Ch. 154 (Subdivision Regulations). Proposed small lot subdivisions shall be
clearly identified as such on the tentative map.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Lot area. 
         (a)   The minimum lot area in a small lot subdivision is 2,000 square
feet.
         (b)   The maximum lot area in a small lot subdivision is 4,999 square
feet except an existing primary residence, including accessory structures
located on the same resultant lot as the primary residence, is not limited to
the 4,999 square foot maximum.
      (2)   Minimum setbacks.
         (a)   There are no minimum setbacks from lot lines within a small lot
subdivision that do not abut a lot outside of the small lot subdivision. See
Figure 332-1.
         (b)   Setbacks from lot lines that abut a property outside of the
small lot subdivision are as required by the applicable zoning district.
            Figure 332-1: Small Lot Subdivision Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7796.png]
 
      (3)   Lot access. Newly created lots must comply with street frontage and
access standards in §
155.308.010(C) (Street Frontage and Access). For lots without direct vehicle
access from a street or alley, utility access easements must be granted to the
city. See Figure 332-2.
      (4)   Parking.
         (a)   On-site parking is required consistent with §
155.324 (Parking); except that, the Director may waive the on-site parking
requirement with an Administrative Adjustment for lots without street or alley
frontage where it is physically impossible for a vehicle to access a lot.
         (b)   To approve the administrative adjustment, the Director must make
the findings in §
155.412.030(F) (Findings for Approval) and the following additional findings:
            1.   It is physically impossible to provide vehicular access to the
lot due to the location of existing structures; or
            2.   Proposed development on the lot cannot be reasonably
reconfigured in any way that would allow for vehicular access to the lot.
      Figure 332-2: Lot Access
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7798.png]
 
      (5)   Other standards. Except for minimum setbacks, small lot
subdivisions are subject to all development standards (e.g., height, FAR, site
coverage) in the applicable zoning district.
   (F)   Subdivision configurations.
      (1)   Minimum requirements. Small lot subdivisions must comply with §
155.308.010 (Lot Standards).
      (2)   Example configurations. Figures
332-3 and
332-4 illustrate example lot configuration and building placement permitted in
small lot subdivisions. Other configurations are permitted, provided they
comply with the requirements of this section.
      Figure 332-3: Small Lot Subdivision Example Configurations - Interior
Lots
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7800.png]
 
      Figure 332-4: Small Lot Subdivision Example Configurations - Corner Lots
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7802.png]
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22)
§ 155.332.030 URBAN LOT SPLIT SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This subsection allows for subdivision of RE and R1 zoned
lots and development of housing pursuant to Cal. Government Code §§ 65852.21
and 66411.7.
   (B)   Where allowed. Urban lot split subdivisions are permitted on any
parcel zoned RE (Residential Estate) or R1 (Residential Low) provided:
      (1)   The original lot area is at least 2,400 square feet;
      (2)   The lot is not listed on the State or Local Register of Historic
Places or located within a designated historic district;
      (3)   The parcel satisfies the requirements of Cal. Government Code §
65913.4(a)(6), subparagraphs (B) to (K), which prohibit development on sites
subject to specified environmental resources and hazards;
      (4)   Neither the owner of the parcel being subdivided nor any person
acting in concert with the owner has previously subdivided an adjacent parcel
using an urban lot split subdivision as provided under Cal. Government Code §
66411.7;
      (5)   The parcel has not been established through a prior urban lot split
subdivision;
      (6)   No parcel owner has exercised the owner's rights under Cal.
Government Code §§ 7060 et seq. (the Ellis Act) to withdraw accommodations from
rent or lease within 15 years before the date of application for the urban lot
split; and
      (7)   The urban lot split would not require demolition or alteration of
housing that:
         (a)   Is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law that
restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of moderate, low,
or very low income; and/or
         (b)   Has been occupied by a tenant in the last three years.
   (C)   Optional/not mandatory. Urban lot split subdivisions are an available
option, not a mandatory requirement. Lots in the RE and R1 Zoning Districts may
also be subdivided using generally applicable subdivision requirements.
Conventional subdivisions, however, are not eligible for relaxed development
standards in division (E) below (Development Standards).
   (D)   Approval process.
      (1)   Ministerial approval. Urban lot split subdivisions require
ministerial city approval of a parcel map as required by the California
Subdivision Map Act and Municipal Code
Chapter 154 (Subdivision Regulations).
      (2)   Nonconforming zoning conditions. The Director may not require the
correction of nonconforming zoning conditions as a condition of parcel map
approval.
      (3)   Time limit to act. Urban lot splits shall be approved or denied
within 60 days of submission of a complete application.
      (4)   Identification on parcel map. Proposed urban lot split subdivisions
must be clearly identified as such on the parcel map.
   (E)   Development standards.
      (1)   Number of new parcels. The urban lot split creates no more than two
resulting parcels.
      (2)   Resulting minimum lot area.
         (a)   The minimum lot area for a lot resulting from an urban lot split
subdivision is 1,200 square feet; and
         (b)   The resulting minimum lot area must be at least 40% of the
original lot area. For example, if the original lot is 5,000 square feet, the
smallest resulting lot must be at least 2,000 square feet, or 40% of the
original lot area. If the original lot is 3,000 square feet, then the smallest
resulting lot must be at least 1,200 square feet.
      (3)   Minimum setbacks and other standards. No setback is required for an
existing structure or a structure in the same location and to the same
dimensions as an existing structure. In all other circumstances see
Table 204-2.1 for minimum setback and other development standards for urban lot
split subdivisions.
      (4)   Lot access. Newly created lots must comply with street frontage and
access standards in §
155.308.010(C) (Street Frontage and Access). For lots without direct vehicle
access from a street or alley, utility access easements must be granted to the
city. See
Figure 332-2.
      (5)   Parking. On-site parking is not required. If on-site parking is
provided, the parking must be consistent with §
155.324 (Parking), and garages and carports must be setback as provided in
Table 204-2.1.
      (6)   Maximum number of dwelling units. A maximum of one single-family
home, one junior accessory dwelling unit and either one additional single-
family home or one accessory dwelling unit are allowed on a lot that is
subdivided using the authority contained in the Cal. Government Code.
      (7)   Guaranteed allowance. A standard of this chapter must be waived if
the applicant demonstrates it would have the effect of physically precluding
the construction of two units on either of the resulting parcels, each with up
to 800 square feet of floor area.
   (F)   Other requirements.
      (1)   Short-term rental. Rental of any unit created pursuant to an urban
lot split subdivision must be for a term longer than 30 days.
      (2)   Residential use. The primary use of the resulting lots must be
residential. The resulting lots may not be utilized for any non-residential
primary use otherwise permitted in the RE or R1 zoning districts as identified
in
Table 204-1.
      (3)   Owner occupancy. An applicant for an urban lot split subdivision
shall sign an affidavit stating the applicant intends to occupy one of the
housing units as their principal residence for a minimum of three years from
the date of the approval of the urban lot split subdivision. Owner-occupancy is
not required if the owner is a community land trust or qualified nonprofit
corporation under Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 214.15 or 402.1.
(Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 965-C.S., passed 8-17-25)
§ 155.332.040 CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section allows for residential conservation subdivisions
to preserve open space and accommodate creative site plans on lots where
development is constrained by gulches, trees, steep slopes and other physical
features. See Figure 332-5 for an example conservation subdivision in the RE
Zoning District.
      Figure 332-5: Example Conservation Subdivision
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7804.png]
 
   (B)   Eligibility. Conservation subdivisions are permitted in any
residential zoning district on lots 10,000 square feet or more.
   (C)    Approvals required. Conservation subdivisions require city approval
of a tentative and final or parcel map as required by the California
Subdivision Map Act and Municipal Code
Ch. 154 (Subdivision Regulations). Proposed conservation subdivisions must be
clearly identified as such on the tentative map.
   (D)   Development standards.
      (1)   Lot size.
         (a)   There is no minimum lot size within a conservation subdivision,
provided the overall density of the subdivision does not exceed the maximum
density of the applicable zoning district.
         (b)   Project density is calculated using the number of homes, not the
number of lots, and includes all open space areas. See
Figure 332-5.
      (2)   Setbacks.
         (a)   There are no minimum setbacks from lot lines within a
conservation subdivision that do not abut a property outside of the
conservation subdivision. See
Figure 332-5.
         (b)   The applicable zoning district will govern setbacks from lot
lines that abut a property outside of the conservation subdivision.
      (3)   Height. Buildings within a conservation subdivision may not exceed
a maximum height of 35 feet.
      (4)   Site coverage. There is no maximum site coverage for individual
lots within a conservation subdivision.
      (5)   Floor area ratio. The maximum floor area ratio in a conservation
subdivision is as required by Table 204-2 in §
155.204 (Residential Zoning Districts).
   (E)   Allowed land uses. The applicable zoning district will govern allowed
land uses in a conservation subdivision.
   (F)   Conservation area. Dedicated conservation areas within a conservation
subdivision must be separated from residential parcels and comply with the
following standards:   
      (1)   Open space minimums. A conservation subdivision project must
designate a minimum of 50% of the total project site as permanent open space.
See
Figure 332-5 .
      (2)   Conservation easement required. Designated open space must be
guaranteed in perpetuity using one or more of the following control mechanisms:
         (a)   Dedication of a conservation easement to a public agency or a
public interest land trust;
         (b)   Dedication of land in fee-title to a public agency; or
         (c)   Deed restrictions recorded with the County Recorder.
      (3)   Use of conservation area. Conservation areas will remain as
undeveloped open space in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Development is prohibited within a conservation area, except for
development necessary for natural resource protection and restoration as
determined by the Director;
         (b)   Animal grazing and crop production is allowed in a conservation
area consistent with Municipal Code
Ch. 91 (Animals). Accessory structures serving an agricultural use, such as
pole barns, are allowed;
         (c)   Trees may not be removed within a conservation area, except as
allowed by §
155.304.140 (Tree Removal); and
         (d)   A subdivider or property owner is not required to provide public
access to a conservation area.
      (4)   Contiguity. Fragmentation of dedicated open space areas must be
avoided. Dedicated open space areas must be consolidated or linked to
facilitate wildlife movement, maintain functioning biological communities and
accommodate agricultural activity where appropriate. Open space connections to
adjoining land beyond the project site should be anticipated and identified
where possible.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.336 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES.
§ 155.336.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.336 establishes standards for temporary uses and structures to allow for
appropriate short-term events and activities while limiting impacts on
neighboring properties and the general public.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.336.020 APPLICABILITY AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all temporary uses and
structures in Eureka.
   (B)   Permit requirements. Specific types of temporary uses and structures
are allowed either:
      (1)   By-right without Department approval (see §
155.336.040); or
      (2)   With a zoning clearance (see §
155.336.050).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.336.030 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards for all temporary uses and structures. All temporary uses
and structures must comply with the following standards.
      (1)   Encroachment permit. Temporary uses and structures may not be
located in the public right-of-way without an encroachment permit.
      (2)   Business license required. Any person engaging in commercial
activity or conducting a business in any manner as part of a temporary use must
obtain a City of Eureka business license.
      (3)   Nuisance. A temporary use or structure may not constitute a public
nuisance as defined in Municipal Code §
150.163 (Public Nuisance Specified).
      (4)   Obstructions. A temporary use or structure may not obstruct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or block a driveway or alleyway.
      (5)   Trash and litter. Temporary uses must provide on-site trash
receptacles as needed to keep the site free of trash and debris.
      (6)   Site condition after use. Upon completion and removal of a
temporary use, the site must be cleaned of debris and litter and returned to
its original state. Temporary uses and structures may not result in permanent
alterations to the site.
      (7)   Other applicable requirements. Temporary uses and structures must
comply with all other applicable standards in the Zoning Code and Municipal
Code, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Lighting standards in §
155.308.050 (Outdoor Lighting);
         (b)   Sign standards §
155.340.090 (Temporary Signs); and
         (c)   Noise limitations in Municipal Code §§
94.01 et seq. (Noise).
   (B)   Applicant agreement. An applicant requesting approval of a temporary
use or structure requiring a zoning clearance must agree in writing to comply
with all applicable standards as provided in this section.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.336.040 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES ALLOWED BY-RIGHT.
   The following temporary uses and structures are allowed without a zoning
clearance or any other form of Department approval:
   (A)   On-site construction yards and equipment. A construction yard on the
same site as an approved construction project, including a trailer or modular
unit used for security personnel, storage, office or other similar temporary
use, dumpsters and other construction equipment. Construction yards, trailers
and equipment must be removed within ten days of completion of the construction
project, or the expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first;
   (B)   Garage sales. Garage sales for individual residences limited to three,
one- to two-day events per calendar year. One block or neighborhood sale per
calendar year is allowed in addition to individual sales;
   (C)   Portable moving and storage containers. Moving and storage containers
delivered to a home, loaded by residents and delivered to another location, for
a maximum of two weeks on private property. Containers placed in a street must
comply with the City of Eureka Traffic Code
Ch. 72 (Stopping, Standing and Parking);
   (D)   Dumpsters. Dumpsters used to collect and store debris from building
demolition and property clean-up activities are allowed on private property for
the duration of the building permit or 30 days;
   (E)   Outdoor fundraising events. Outdoor fundraising events on commercial
sites when sponsored by a non-profit organization directly engaged in civic or
charitable efforts. Outdoor fundraising events are limited to two days each
month for each sponsoring organization;
   (F)   Catering. Mobile food vendors operating as caterers to private events
when food or beverages are not sold to the general public; and
   (G)   Recreational vehicles (RVs).
      (1)   A recreational vehicle (RV), motor home, camper or other similar
vehicle as follows:
         (a)    Used for living and sleeping purposes on a site with an active
building permit for a construction project associated with an existing, or
proposed single-family home. Vehicles may be occupied only by the property
owner and the property owner’s family. Vehicles must be removed within ten days
of completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the building
permit, whichever occurs first.
         (b)   Used for temporary living and sleeping purposes when associated
with a single-family home (e.g., visiting relatives) for a maximum of 14
consecutive days and a maximum of 45 days per calendar year.
         (c)   Used for emergency housing during a declared shelter crisis on
city-owned or -leased properties specifically designated as safe parking
facilities under the city's shelter crisis declaration.
      (2)   A recreational vehicle (RV), motor home, camper or other similar
vehicle located outside of a legally established recreational vehicle park may
not be used for living or sleeping purposes, except as allowed in division (G)
(1) above.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22)
§ 155.336.050 TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES ALLOWED WITH A ZONING CLEARANCE.
   The following temporary uses and structures require a zoning clearance.
   (A)   Seasonal sales. Seasonal sales (e.g., Christmas trees, pumpkins) for a
maximum of 60 days, no more than four times per year on a single property.
   (B)   Outdoor sales events. Outdoor sales events conducted by a permanent
on-site use for a maximum of 30 days in any 180-day period.
   (C)   Traveling sellers. Temporary outdoor retail sales not associated with
a permanent on-site use conducted in a fixed location as follows.
      (1)   A traveling seller may conduct sales for a maximum of 14 days and
no more than four times per year on a single property. After 14 days, a
traveling seller must move to a new location 1,000 feet or more from the
previous location.
      (2)   Traveling sellers may locate only on commercial property, and only
with approval of the property owner. Sales activities are not permitted in the
public right-of-way.
      (3)   Retail sales from a vehicle are not subject to these limitations.
See §
155.304.090 (Mobile Vendors).
   (D)   Metal shipping containers. Metal shipping containers (e.g., CONEX
boxes) in residential and mixed-use zoning districts, not to exceed 30 days.
   (E)   Expansion or replacement facilities. Temporary work space for
employees during construction or remodeling of a permanent building. Temporary
space may be provided in trailers or transportable buildings that are pre-
constructed and arrive at the site ready for occupancy and are readily removed
and installed at other sites. Structures must be removed within ten days of
completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the building
permit, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   Tiny houses on wheels. Tiny houses on wheels when permitted as an
accessory dwelling unit in a residential zone district pursuant to §
155.304.130 (Tiny Houses on Wheels).
   (G)   Other temporary uses. Other temporary uses compatible with the
applicable zoning district and surrounding land uses as determined by the
Director.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22)
§ 155.340 SIGNS.
§ 155.340.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.340 establishes standards relating to the permitted type, size, dimensions,
placement, number and design of signs. The intent of these standards is to:
   (A)   Support economically viable businesses serving city residents, workers
and visitors;
   (B)   Allow for signage that identifies businesses and other properties in a
fair and equitable manner;
   (C)   Allow persons to exercise their free speech rights protected under the
U.S. and California Constitutions;
   (D)   Promote the use of signs that are aesthetically pleasing, of
appropriate scale, and integrated with surrounding buildings and landscape, in
order to meet the community’s expressed desire for quality development;
   (E)   Ensure that signs are compatible with their surroundings;
   (F)   Promote the free flow of traffic and protect pedestrians and motorists
from injury and property damage caused by, or which may be fully or partially
attributable to cluttered, distracting or illegible signage;
   (G)   Emphasize Eureka’s small-town historical character by promoting
pedestrian-oriented and appropriately-scaled signage in all parts of town other
than Broadway;
   (H)   Acknowledge Broadway’s role as a primarily vehicular corridor through
Eureka and allow for larger-scale and more vehicle-oriented signs on Broadway
while still emphasizing aesthetic quality and scales appropriate for Eureka;
and
   (I)   Allow for a simple and streamlined sign permitting process.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.340.020 APPLICABILITY.
   Unless specifically exempted, all signs in Eureka must comply with the
requirements of this section, including signs for which a city permit or other
approval is not required.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.340.030 SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT PERMITS.
   (A)   Types of signs. The following signs are exempt from the permit
requirements of this section and are not counted towards the allowable sign
area or number of signs:
      (1)   Address and nameplate signs. Street, apartment, unit, suite
numbers, and nameplates, not greater than four inches in height for residential
uses, and not greater than six inches in height for commercial uses.
      (2)   Commemorative plaques. One commemorative plaque identifying a
building name, date of construction, or similar information that is cut into,
carved, or made of stone, concrete, metal, or other similar permanent material.
Commemorative plaques may not be illuminated.
      (3)   Decorations. Holiday and cultural observance decorations on private
property which do not include any commercial advertising.
      (4)   Sandwich board signs on private property. Non-digital sandwich
board signs on private property, not to exceed a vertical or horizontal
dimension of four feet. Sandwich board signs within the public right-of-way
must comply with the requirement of §
155.340.070(F) (Sandwich Board Signs).
      (5)   Directional signs. On-site directional signs located entirely on
the property to which they pertain, identifying direction to parking,
restrooms, and similar public facilities, each not exceeding five feet in
height and five square feet in area for non-residential uses, and two square
feet for residential uses.
      (6)   Directory signs. One directory sign per street frontage as follows:
         (a)   Maximum area: one square foot per tenant.
         (b)   Maximum height: six feet if freestanding.
         (c)   Internal illumination prohibited.
      (7)   Home occupation. One single, non-illuminated, wall-mounted outdoor
sign of not more than two square feet in area.
      (8)   Vacation rental. Each lot containing a vacation rental use may
display one single, non-illuminated, wall-mounted outdoor sign of not more than
two square feet.
      (9)   Flags. Flags bearing noncommercial messages or graphic symbols.
      (10)   Government signs. Signs installed or required by a governmental
agency, including signs advertising community activities and local nonprofit,
civic, or fraternal organizations.
      (11)   Informational signs. Signs with information for the safety and
convenience of the public such as address, hours and days of operation, whether
a business is open or closed, and no smoking notices, up to three square feet
per sign and ten square feet in total. Excludes internally illuminated window
signs.
      (12)   Internal signs. Signs within a building, or on the premises of a
building, that are not visible from the public right-of-way and are intended
for interior viewing only.
      (13)   Window signs. Window signs consistent with Table 340-2 (Window
Signs, Non-Illuminated) and Table 340-3 (Window Signs, Internally Illuminated).
Signs may not move or appear to move, change intensity, color, or pattern at
any time, and may not create a public nuisance or hazard due to glare or halo
effect.
      (14)   Equipment signage. Signs manufactured as a standard, integral part
of a mass-produced product accessory to a commercial or public or semipublic
use, including but not limited to telephone booths, restrooms, vending
machines, automated teller machines, gasoline pumps, drive-thru restaurant menu
boards, and other signs of an instructive nature.
      (15)   No trespassing signs. "No trespassing" signs, each not more than
one square foot in size, placed at each corner and each entrance to a property,
and at intervals of not less than 100 feet, or in compliance with the
requirements of state or federal law.
      (16)   Non-commercial bulletin boards. One bulletin board on a parcel
occupied by a non-commercial place of public assembly, with a maximum area of
12 square feet.
      (17)   Real estate listings. Real estate listings posted in the window of
a real estate office, with a maximum area of 25% of the total window area.
      (18)   Restaurant menu signs. Restaurant menu signs attached to a
building.
      (19)   Fuel price signs. Fuel price signs as required by state law. (See
Cal. Business and Professions Code § 13530). Fuel price signs may include
digital displays; however, the digital display may change no more than once a
day. Digital displays must comply with brightness limitations in Table 340-9
(Digital Signs).
      (20)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs consistent with §
155.340.090 (Temporary Signs).
   (B)   Routine maintenance. The painting, cleaning, repair and normal
maintenance of a legally-established sign in conformance with § 155.340.080(E)
(Maintenance) is allowed by-right, without a zoning clearance or other form of
Department approval.
   (C)   Murals and decorations. Murals, decorations and design elements on the
exterior of a building that do not advertise a product, business or service are
not considered signs and are not subject to the requirements of this section.
Advertisement includes text displaying the name of a business, text displaying
the name of a product, text publicizing a service, business-specific logos and
product-specific logos. Murals do not require a permit.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.340.040 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   (A)   Prohibited sign types. The following types of signs are prohibited:
      (1)   Banner signs, feather banners, yard signs, and inflatable balloon
signs, except when used as a temporary sign consistent with §
155.340.090 (Temporary Signs);
      (2)   Beacon signs and searchlights;
      (3)   Human directional and advertising signs;
      (4)   New off-premise signs established after June 20, 2019;
      (5)   Ticker signs; and
      (6)   Digital signs, except when allowed consistent with Table 340-9 in §
155.340.070 (Sign Standards).
   (B)   Prohibited location or placement. Signs with the following location
and/or placement characteristics are prohibited:
      (1)   Signs attached to or placed adjacent to any utility pole, parking
meter, traffic signpost, traffic signal or any other traffic-control device,
except when installed by a governmental agency;
      (2)   Signs attached to trees;
      (3)   Signs erected or maintained with horizontal or vertical clearance
from overhead utilities less than required by a governmental agency;
      (4)   Signs installed without permission of the property owner or the
owner’s agent;
      (5)   Signs mounted or attached to a vehicle parked for the purpose of
calling attention to or advertising a business establishment. This prohibition
does not limit the use of business logos, identification or advertising on
vehicles actively used for business purposes and/or personal transportation;
      (6)   Signs in the public right-of-way or projecting over a public street
which have not received an encroachment permit;
      (7)   Signs that obstruct or interfere with a traffic- control sign or
signal;
      (8)   Signs that obstruct or interfere with the free use of a fire
escape, exit, stairway, door, ventilator or window in violation of the
California Building or Fire Code; and
      (9)   Signs that conflict with §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area) or signs that otherwise interfere with
visibility at an intersection, public right-of-way, driveway or other point of
ingress/egress. The city may require sign setbacks greater than specified in
this section to maintain adequate visibility for motorists and pedestrians.
   (C)   Prohibited design features. Signs with the following design features
and/or physical characteristics are prohibited:
      (1)   Signs containing mirrors and signs that constitute a traffic hazard
due to highly reflective or fluorescent materials;
      (2)   Signs that simulate in size, color, lettering or design a traffic
control sign or signal;
      (3)   Signs that blink, except chase lighting (see §
155.340.080(H));
      (4)   Signs that flash, strobe or change intensity;
      (5)   Signs emitting audible sounds, odor, fumes, smoke, flames or other
visible matter; and
      (6)   Signs that feature a flag, pennant, whirligig or any devices that
wave, flutter, rotate or display other movement under the influence of wind.
   (D)   Prohibited sign content.
      (1)   The following sign content is prohibited:
         (a)   Obscene or indecent text or graphics;
         (b)   Text or graphics that advertise unlawful activity under state or
local laws;
         (c)   Text or graphics that constitute defamation, incitement to
imminent lawless action or true threats; and
         (d)   Text or graphics that present a clear and present danger due to
their potential confusion with signs that provide public safety information
(for example, signs that use the words “Caution,” “Danger” or comparable words,
phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to imply a safety hazard
that does not exist).
      (2)   The content prohibited by division (D)(1) above is either not
protected by the United States or California Constitutions or is offered
limited protection that is outweighed by the substantial governmental interests
in protecting the public safety and welfare. It is the intent of the City
Council that each subparagraph of division (D)(1) above be individually
severable in the event that a court of competent jurisdiction were to hold one
or more of them to be inconsistent with the United States or California
Constitutions.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.340.050 RULES OF MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   Calculating sign area.
      (1)   Sign area for digitally-printed signs is measured as the area
within a single rectangle that completely enclose the sign copy and graphics,
as well as any frame, material or color that is an integral part of the display
or used to differentiate the sign’s contents from the background against which
they are placed. See
Figure 340-1.
      (2)   For all signs other than digitally-printed signs, sign area is
measured as the area within up to eight rectangles that completely enclose the
sign copy and graphics. See
Figure 340-2.
Figure 340-1: Sign Area Measurement - Digitally Printed Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7810.png]
 
Figure 340-2: Sign Area Measurement - All Other Sign Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7812.png]
 
      (3)    Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the
display itself is not calculated as sign area.
      (4)   For projecting and other double-faced (back-to-back) signs with
identical faces, only one display face is counted in the sign area measurement
if the distance between each sign face does not exceed 36 inches and the two
faces are parallel with each other.
      (5)   The area of spherical, free-form, sculptural or other non-planar
signs is measured as 50% of the sum of the area enclosed within the four
vertical sides of the smallest four-sided polyhedron that will encompass the
sign structure. See
 Figure 340-3.
Figure 340-3: Non-Planer Sign Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7814.png]
 
   (B)   Tenant frontage.
      (1)   General. Tenant frontage is the linear measurement of a tenant's
building wall that abuts and faces a street, a tenant's building wall that
abuts and faces a parking lot, or a tenant's building wall that abuts and faces
a pedestrian walkway or alley. See
Figure 340-4.
Figure 340-4: Tenant Frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8897.png]
 
      (2)   Corner and through lots.
         (a)    Where a tenant occupies a building that fronts on two streets
(on a corner or through lot), allowed sign standards apply independently for
each street frontage unless otherwise indicated in this section. See
Figure 340-5.
Figure 340-5: Corner and Through Lots
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7818.png]
 
         (b)    For example, a corner tenant in the DT Zoning District may
install one wall sign on each street frontage. Allowed sign area applies
individually to each frontage and may not be transferred between frontages.
   (C)   Building frontage. Building frontage is measured in the same manner as
tenant frontage, except calculated for the entire building, not individual
tenants. See
Figure 340-6.
Figure 340-6: Building Frontage
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7820.png]
 
   (D)   Detached sign height measurement. The height of a freestanding, pole,
monument or other type of detached sign is measured from the finished grade at
the base of the sign to the top of the sign. See
Figure 340-7.
Figure 340-7: Detached Sign Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7822.png]
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.340.060 SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Types of sign permits. The Zoning Code establishes three types of sign
permits: administrative sign permits, master sign permits, and creative sign
permits.
      (1)   An administrative sign permit is a ministerial approval by the
Department to confirm that a proposed sign complies with all applicable
standards.
      (2)   A master sign permit is a discretionary permit reviewed by the
Design Review Committee to allow for comprehensive and coordinated signs on
large, complex, non-residential multi-tenant sites and to allow some deviation
from sign standards where appropriate.
      (3)   A creative sign permit is a discretionary permit reviewed by the
Design Review Committee to allow unique, high-quality signs that deviate from
sign standards in this section.
   (B)   Administrative sign permits.
      (1)   When required. All new signs require an administrative sign permit
except for:
         (a)   Signs exempt from permit requirements as identified in §
155.340.030 (Signs Allowed Without Permits);
         (b)   Signs that comply with the requirements of an approved master
sign permit as identified in §
155.340.060(C) (Master Sign Permit); and
         (c)   Signs that comply with the requirements of an approved creative
sign permit as identified in §
155.340.060(D) (Creative Sign Permit).
      (2)   Permit requirements.
         (a)   Administrative sign permit applications must be submitted using
an official Department form accompanied by all fees, information, and materials
required by the Department.
         (b)   Department staff will review the proposed sign to verify
compliance with applicable standards. If the proposed sign complies with all
applicable standards, the Department staff will approve the administrative sign
permit. No public notice or hearing is required.
   (C)   Master sign permit.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of the master sign permit is to provide a
coordinated approach to signage for large sites/buildings and non-residential
multi-tenant developments, buildings, or adjacent/adjoining properties/parcels.
      (2)   When allowed. Any site greater than one acre, any site with tenant
spaces above the first floor, or any non-residential development, building, or
property with three or more tenants, may request approval of a master sign
permit.
      (3)   Review authority. The Design Review Committee reviews and takes
action on master sign permit applications.
      (4)   Application submittal and review.
         (a)   Master sign permit applications must be submitted and reviewed
in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Procedures).
         (b)   Master sign permit applications must be authorized by the
property owner/agent.
      (5)   Master sign program. All master sign permit applications must
include a proposed master sign program that identifies the placement, size,
materials, type, and general design of signs located on a site, including both
existing and proposed signs.
      (6)   Design standards.
         (a)   A master sign program may not allow prohibited signs as
identified in §
155.340.040 (Prohibited Signs) or deviation from digital sign requirements in
Table 340-9 (Digital Signs).
         (b)   A master sign program may allow deviation from the maximum size
of signs through transfers of maximum sign areas in §
155.340.070 (Sign Standards) between tenants on a site. For example, on a site
with ten tenants that each have 20-foot-wide frontages, each tenant would be
allowed 20 square feet of pole signs. Through a standard administrative sign
permit, the area of each sign cannot be transferred from one tenant to another.
However, through Design Review Committee approval of a master sign permit, the
collective total of 200 square feet of sign area for the entire site can be
pooled and then re-allocated between tenants so that one tenant could have 101
square feet and the remaining tenants could each have 11 square feet of sign
area.
         (c)   A master sign program may allow deviation from the total number
of signs permitted per site in §
155.340.070 (Sign Standards). In the example in division (6)(b) above, the site
would be limited to one pole sign 150 square feet or smaller with a standard
administrative sign permit. However, through a master sign permit, the site
could have two or more pole signs totaling 150 square feet of signage if
specifically allowed by the master sign permit approval.
         (d)   Deviation from any other requirement in this section is not
allowed.
      (7)   Public notice and hearing. The Design Review Committee will review
and act on a master sign permit application at a noticed public hearing in
compliance with §
155.408.080 (Notice of Public Hearing) and §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
      (8)   Findings for approval. To approve a master sign permit, the Design
Review Committee must make all of the following findings:
         (a)   Allowed signs are consistent with the General Plan, Zoning Code,
and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the City Council;
         (b)   The master sign program features a unified and coordinated
approach to the materials, size, type, placement, and general design of signs
proposed for a project or property;
         (c)   If deviations from sign standards in §
155.340.070 (Sign Standards) are proposed, the deviations are necessary to
accommodate the unique signage needs of the site;
         (d)   Allowed signs comply with all applicable standards in this
section, unless specific deviations are allowed by the master sign program;
         (e)   The allowed signs will not adversely impact the public health,
safety, or general welfare;
         (f)   The allowed sign sizes are proportionate and appropriate to the
building and site where they are located; and
         (g)   The number, placement, design, and material of the allowed signs
are compatible with the architectural design of buildings on the site.
      (9)   Limitations. As a part of the discretionary approval of a master
sign permit, the Design Review Committee may require modifications to the
proposed master sign program including limits on allowed sign types, height,
area, dimensions, placement, materials, and other sign design features, in
addition to the limitations set by the objective standards of the Zoning Code.
      (10)   Effect of master sign program.
         (a)   All tenants and land uses on the site are subject to the
requirements of the approved master sign program.
         (b)   All subsequent signs proposed for a site subject to an approved
master sign program must comply with the standards and specifications included
in the master sign program.
         (c)   Subsequent signs consistent with an approved master sign program
are allowed with an administrative sign permit.
         (d)   Signs inconsistent with an approved master sign program require
either an amendment to the master sign program or modification of the
inconsistent signs.
         (e)   Approval of a master sign program supersede the regulations of
this section. Any aspect of the proposed signs not addressed by the master sign
program must be in compliance with this section.
   (D)   Creative sign permits.
      (1)   Purpose. A creative sign permit allows for creative signs that
deviate from sign standards in this section. Creative sign permits are intended
to:
         (a)   Encourage signs of unique design, and that exhibit a high degree
of thoughtfulness, imagination, inventiveness, and spirit; and
         (b)   Allow for creative signs that deviate from the standards in this
section while minimizing adverse impacts on neighboring properties and the
community at large.
      (2)   When allowed. A creative sign is allowed for any type of sign in
any location in Eureka, except for digital signs, which are allowed only in
locations specified in Table 340-9 (Digital Signs).
      (3)   Review authority. The Design Review Committee reviews and takes
action on creative sign permit applications.
      (4)   Application submittal and review. Creative sign permit applications
must be submitted and reviewed in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Procedures). To allow the Design Review Committee to understand
the context of proposed creative signs, creative sign permit applications may
identify the placement, size, materials, type, and general design of all
existing and proposed signs located on the same site, including signs not
requiring a creative sign permit. If proposed signs meeting all applicable
standards are considered and approved by the Design Review Committee as part of
a creative sign permit application, the creative sign permit serves as an
equivalent of an administrative sign permit and no separate administrative sign
permit is required.
      (5)   Eligible adjustments. A creative sign permit may allow deviation
from standards in §
155.340.070 (Sign Standards), excluding standards for digital signs (see Table
340-9) and marquee signs (see § 155.340.070(E)(3)). Deviation from any other
requirement in this section is not allowed. One creative sign permit may cover
multiple deviations from standards and multiple signs on the same site.
      (6)   Design features requiring a creative sign permit. The following
sign design features are allowed only with a creative sign permit:
         (a)   Signs which change color at a frequency of more than one color
change per 15 seconds, except for digital signs consistent with Table 340-9
(Digital Signs);
         (b)   Chase lighting; and
         (c)   Neon signs that change color or are animated. Neon signs that do
not change color or utilize animation are allowed without a creative sign
permit.
      (7)   Digitally-printed signs. A digitally-printed sign may constitute no
more than 40% of the total sign area of a sign approved with a creative sign
permit.
      (8)   Public notice and hearing. The Design Review Committee will review
and act on a creative sign permit application at a noticed public hearing in
compliance with § 155.408.080 (Notice of Public Hearing) and §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
      (9)   Approval criteria. To approve a creative sign permit, the Design
Review Committee must find that the sign meets all of the general design
criteria and incorporates three or more of the sign features, materials, and
contextual criteria, as provided below.
         (a)   General design. The sign meets all of the following general
design criteria:
            1.   The sign constitutes a substantial aesthetic improvement to
the site and has a positive visual impact on the surrounding area;
            2.   The sign is of unique design, and exhibits a high degree of
thoughtfulness, imagination, inventiveness, and spirit;
            3.   The sign is of a higher creative, artistic, and/or sculptural
nature than the average sign typically found in Eureka; and
            4.   The sign provides strong graphic character through the
imaginative use of graphics, color, texture, quality materials, scale, and
proportion.
         (b)   Sign features, materials, and contextual criteria. The sign
incorporates three or more of the following:
            1.   Materials of a higher quality than typically used for signs in
Eureka (e.g., stone, sculptural steel, sandblasted wood, gold leaf, hand-
painted content with an artistic mural-like component);
            2.   Projecting, recessed, or cut-out text (e.g., push-through
illuminated acrylic letters, routed letters, routed metal);
            3.   Creative and unique use of clearly-visible high-quality
landscaping with an area greater than the minimum required for the sign or
site, whichever is more;
            4.   Creative and unique use of lighting (e.g., chase, neon
lighting, LED faux neon, a well-coordinated combination of at least three
different types of site-appropriate illumination);
            5.   Clearly visible three-dimensionality where a notable
proportion of the structure or form of the sign includes multiple deviations
from a parallel plane (e.g., a sphere, a half-sphere, sculptural elements, a
fully three-dimensional beer mug);
            6.   Sign design successfully emulates the architecture of the
building (e.g., a sign with roof-like covering that matches the general design
of the roof of the building it serves);
            7.   Highly irregular multi-dimensional sign shape (e.g., a sign
that has at least five or more straight sides, a sign that has a few straight
sides and multiple variable rounded sides, a sign with an unusually
disproportionate height-to-width ratio);
            8.   At least 50% of the sign area includes custom artistic
illustrations;
            9.   Sign shape includes inventive representation of the use, name,
or logo of the structure or business (e.g., a fish-shaped sign for a fishing
store);
            10.   Neon and/or LED faux neon signs that emulate movement but do
not include chase lighting;
            11.   Mechanically-animated element(s); and
            12.   Symbols or imagery relating to timber, commercial fishing,
coastal land uses, arts/culture, other factors inherent to Eureka's identity,
or to Eureka's current or historic character.
      (10)   Limitations. As a part of the discretionary approval of a creative
sign permit, the Design Review Committee may require modifications to the
proposed signage including limits on allowed sign types, area, dimensions,
placement, materials, and other sign design features, in addition to the
limitations set by the objective standards of the Zoning Code.
   (E)   Encroachment permit. Any sign which projects into the public right-of-
way requires approval of an encroachment permit.
   (F)   City-installed or required signs. Signs installed or required by the
city do not require a permit.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.340.070 SIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Sign type standards.
      (1)   All signs must comply with the sign type standards in Tables 340-
1 through 340-9 unless deviations are allowed through a master sign permit (§
155.340.060(C)) or creative sign permit (§
155.340.060(D)).
      (2)   Maximum sign standards in Tables 340-1 through 340-9 apply to
individual signs, not all signs combined on a property, unless otherwise noted
in the tables.
      (3)   If a proposed sign type is not specifically listed in Tables 340-
1 through 340-9, the sign will be regulated in the same manner as the most
similar listed sign type as determined by the Director.
 
Table 340-1: Wall Signs
Definition: a wall sign is a sign attached to, or painted on, the exterior wall
of a structure, with the display surface of the sign approximately parallel to
the building wall. Wall signs include signs attached to, but not extending
above, a fascia, parapet or mansard roof.
Where allowed: all zoning districts.
Materials:
Unless painted on a wall, wall signs
must be constructed of durable, rigid
material such as wood, plastic or     Figure 340-8: Wall Signs
metal.                                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Permanent walls signs constructed of  1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
flexible, non-rigid material (e.g.,   IMAGES/0-0-0-8953.png]
cloth, flexible vinyl) are not
permitted.
Wall signs may be painted directly on
a building wall.
Illumination:
In non-residential zoning districts: both external and internal illumination is
allowed.
In residential zoning districts and multi-family residential uses: only
external illumination is allowed.
Digital signs: Digital signs are not allowed as a wall sign.
 
 
                   Zoning District
                                                            Non-Residenti al
Standards [1]      DT, DW, HC, WA, NC,                      Uses in All
                   OR, HM, H            SC, LI, HI          Residential Zones
                                                            and Multi-Family
                                                            Residential Uses
Max. number        2 per tenant frontage                    1 per building
                                                            frontage
                   1.0 sq. ft. per
                   linear foot of       1.0 sq. ft. per
Max. area [2]      tenant frontage to a linear foot of      24 sq. ft.
                   maximum of 32 sq.    tenant frontage (no
                   ft. per tenant       maximum)
                   frontage
Max. height        Roof line or parapet of building to which sign is attached.
Max. projection    12 inches
from building wall
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See § 155.340.070
(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
[2] Maximum area applies to all wall signs combined on a tenant frontage.
 
 
Table 340-2: Window Signs, Non-Illuminated
Definition: a sign posted, painted, placed or affixed in or on a window exposed
to public view (including windows on upper floors). Any sign attached to a
window, within two feet of a window, or attached to a display located within
two feet of a window is considered a window sign.
Where allowed: all zoning districts.
Window transparency: for each
individual window, a minimum of 50%   Figure 340-9: Window Signs, Non-
of the total window area must be      Illuminated
transparent and free of signage       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
features. Window area is measured     1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
from interior of trim to interior of  IMAGES/0-0-0-8951.png]
trim, including mullions, muntins and
other separations of panes of glass.
 
 
              Zoning District
Standard [1]  DT, DW, HC, WA, NC,  SC, LI, HI           Non-Residential Uses in
              OR, HM, H                                 All Residential Zones
Max. number   No max.
              25% of total tenant  50% of total tenant  25% of the total window
Max. area [2] frontage window area frontage window area area of each individual
                                                        window
Max. height   No max.
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See § 155.340.070(B)
(Multi-Story Buildings).
[2] Maximum area applies to all window signs combined on a tenant frontage.
 
 
Table 340-3: Window Signs, Internally Illuminated
Definition: a sign placed in a window with individually illuminated letters,
numbers or graphics not exceeding 12 square feet. Includes illuminated “open”
signs and signs illuminated with LEDs, neon or other fluorescing gas.
Where allowed: allowed in all non-
residential zoning districts, except
for the Office Residential (OR)      Figure 340-10: Window Signs, Internally
Zoning District.                     Illuminated
Additional requirements: animated    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
window signs require a creative sign 1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
permit.                              IMAGES/0-0-0-8949.png]
Digital signs: digital signs are not
allowed as a window sign.
Window transparency: for each individual window, a minimum of 50% of the total
window area must be transparent and free of signage features. Window area is
measured from interior of trim to interior of trim, including mullions,
muntins, and other separations of panes of glass.
 
 
Standard [1]  Zoning District
              DT, DW, HC, WA, NC, HM, HN   SC, LI, HI
Max. number   2 per tenant frontage
Max. area [2] 25% of total tenant frontage 50% of total tenant frontage window
              window area                  area
Max. height   No max.
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See § 155.340.070
(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
[2] Maximum area applies to all window signs combined on a tenant frontage.
 
 
Table 340-4: Projecting and Suspended Signs
Definition: a sign permanently attached to a building or wall such that the sign face or faces are
perpendicular to the building or wall. Includes blade signs suspended under a bracket, armature or
other mounting device.
                                                          Figure 340-11: Projecting and Suspended
Where allowed:                                            Signs
•   Allowed in all non-residential zoning districts. [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
•   Prohibited in all residential zoning districts.  1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
                                                          IMAGES/0-0-0-7830.png]
Vertical and horizontal clearance: see §
155.340.080(I) (Vertical and Horizontal Clearance),
Digital signs: Digital signs are not allowed as a projecting or suspended sign.
 
 
                        Zoning District
Standard [1]            DT, DW, HC, WA, NC, OR, HM, SC, LI, HI
                        HN
Max. number             1 per tenant frontage
Max. area               18 sq. ft. per tenant       24 sq. ft. per tenant
                        frontage                    frontage
Max. height             Height of building to which it is attached
Maximum projection from 8 ft.
building wall
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See §
155.340.070(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
[2] The Building Code may require a projection less than eight feet.
 
Table 340-5: Awning/Canopy Signs
Table 340-5: Awning/Canopy Signs
Definition: an awning sign is incorporated into, attached to or painted on the face
or valance of an awning. A canopy sign is attached to a fixed overhead shelter used
as a roof.
Figure 340-12: Awning Signs               Figure 340-13: Canopy Signs
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/ 1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8957.png]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-8955.png]
Where allowed:
•   Allowed in all non-residential zoning districts.
•   Prohibited in all residential zoning districts except for multi-family
residential uses.
Placement: awnings and canopies with signs may only be mounted on the wall area
below the second floor.
Vertical and horizontal clearance: see §
155.340.080(I) (Vertical and Horizontal Clearance).
Materials: awnings must be constructed of durable, long-lasting fabric. Plastic or
vinyl material is not permitted.
Awnings/canopies without sign copy: awnings and canopies without lettering or sign
copy are not regulated as signs.
Digital signs: Digital signs are not allowed as an awning or canopy sign.
 
         Zoning District
Standard DT, DW, HC, WA, NC, OR, HM, HN SC, LI, HI Multi-family
                                                   residential uses
                    Zoning District
Standard            DT, DW, HC, WA, NC, SC, LI, HI          Multi-family
                    OR, HM, HN                              residential uses
Max. number         No max.                                 1 per frontage
                    25 sq. ft. or area  35 sq. ft. or area  25 sq. ft. or area
Max. area           of awning or canopy of awning or canopy of awning or canopy
                    fascia, whichever   fascia, whichever   fascia, whichever
                    is less             is less             is less
Max. height (awning Height of awning area
signs)
                    Height of canopy    Height of canopy    Height of canopy
Max. height (canopy fascia; 3 ft. for   fascia; 4 ft. for   fascia;
signs)              signs atop canopy   signs atop canopy   3 ft. for signs
                                                            atop canopy
Max. width          The building wall to which it is attached or the tenant
                    space it identifies
Maximum projection  No max.
from building wall
NOTES TO TABLE:
Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See §
155.340.070(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
 
 
Table 340-6: Roof Signs
Definition: a sign erected above a roof and/or the parapet of a building. Signs
attached to the side of a mansard roof are not considered roof signs. The
definition of roof signs does not include signs attached to a building wall or
other horizontal building element.
Where allowed:
Allowed in all non-residential zoning
districts except for Office           Figure 340-14: Roof Signs
Residential (OR) and Hospital Medical [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
(HM).                                 1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
Prohibited in Office Residential      IMAGES/0-0-0-8739.gif]
(OR), Hospital Medical (HM) and all
residential zoning districts.
Design: roof signs must consist of individually-formed letters and associated
graphics without a solid background. A box sign is not allowed as a roof sign.
Illumination: internal or external illumination allowed. Internally illuminated
signs are permitted only when the portion of the sign that appears illuminated
is primarily the sign lettering, registered trademark or logo.
Digital signs: digital signs are not allowed as a roof sign.
 
 
Standards   Zoning District
            DT, DW, HC, WA, NC, HN         SC, LI, HI
Max. number 1 roof sign per building
            1.0 sq. ft. per linear foot of 1.0 sq. ft. per linear foot of total
Max. area   total building frontage to a   tenant frontage to a maximum of 100
            maximum of 50 sq. ft.          sq. ft.
Max. height 10 ft. above top of building   16 ft. above top of building
NOTES TO TABLE:
Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See §
155.340.070(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
 
Table 340-7: Monument Signs
Definition: a monument sign is a sign detached from a building and supported on
the ground by one or more structural elements that are one-quarter or more of
the width of the sign face. Internal supports, poles or pylons, if any, are
enclosed by decorative covers or otherwise not exposed to view. Includes signs
where supporting structural elements are architecturally dissimilar to the
design of the sign. Excludes “pole signs.”
Where allowed: allowed in all mixed-
use and industrial zoning districts
and multi-family residential uses.    Figure 340-15 Monument Signs
Monument and pole signs: a monument   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
sign is not allowed on a site that    1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
also contains a pole sign.            IMAGES/0-0-0-8979.png]
Ground support and placement: see §
155.340.080(J) (Detached Sign Ground
Support and Placement).
Digital signs: Digital signs are not allowed as a monument sign.
 
 
            Zoning District
Standard    DT, DW, HC, WA, NC,   SC, LI, HI             Multi-Family
            OR, HM, HN                                   Residential Uses
Max. number 1 per site
            1.0 sq. ft. per       1.0 sq. ft. per linear
            linear foot of tenant foot of tenant
            frontage to a maximum frontage to a maximum  1.0 sq. ft. per linear
Max. area   of 32 sq. ft. per     of 50 sq. ft. per      foot of street-facing
            tenant; maximum of 64 tenant; maximum of 150 building frontage to a
            sq. ft. for multi-    sq. ft. for multi-     maximum of 32 sq. ft.
            tenant signs          tenant signs for 3 or
                                  more tenants
Max. height 8 ft.                 12 ft.                 8 ft.
Max. width  No max.
NOTES TO TABLE:
Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See §
155.340.070(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
 
 
Table 340-8: Pole Signs
Definition: a sign detached from a building and supported on the ground by one
or more structural elements that are less than one-quarter the width of the
sign face.
Where allowed:
New pole signs are allowed in the SC, Figure 340-16: Pole Signs
LI and GI Zoning Districts.           [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
New pole signs are prohibited in all  1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
other zoning districts. Pole signs    IMAGES/0-0-0-8977.png]
existing as of June 20, 2019, may
remain.
Pole and monument signs: a pole sign is not allowed on a tenant frontage that
also contains a monument sign.
Ground support and placement: see §
155.340.080(J) (Detached Sign Ground Support and Placement).
Landscaping: pole signs must be placed in a planter box or other landscaped
area, with the area of the landscaping a minimum of 15 square feet or one-half
of the surface area of the sign, whichever is greater.
Digital signs: Digital signs are not allowed as a pole sign.
 
 
Standard             SC, LI, HI Zoning Districts
Max. number          1 per site
                     1.0 sq. ft. per linear foot of tenant frontage to a
Max. area            maximum of 50 sq. ft. per tenant; maximum of 150 sq. ft.
                     for multi-tenant signs for 3 or more tenants
Max. height          24 ft.
Horizontal clearance See §
                     155.340.080(I) (Vertical and Horizontal Clearance)
Max. width           No max.
NOTES TO TABLE:
Standards apply only to ground-floor tenants and uses. See §
155.340.070(B) (Multi-Story Buildings).
 
 
Table 340-9: Digital Signs
Definition: a sign that displays a visual image using liquid crystal cells or other
types of light emitting diodes (LEDs), or their functional equivalent, where the image
can be easily changed, typically by remote control or computer programming. Also known
as electronic message center (EMC) signs. Excludes fuel price signs, as provided in §
155.340.030(A)(19), and marquee signs, as provided in §
155.340.070(E).
Where allowed: prohibited in all zoning
districts.
Existing legal non-conforming digital signs:
existing legally-established digital signs     Figure 340-14: Digital Signs
must comply with all listed digital sign       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
standards, and must be removed when removal is 1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
triggered by § 155.424.050 (Non-conforming    IMAGES/0-0-0-8975.png]
Signs).
Off-premises signs prohibited: digital signs
may not be used as an off-premises sign, or
for any form of off-site advertising.
 
Message display:
Digital signs may contain static messages only. Signs may not display text
which flashes, pulsates, moves or scrolls. Each complete message must fit on
one screen.
Digital signs may not change message more than once every 15 seconds.
The content of a digital sign must transition by changing instantly (e.g., no
fade-out or fade-in).
Ticker signs are prohibited.
Brightness:
During daylight hours between sunrise and sunset, luminance is limited to
10,000 nits.
At all other times, luminance is limited to 160 nits.
Digital signs may produce no more than 0.3 foot-candle of light when measured
from the distance using the following formula:
 
Measurement Distance= [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/IMAGES/0-0-0-8967.jpg] (Area of Sign
Sq. Ft. × 100)
Each sign must have a light sensing device that will automatically adjust the
brightness of the display as the natural ambient light conditions change.
 
   (B)   Multi-story buildings. Standards for signs in Tables 340-1 through
340-9 apply only to ground floor tenants and uses. Signs for tenants and uses
located above the ground floor are allowed only with a master sign permit that
establishes sign standards for the site. See §
155.340.060(C) (Master Sign Permits).
   (C)   Hospital signs. Hospitals are exempt from all building-attached sign
regulations, except for digital sign regulations. Hospitals must comply with
detached sign regulations. Non-hospital uses in the HM Zoning District must
comply with all sign regulations.
   (D)   Public facilities and parks and recreation zoning districts. In the
Public Facilities (PF) and Parks and Recreation (PR) Zoning Districts, the
Director will determine the allowed sign types and size based on the signage
needs of the associated uses.
   (E)   Marquee signs.
      (1)   A marquee sign is allowed with a creative sign permit and must
satisfy all of the requirements of that permit. The Design Review Committee
will determine the maximum allowed sign area, height, dimensions and other
standards as part of the design review approval process.
      (2)   Marquee signs are limited to theaters, auditoriums, indoor
amusement/entertainment facilities and similar facilities. A maximum of one
marquee sign is allowed per use.
      (3)   Digital display is allowed only for marquee sign copy that
advertises films, performances and other events. Use of digital display to
advertise goods and services is not allowed. Digital display may change no more
than once a day. Digital display must comply with the brightness limitation in
Table 340-9 (Digital Signs).
   (F)   Sandwich board signs.
      (1)   Sandwich board signs on private property are exempt from the
requirements of this section. (See §
155.340.030.A.4.)
      (2)   Sandwich board signs within the public right-of-way must comply
with the following standards.
         (a)   Signs may only be located in mixed use zones.
         (b)   Signs must be constructed of durable materials and in such a
manner as not to present a hazard to pedestrian movement.
         (c)   A sign may not exceed 30 inches in width and 48 inches in
height.
         (d)   Signs must be weighted at the base so as to provide a stable and
secure sign.
         (e)   Signs must be placed so as to allow for a minimum of 48 inches
pedestrian path of travel clearance between obstacles.
         (f)   Signs may not conflict with utilities or parking meters, public
parking or traffic sight distance at street or alley intersections, and may not
block entrances or exits.
         (g)   Signs are limited to one sign per business, and must be placed
on the sidewalk that fronts the business.
         (h)   Digital signs are not allowed as a sandwich board sign. See
Table 340-9 (Digital Signs).
         (i)   Signs in the public right-of-way must acquire an encroachment
permit.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902 C.-S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.340.080 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Message neutrality.
      (1)   It is the city’s policy to regulate signs in a constitutional
manner that does not favor commercial speech over non- commercial speech, and
is content neutral as to non-commercial messages which are within the
protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the corollary
provisions of the California Constitution.
      (2)   Where necessary, the Director will interpret the meaning and
applicability of this section in light of this message neutrality policy. Under
no circumstances will this message neutrality policy be interpreted to allow
off-premises signs. See division (J) below.
   (B)   Message substitution.
      (1)   Subject to the property owner’s consent, a message of any type may
be substituted, in whole or in part, for the message displayed on any legally
established sign without consideration of message content.
      (2)   Message substitutions require a zoning clearance.
      (3)   This message substitution provision does not:
         (a)   Create a right to increase the total amount of signage beyond
that otherwise allowed or existing;
         (b)   Affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device
be properly permitted, when a permit requirement applies;
         (c)   Allow a change in the physical structure of a sign or its
mounting device;
         (d)   Allow the establishment of a prohibited sign as identified in §
155.340.040 (Prohibited Signs); or
         (e)   Nullify or eliminate any contractual obligation through a
development agreement or similar agreement that specifies the allowable content
of a sign.
   (C)   Maximum number of sign types. No more than three different types of
signs are allowed.
   (D)   Changes to sign face. Changes to a sign face that do not structurally
alter or enlarge a legally-established sign do not require an administrative
sign permit but do require a zoning clearance.
   (E)   Maintenance.
      (1)   All signs and supporting hardware, including temporary signs, must
be maintained in a state of good repair at all times.
      (2)   Any repair to a sign must be of equal or better quality of
materials and design as the original sign.
      (3)   A sign that is not properly maintained or is dilapidated will be
deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated in compliance with §
155.428 (Enforcement and Penalties) and Municipal Code §§
10.35 et seq. (Administrative Citations). Examples of dilapidated signs include
the following:
         (a)   Signs with rust covering 25% or more of a pole or other support
structures;
         (b)   Signs with peeling paint visible on 25% or more of the sign or
support structure;
         (c)   Signs and support structures with visible physical damage that
significantly alters the sign’s appearance;
         (d)   Signs with malfunctioning or damaged lighting;
         (e)   Illegible sign copy resulting from damage to the sign;
         (f)   Signs and supporting elements that no longer contain a sign face
or copy. Includes box signs without a slide-in sign copy panel, projecting sign
brackets without an attached sign face and stand-alone poles without an
attached sign face; and
         (g)   Other similar conditions as determined by the Director.
   (F)   Building surface repair. When an existing sign is replaced, removed or
modified, any newly exposed portions of a building surface on which the sign is
or was displayed must be repaired and repainted to restore a uniform appearance
to the surface. Compliance with this requirement includes the removal of any
excess conduit and supports, and the patching or filling of any exposed holes.
   (G)   Materials. Except for interior window signs, all permanent signs must
be constructed of wood, metal, plastic, glass or similar durable and
weatherproof material.
   (H)   Illumination.
      (1)   Signs in non-residential zoning districts may be internally or
externally illuminated, except where specifically prohibited.
      (2)   Signs in residential zoning districts may only be externally
illuminated.
      (3)   Light sources must be steady, stationary and static in color,
except for neon signs and chase lighting when allowed with a creative sign
permit.
      (4)   Lighting may not produce glare that creates a public nuisance or
hazard for motorists or pedestrian.
      (5)   The light source for externally illuminated signs must be
positioned so that light does not shine directly on adjoining properties.
      (6)   Exposed bulbs, with or without chase lighting, are permitted with a
creative sign permit.
      (7)   Design features consisting of neon or other small diameter tubing
illuminated by fluorescing gas is allowed as part of any type of sign.
   (I)   Vertical and horizontal clearance.
      (1)   Signs that project over any public walkway or walk area must have
an overhead clearance of at least eight feet and require an encroachment
permit. See
Figure 340-17.
      (2)   Signs must maintain a minimum two-foot horizontal clearance from a
driveway or street curb. See
Figure 340-15.
Figure 340-17: Vertical and Horizontal Clearance
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7846.png]
 
   (J)   Detached sign ground support and placement.
      (1)   Ground support. Detached signs must be supported and permanently
placed by embedding, anchoring, or connecting the sign in such a manner as to
incorporate it into the landscape or architectural design scheme.
      (2)   Placement. A detached sign may not occupy an area designated for
parking, loading, walkways, driveways, fire lane, easement, traffic portion of
the right-of-way, vision clearance areas (if greater than 36 inches tall), or
other areas required to remain unobstructed.
   (K)   Off-premises signs.
      (1)   New off-premises signs. New off-premises signs established on or
after June 20, 2019, are prohibited.
      (2)   Existing off-premises signs. Legally-established off-premises signs
established prior to June 20, 2019, may remain and must comply with all
applicable regulations in this section.
   (L)   Non-conforming signs. See §
155.424.050 (Non-Conforming Signs).
   (M)   Violations and enforcement. See §
155.428.090 (Signs) for the procedure to remove hazardous and illegal signs.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.340.090 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   Temporary signs are allowed in all zoning districts subject to this section.
   (A)   “Temporary sign” defined. A TEMPORARY SIGN means a sign intended to be
displayed for a limited period of time. The following types of signs are always
considered temporary and allowed only as a temporary sign:
      (1)   Banner signs;
      (2)   Feather banners;
      (3)   Yard signs;
      (4)   Inflatable balloon signs; and
      (5)   Post signs on a residential property (e.g., for-sale signs).
   (B)   Allowed by-right. Temporary signs that comply with this section are
allowed by-right without a zoning clearance or other form of Department
approval.
   (C)   Prohibited signs. Temporary signs must comply with §
155.340.040 (Prohibited Signs).
   (D)   Maximum area. Temporary signs may not exceed the maximum sign area
shown in Table 340-10.
 
Table 340-10: Maximum Temporary Sign Area
Zoning District                               Maximum Area
DT, DW, HC, NC, OR                            25 sq. ft. per tenant, business
                                              or land use
SC, HM, HN, LI, GI
   Tenants with less than 50 ft. of tenant 25 sq. ft. per tenant, business
frontage                                      or land use
   Tenants with 50 ft. or more of tenant   0.5 sq. ft. per linear foot of
frontage                                      building frontage to a maximum of
                                              100 sq. ft.
All other zoning districts                    25 sq. ft. per site
 
   (E)   Illumination. Illumination of temporary signs is prohibited.
   (F)   Duration.
      (1)   Temporary signs may be displayed for the maximum duration shown in
Table 340-11.
      (2)   A sign displayed longer than allowed by Table 340-11 is considered
a permanent sign subject to all applicable requirements in this section.
 
Table 340-11: Temporary Sign Duration
Type of Temporary Sign    Maximum Duration
Yard signs                90 days
Post signs                180 days
All other temporary signs 30 days per occurrence not to exceed a total of 60
                          calendar days per year
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21)
§ 155.344 DENSITY BONUS.
§ 155.344.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to allow for density bonuses and additional
incentives, consistent with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et seq. and the General
Plan Housing Element, and to promote the production of affordable, specialized,
and senior housing. The density bonus ordinance codified in this chapter is
intended to comply with State Density Bonus Law, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et
seq.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.344.020 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions found in State Density Bonus Law apply to the terms
contained in this subsection.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.344.030 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   A housing development as defined in State Density Bonus Law is
eligible for a density bonus and other regulatory incentives that are provided
by State Density Bonus Law when the applicant seeks and agrees to provide low,
very-low, senior or moderate-income housing units or units intended to serve
transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, homeless persons, and lower
income students in the threshold amounts specified in State Density Bonus Law.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.344.040 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All applications. All applications for a density bonus, developer
incentive, waiver or modification of development standards must include the
following reasonable documentation:
      (1)   Density bonus.
         (a)   A summary table showing the maximum number of dwelling units
permitted by the zoning and general plan excluding any density bonus units, the
proposed affordable units by income level, the proposed bonus percentage, the
number of density bonus units proposed, the total number of dwelling units
proposed on the site, and the resulting density in units per acre.
         (b)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the number and location of
all proposed units, designating the location of proposed affordable units and
density bonus units.
         (c)   The zoning and general plan designations and assessor's parcel
number(s) of the housing development site.
         (d)   A description of all dwelling units existing on the site in the
five-year period preceding the date of submittal of the application and
identification of any units rented during the five-year period. If dwelling
units on the site are currently rented, income and household size of all
residents of currently occupied units, if known. If any dwelling units on the
site were rented in the five-year period but are not currently rented, the
income and household size of residents occupying dwelling units when the site
contained the maximum number of dwelling units, if known.
         (e)   A description of any recorded covenant, ordinance, or law
applicable to the site that restricted rents to levels affordable to very-low
or lower-income households in the five-year period preceding the date of
submittal of the application.
      (2)   Concession or incentive. For each concession or incentive
requested:
         (a)   The existing development standard and the requested development
standard or regulatory incentive.
         (b)   Except where mixed-use zoning is proposed as a concession or
incentive, documentation to show any requested incentive will result in
identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs
or rents.
         (c)   If approval of mixed-use zoning is proposed, documentation that
nonresidential land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development, that
the nonresidential land uses are compatible with the housing development and
the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed housing
development will be located, and that mixed-use zoning will provide for
affordable housing costs or rents.
      (3)   Waiver. For each waiver requested:
         (a)   The existing development standard and the requested development
standard.
         (b)   Documentation that the development standard for which a waiver
is requested will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of
a development at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted
by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.
      (4)   Parking reduction. A table showing parking required by the zoning
regulations, parking proposed under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(p), and reasonable
documentation that the project is eligible for the requested parking reduction.
      (5)   Child care facility. Documentation that all requirements included
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(h) can be met.
      (6)   Condominium conversion. Documentation that all requirements
included in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.5 can be met.
      (7)   Commercial development bonus. Documentation that all requirements
included in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.7 can be met.
      (8)   Land donation. Documentation of the location of the land to be
dedicated, proof of site control, and reasonable documentation that each of the
requirements included in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(g) can be met.
   (B)   Timeline for application processing. Applications made pursuant to
this section will be processed pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65950 et seq.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.344.050 BONUS AND INCENTIVE CALCULATION.
   (A)   All calculations are rounded up for any fractional numeric value in
determining the total number of units to be granted, including base density and
bonus density, as well as the resulting number of affordable units needed for a
given density bonus project.
   (B)   Projects qualifying for a density bonus under one or more income
categories, or one or more types of housing (i.e., senior housing or housing
intended to serve transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, homeless
persons, or lower income students), must identify the categories under which
the density bonus would be applied. Density bonuses from more than one category
can be combined up to the maximum allowed under State Density Bonus law.
   (C)   Density bonus units are not included in determining the number of
affordable units required to qualify a project for a density bonus.
   (D)   The applicant may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus
than the housing development is entitled to, or no density bonus, but no
reduction will be permitted in the percentages of required affordable units
contained in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(b), (c), and (f). Regardless of the number
of affordable units, no project will be entitled to a density bonus of more
than what is authorized under State Density Bonus Law.
   (E)   The number of incentives an applicant may request is provided by State
Density Bonus Law.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.344.060 REVIEW AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Density bonus applications for housing developments requiring
discretionary review will be reviewed and acted upon by the highest review
authority designated by the Zoning Code for any of the applications (e.g., a
project requiring a use permit and applying for a density bonus will have both
applications decided by the Planning Commission).
   (B)   The Director reviews and takes action on density bonus applications
for housing developments requiring only ministerial review (e.g., a density
bonus application for a housing development requiring only a building permit
will be decided by the Director).
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.344.070 FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   To approve a density bonus application, the review authority must make
the following written findings, based upon substantial evidence, as applicable:
      (1)   Density bonus.
         (a)   The proposed development provides the affordable units or senior
housing required by State Density Bonus Law to be eligible for the density
bonus and any incentives, parking reduction, or waivers requested, including
the replacement of units rented or formerly rented to low- and very low-income
households as required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(c)(3).
         (b)   The proposed density bonus will result in identifiable and
actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50052.5, or for affordable rents, as defined in
Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50053; or
         (c)   The proposed density bonus will not be contrary to state or
federal law; and
         (d)   The proposed density bonus will not have a specific adverse
impact on public health or safety, or the physical environment, or on any real
property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources. For
the purpose of this subsection, specific adverse impact means a significant,
quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified,
written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they
existed on the date the application for the housing development was deemed
complete.
      (2)   Incentive. Any requested incentive will result in identifiable and
actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or rents, except
that, if a mixed-use development is requested, the application must instead
meet all of the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(k)(2).
      (3)   Waiver. The development standard for which a waiver is requested
will have the effect of physically precluding the construction of a development
at the densities or with the concessions or incentives permitted by Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65915.
      (4)   Parking reduction. The housing development is eligible for any
requested parking reductions under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(p).
      (5)   Donation of land. If the density bonus is based entirely, or in
part, on the donation of land, all of the requirements included in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65915(g) have been met.
      (6)   Child care facility. If the density bonus or incentive is based on
the inclusion of a child care facility, all of the requirements included in
Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915(h) have been met.
      (7)   Condominium conversion. If the density bonus or incentive is based
on the inclusion of affordable units as part of a condominium conversion, all
of the requirements included in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.5 have been met.
      (8)   Commercial Development.
         (a)   The city has approved the partnered housing agreement; and
         (b)   The commercial development bonus has been mutually agreed upon
by the city and the commercial developer; and
         (c)   All of the requirements included in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65915.7
have been met.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.344.080 INTERPRETATION.
   If any portion of §
155.344 conflicts with State Density Bonus Law (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65915 et
seq.) or other applicable state law, state law shall supersede this section.
Any ambiguities in this section shall be interpreted to be consistent with
State Density Bonus Law.
(Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 155.404 ADMINISTRATION.
§ 155.404.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.404 describes city roles and responsibilities when administering the Zoning
Code.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.404.020 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Summary table. Table 404-1 summarizes city review and decision-making
authority when processing permit applications and other requested approvals.
   (B)   Meaning of notations. Authority roles shown in Table 404-1 mean the
following.
      (1)   “Recommend” means the authority reviews and makes a recommendation
to a higher decision-making body.
      (2)   “Decision” means the authority may approve, conditionally approve
or deny an application.
      (3)   “Appeal” means the authority hears an appeal of a decision by a
lower review authority.
      (4)   “-” means the authority has no role in the action.
   (C)   Multiple permit applications. For projects that include multiple
permits, see §
155.408.050 (Multiple Permit Applications).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.404.030 DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT.
   Responsibilities and powers. The Department:
   (A)   Processes permit applications as provided in §
155.408 (Permit Procedures);
   (B)   Assumes responsibilities delegated by the Director; and
   (C)   Performs other duties as necessary to administer the Zoning Code.
Table 404-1: Review and Decision-Making Authority
               Zoning Code Role of Authority
Type of Action Section     Director/  Design Review Planning   City Council
                           Department Committee     Commission
Table 404-1: Review and Decision-Making Authority
                            Role of Authority
Type of Action  Zoning Code Director/    Design       Planning
                Section     Department   Review       Commission   City Council
                                         Committee
Legislative Actions
Zoning Code and
General Plan    155.432     Recommend    -            Recommend    Decision
amendment
Use Permits
Conditional use 155.412.120 Recommend    -            Decision     Appeal
permit [3]
Minor use       155.412.120 Decision [1] -            Decision [5] Appeal
permit [3]
Flexibility and Relief
Administrative  155.412.030 Decision [1] -            Appeal       Appeal
adjustment
Infill
incentive       155.412.060 Recommend    -            Decision     Appeal
permit, major
[3]
Infill
incentive       155.412.060 Decision [1] -            Decision [5] Appeal
permit, minor
[3]
Minor           155.412.070 Decision [1] -            Appeal       Appeal
modification
Reasonable      155.412.080 Decision [1] -            Appeal       Appeal
accommoda tion
Variance, major 155.412.140 Recommend    -            Decision     Appeal
[3]
Variance, minor 155.412.140 Decision [1] -            Decision [5] Appeal
[3]
Sign Permits
Administrative  155.340.060 Decision [2] Appeal       Appeal       Appeal
sign permits    (B)
Creative sign   155.340.060 Recommend    Decision     Appeal       Appeal
permits [3]     (D)
Master sign     155.340.060 Recommend    Decision     Appeal       Appeal
permits [3]     (C)
Gulch Greenway Permits
Conditional
Gulch Greenway  155.224.050 Recommend    -            Decision     Appeal
permit [3]
Minor Gulch
Greenway permit 155.224.050 Decision [1] -            Decision [5] Appeal
[3]
Other Permits and Approval
Density bonus   155.344     Decision [2]              Appeal       Appeal
(ministerial)
Density bonus
(discretionary) 155.344     Decision [1]              Appeal       Appeal
[3]
Design review   155.412.040 Recommend    Decision [4] Appeal       Appeal
[3]
Home occupation 155.304.070 Decision [2] -            Appeal       Appeal
approval
Tiny house on   155.304.130 Decision [2]              Appeal       Appeal
wheels permit
Tree permit     155.304.140 Recommend    -            Decision     Appeal
Zoning          155.412.150 Decision [2] -            Appeal       Appeal
clearance
NOTES:
[1] The Director may choose to refer the project to the Planning Commission for
review and decision.
[2] The Director may delegate review authority to Department staff on
ministerial permits and approvals.
[3] Applications requiring other discretionary review will be acted upon by the
highest review authority, with appeal rights to the next highest authority,
except that decisions of the City Council are final.
[4] The Historic Preservation Commission conducts design review for projects
that alter a designated historic resource as provided in Municipal Code Chapter
157. If a project subject to design review also requires a permit from the
Planning Commission, the Planning Commission conducts design review. If the
project both alters a designated historic resource as provided in Municipal
Code Chapter 157 and requires a permit from the Planning Commission, the
Historic Preservation Commission conducts any design review for the project.
[5] The Planning Commission acts on the permit only after receiving a written
request for a public hearing during the 15-day hearing request period, in
accordance with § 155.408.090 (Notice of Pending Action). If no request for a
public hearing is received by the end of the 15-day period, the Director acts
on the application, and the action is final.
 
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.404.040 DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Responsibilities and powers. The Director:
      (1)   Serves as the review and decision-making authority as shown in
Table 404-1;
      (2)   Makes official interpretations of the Zoning Code in accordance
with §
155.108.030 (Official Interpretations);
      (3)   Enforces the Zoning Code in accordance with §
155.428 (Enforcement and Penalties);
      (4)   Assumes responsibilities described in Municipal Code §
32.041 (Director of Development Services);
      (5)   Performs other duties as necessary to administer the Zoning Code
and as assigned by the City Council; and
      (6)   Serves as the Secretary to the Design Review Committee, Historic
Preservation Commission and Planning Commission.
   (B)   Duties as Secretary to DRC, HPC and PC. As Secretary to the Design
Review Committee (DRC), Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) and Planning
Commission (PC), the Director:
      (1)   Prepares staff reports on permit applications and other requested
approvals;
      (2)   Presents applications at public hearings;
      (3)   Maintains a record of DRC, HPC and PC proceedings and decisions;
      (4)   Advises the DRC, HPC and PC on the meaning and applicability of the
Zoning Code; and
      (5)   Provides support and technical assistance to the DRC, HPC and PC as
needed.
   (C)   Delegation to staff. The Director may designate one or more Department
staff to perform the duties described in division (A) (Responsibilities and
Powers) above and (B) (Duties as Secretary to DRC, HPC, and PC).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.404.050 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Established. The city must maintain a Planning Commission to review
and act on proposed development projects and to assist in the development and
application of land use policy and regulations in Eureka.
   (B)   Composition.
      (1)   Number of members. The Planning Commission consists of five
members.
      (2)   Member experience. Persons appointed to the Planning Commission
must have an interest and/or experience in city planning, land development,
land use law, architecture, urban design, natural resource protection, real
estate, transportation planning, economic development or other relevant
planning-related fields.
      (3)   Appointment; vacancy. Planning Commission members must be appointed
and vacancies on the Commission filled in accordance with Municipal Code §§
33.001 et seq. (Boards and Commissions Created by Council).
   (C)   Responsibilities and powers. The Planning Commission:
      (1)   Serves as the review and decision-making authority on applications
as shown in Table 404-1;
      (2)   Hears appeals on decisions in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews);
      (3)   Makes recommendations to the City Council on Zoning Code amendments
and other legislative matters;
      (4)   Makes recommendations to the City Council on General Plan
amendments and specific plans and other special-purpose land use plans; and
      (5)   Assumes responsibilities described in Municipal Code §
152.01 (Planning Commission).
   (D)   Meetings and procedures. The Planning Commission operates according to
Municipal Code
Ch. 33 (Other Departments, Boards and Commissions),
Ch. 152 (Planning and Zoning Administration) and any official rules of
procedure or bylaws adopted by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.404.060 DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Established. The Design Review Committee (DRC) is established to
review and approve the design of proposed development projects.
   (B)   Composition.
      (1)   Number of members. The DRC consists of five members.
      (2)   Member experience. Persons appointed to the DRC must have
professional experience in the fields of architecture, land development, city
planning, real estate, landscape architecture or other relevant design-related
profession.
      (3)   Appointment. DRC members must be appointed and vacancies filled
according to Municipal Code §§
33.001 et seq. (Boards and Commissions Created by Council).
      (4)   Architect. If the DRC membership does not include an architect, the
DRC may, by unanimous agreement, invite an architect, who may or may not be a
resident of the city, to serve in an advisory capacity.
   (C)   Responsibilities and powers.
      (1)   The DRC serves as the review and decision-making authority as shown
in Table 404-1.
      (2)   The DRC may assume other responsibilities as requested by the
Director, Planning Commission or City Council.
   (D)   Meetings and procedures. The DRC operates according to Municipal Code
Ch. 33 (Other Departments, Boards and Commissions) and any official rules of
procedures or bylaws adopted by the DRC.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.404.070 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   The purpose and function of the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) is
stated in Municipal Code
Ch. 157 (Historic Preservation). In the administration of the Zoning Code, the
HPC conducts design review for projects that alter a designated historic
resource as provided in Municipal Code
Ch. 157.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.404.080 CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council:
   (A)   Takes action on proposed Zoning Code and General Plan amendments;
   (B)   Hears appeals on decisions in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews); and
   (C)   Assumes other responsibilities and takes action on other matters
related to the Zoning Code according to the Municipal Code and state and
federal laws.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.408 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
§ 155.408.010 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   This section establishes procedures for the preparation, filing and
processing of permit applications required by the Zoning Code. Procedures and
requirements that apply after an application is approved are found in §
155.420 (Post-Approval Provisions).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.408.020 APPLICATION PREPARATION AND FILING.
   (A)   Pre-application conference.
      (1)   Applicants are encouraged to request a pre-application conference
with the Department before completing and filing a permit application.
      (2)   The purpose of this conference is to:
         (a)   Review the applicant’s project concepts, preliminary project
descriptions and/or rough site plans;
         (b)   Inform the applicant of Zoning Code and Department requirements
that apply to the proposed project;
         (c)   Inform the applicant of requirements from other departments
(such as Building, Public Works, Police and Fire) and other governmental
agencies (such as the Coastal Commission) that may apply to the proposed
project;
         (d)   Inform the applicant of the city’s review processes;
         (e)   Identify information and materials the city will require with
the application, and any necessary technical studies and information relating
to the environmental review of the project;
         (f)   Provide guidance to the applicant of possible project
alternatives or modifications; and
         (g)   Assign Department staff to serve as the project liaison with
whom the applicant should communicate as the application is processed.
      (3)   The pre-application conference and any information provided by city
staff must not be construed as a recommendation for approval or denial of an
application.
      (4)   Failure by city staff to identify all permit requirements does not
constitute a waiver of those requirements.
   (B)   Application contents.
      (1)   Applications must be made in writing on a form provided by the
Department.
      (2)   Applications must be filed along with all fees, information and
materials required by the Department.
   (C)   Eligibility for filing.
      (1)   An application may be filed only by:
         (a)   The property owner;
         (b)   A property tenant;
         (c)   An authorized agent of the property owner or tenant;
         (d)   A person under contract or with an exclusive option to purchase
the property; or
         (e)   Any other person who can demonstrate a legal right, interest or
other entitlement to use the property for the proposed project.
      (2)   The application must be either:
         (a)   Signed by the property owner; or
         (b)   Accompanied by a written letter signed by the property owner
consenting to the application.
   (D)   Application acceptance.
      (1)   The Department may accept an application for processing only if the
submittal contains all fees, information and materials required by the
Department.
      (2)   Accepting an application for processing does not indicate
Department support for the proposed project or that the application is complete
pursuant to §
155.408.040 (Application Review).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.408.030 APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   Fee schedule. Fees required to process permit applications are
identified in the Development Services Department fee schedule adopted by the
City Council.
   (B)   Payment required.
      (1)   The Department may accept and begin processing an application only
after all required fees are paid.
      (2)   Failure to pay any required fees may be a basis for denial or
revocation of a permit.
   (C)   Refunds and withdrawals.
      (1)   If an application is withdrawn in writing by the applicant, the
Director may authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to the
date of withdrawal and the status of the application at the time of withdrawal.
      (2)   The Department will not refund fees for denied applications, unless
directed to do so by City Council.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.408.040 APPLICATION REVIEW.
   (A)   Initial review. The Department must review each application for
completeness and accuracy before it is accepted as complete and officially
filed.
   (B)   Basis for determination. The Department’s completeness determination
is based on the Department’s list of required application content and any
additional written instructions provided to the applicant at a pre-application
conference, and/or during the application review period.
   (C)   Applicant notification. Within 30 days of application filing, the
Department must inform the applicant in writing that the application is
complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is
incomplete and additional information is required.
   (D)   Appeal of determination. When the Department determines that an
application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is
complete or that the information requested by the Department is not required,
the applicant may appeal the Department’s determination in compliance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
   (E)   Submittal of additional information.
      (1)   When the Department determines that an application is incomplete,
the applicant must submit additional required information in writing.
      (2)   Resubmitted information is subject to a new 30-day period of review
for completeness.
      (3)   Requested information must be submitted within the timeframe
identified in §
155.408.070(A) (Response Required).
   (F)   Environmental information. After determining that an application is
complete pursuant to §
155.408.040(C) (Applicant Notification), the Department may require the
applicant to submit additional information for the environmental review of the
project, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.408.050 MULTIPLE PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Concurrent filing. If a project requires more than one permit or
approval (e.g., a Zoning Map amendment and a conditional use permit), the
applicant must apply for all permits and approvals concurrently, unless the
concurrent filing requirement is waived by the Director. The Department may
accept a single application form for all required permits and approvals.
   (B)   Concurrent processing and review.
      (1)   The Department must process multiple applications for the same
project concurrently.
      (2)   Projects requiring multiple permit applications must be reviewed
and acted upon by the highest review authority designated by the Zoning Code
for any of the applications (e.g., a project requiring a zoning map amendment
and a conditional use permit will have both applications decided by the City
Council, instead of the Planning Commission acting on the conditional use
permit). This does not apply to any ministerial permits or approvals acted on
by the Director or Department staff without notice or public hearing, unless
otherwise stated in the provisions of the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.408.060 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW.
   (A)   CEQA review.
      (1)   After accepting a complete application, the Department must review
the project in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
and any adopted City CEQA guidelines.
      (2)   The Department will determine the required level of environmental
review (e.g., exemption, negative declaration) within 30 days of finding the
application complete.
   (B)   Special studies required. The Department may require the applicant to
prepare special studies and/or submit additional information to supplement the
Department’s CEQA compliance review.
   (C)   Action on CEQA document. The review authority that approves an
application must take final action on the CEQA document prepared for the
proposed project. Final action on the CEQA document must occur prior to or
concurrent with action on required permits. Pursuant to CEQA Guidelines § 15270
(b), the city is not required to take final action on a CEQA documents for a
denied application.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.408.070 APPLICATIONS DEEMED WITHDRAWN.
   (A)   Response required.
      (1)   When an applicant has been informed by letter that an application
is incomplete in accordance with §
155.408.040 (Application Review), the applicant must pay required supplemental
fees and/or provide requested information within 120 days following the date of
the letter, or within a different timeframe as determined by the Department and
communicated to the applicant in writing.
      (2)   If an applicant does not respond within the required response
timeframe, the application expires and is deemed withdrawn without any further
action by the Department.
   (B)   Resubmittal. After an application expires, future Departmental
consideration of the project requires an applicant to submit a new complete
application and associated fees.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.408.080 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   General. When the Zoning Code or a Major Subdivision requires a
noticed public hearing, the Department must provide notice of the hearing in
conformance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65090 et seq. and as described in this
section.
   (B)   Content of notice. Notice of public hearing must include all of the
following information, as applicable:
      (1)   Hearing information. The date, time and place of the hearing; the
name of the hearing body; and the phone number, email address and Department
location where an interested person can obtain additional information;
      (2)   Project information. The applicant's name, the application file
number, a general description of the project, and the location of the subject
property;
      (3)   Statement on environmental document. The required level of
environmental review for the proposed project (e.g., exemption, negative
declaration); a statement that the hearing body will consider approval of the
project CEQA determination or document, if applicable; and
      (4)   Statement limiting issues on appeal or in court actions. The
following statement: “If you challenge any decision made by a review authority
through administrative appeal or in court, you may be limited to raising only
those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this
notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the review authority at, or
prior to, the public hearing.”
   (C)   Method of notice distribution. Notice of a public hearing must be
given not more than 30 and not less than ten days before the hearing date using
the methods required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 65091 and as follows:
      (1)   Mailing.
         (a)   Notice is complete upon mailing and must be mailed or delivered
at least ten days before the scheduled hearing to the following recipients:
            1.   The owners of the subject property or the owner’s authorized
agent, and the applicant;
            2.   The owners of the real property located within a radius of 300
feet from the exterior boundaries of the subject property. The Department may
mail or deliver notices to properties within a larger radius of the subject
property if deemed necessary by the Director;
            3.   Each local agency expected to provide roads, schools,
sewerage, streets, water, power or other essential facilities or services to
the subject property, whose ability to provide those facilities and services
may be significantly affected; and
            4.   Any person who has filed a written request for notice of the
hearing with the Department or City Clerk.
         (b)   If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed
in compliance this division (C)(1) is more than 1,000, the Department may
provide notice by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page
in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten days prior to the
hearing.
      (2)   Posting. Notice must be posted on the project site and two other
public places at least ten days before the hearing, one of which will always be
City Hall.
      (3)   Publication.
         (a)   Notice of a public hearing for a General Plan, Zoning Code
amendment, subdivision and other projects required to do so by state law must
be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least ten days
before the hearing.
         (b)   For any other project requiring a public hearing, the Director
may determine that enhanced public notice is necessary and/or desirable and
require notice publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least ten
days before the hearing.
      (4)   Drive-thru facilities. For projects involving a new or modified
drive-thru facility, the Department shall provide notice to local organizations
identified by the Department as serving Eureka’s blind, aged and/or disabled
community.
      (5)   Additional notice. In addition to the types of notice required
above, the Department may require or provide additional notice as determined
necessary or desirable by the Department.
   (D)   Failure to receive notice. The validity of the hearing is not affected
by the failure of any resident, property owner or community member to receive a
mailed or other notice.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.408.090 NOTICE OF PENDING ACTION.
   When the Zoning Code requires a notice of pending action for applications
acted on by the Director, public notice must be given prior to the date of
action as follows.
   (A)   Content of notice. A notice of pending action must include all of the
following information, as applicable:
      (1)   Project information. The applicant's name, the application file
number, a general description of the project, the location of the subject
property.
      (2)   Statement on environmental determination. The environmental review
for the project (e.g., exemption, negative declaration); a statement that the
Director has adopted a CEQA determination or document, if applicable.
      (3)   Hearing request period. The notice must state that within 15 days
of the date the notice is mailed, any person may submit a written request for a
public hearing before the Planning Commission on the application, and must
indicate the reason or reasons the public hearing is requested.
   (B)   Method of notice distribution. Notice of pending action must be mailed
to the following recipients:
      (1)   The owners of the subject property, the owner's authorized agent,
and/or the applicant.
      (2)   The owners of the real property located within a radius of 300 feet
from the exterior boundaries of the subject property. The Department may mail
or deliver notices to properties within a larger radius of the subject property
if deemed necessary by the Director.
      (3)   Any person who has filed a written request for notice of the action
with the Department or City Clerk.
   (C)   Hearing only on request.
      (1)   If the Department receives a written request for a public hearing
before the end of the 15-day period, a date for the public hearing will be
determined, and notice will be provided pursuant to §
155.408.080 (Notice of Public Hearing).
      (2)   If no request for a public hearing is received by the end of the
15-day period, the Director will act on the application, and the action is
final.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22)
§ 155.408.100 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   General. Hearings will be conducted in a manner consistent with any
procedures adopted or endorsed by the review authority.
   (B)   Notice of public hearing. Notice of the public hearing must be
provided in accordance with §
155.408.080 (Notice of Public Hearing).
   (C)   Time and place of hearing. A hearing must be held at the date, time,
and place for which notice was given, unless the required quorum of hearing
body members is not present or the hearing is continued pursuant to division
(E) below.
   (D)   Public comment. All hearings must be open to the public with
opportunity to provide comment and/or testimony in accordance with established
procedures.
   (E)   Continued hearing.
      (1)   A hearing may be continued without further notice, provided that
the review authority chair announces the date, time and place to which the
hearing will be continued before the hearing adjournment or recess.
      (2)   The Director may continue a hearing without further notice when a
quorum of the review authority is not present at the public hearing. The
Director must announce the date, time and place to which the hearing will be
continued.
   (F)   Decision. After the close of a public hearing, the review authority
may:
      (1)   Approve, approve with conditions or deny the application; or
      (2)   Make a recommendation to another review authority if the review
authority does not make the final decision on the application.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.408.110 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Discretionary permits.
      (1)   The review authority may attach conditions to a discretionary
approval as needed to:
         (a)   Achieve consistency with the General Plan, Zoning Code and any
applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the City Council;
         (b)   Mitigate any project impacts; and
         (c)   Ensure compliance with any applicable city requirement or
regulation.
      (2)   A decision to impose a condition on a discretionary approval may
involve the subjective judgment of the review authority to determine how a
project may best meet a city policy or regulation.
   (B)   Ministerial permits.
      (1)   The Director may attach conditions to a ministerial approval as
needed to bring the project into compliance with an objective standard or
requirement.
      (2)   Conditions attached to ministerial permits must also be ministerial
and may not involve subjective judgment.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.412 SPECIFIC PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
§ 155.412.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General. This §
155.412 identifies procedures for specific types of permits and approvals
required by the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Modifications to standards.
      (1)   The following permits and approvals may be used to allow deviations
from Zoning Code standards:
         (a)   Administrative adjustments;
         (b)   Infill incentive permits;
         (c)   Minor modifications; and
         (d)   Reasonable accommodations.
      (2)   Variances.
         (a)   The city may change standards that apply to a property through a
Zoning Code text or map amendment as provided in §
155.432 (Zoning Code and General Plan Amendments).
         (b)   The city may also change standards that apply to a property
through a specific plan and/or development agreement as provided in Cal. Gov’t
Code §§ 65450 et seq. and 65864 et seq., respectively.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.412.020 REVIEW AUTHORITY; APPEALS.
   (A)   Projects requiring multiple permits. Projects requiring multiple
permit applications must be reviewed and acted upon by the highest review
authority designated by the Zoning Code for any of the applications (e.g., a
project requiring a zoning map amendment and a conditional use permit will have
both applications decided by the City Council, instead of the Planning
Commission acting on the conditional use permit). This does not apply to any
ministerial permits or approvals acted on by the Director or Department staff
without notice or public hearing, unless otherwise stated in the provisions of
the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Appeals. All decisions on permits and approvals in this section may be
appealed in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.412.030 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. An administrative adjustment is a discretionary process to
determine if a project is eligible for a modified standard.
   (B)   When allowed. Standards that may be modified with an administrative
adjustment are identified in the following subchapters of this Zoning Code:
Zoning Districts and Citywide Standards and below.
Table 412-1: Allowed Administrative Adjustments
Section Adjustment
Table 412-1: Allowed Administrative Adjustments
Section                                                     Adjustment
155.208 Mixed Use Zone Districts
   155.208.030 Development Standards                     Maximum Front
                                                            Setbacks
                                                            Ground Floor
   155.208.040 Pedestrian Focused Frontages              Storefront
                                                            Transparency
155.220 Resource Related Zoning Districts
                                                            Height Exceptions
   155.220.030 Development Standards                     for Non-Residential
                                                            Structures
155.304 Supplemental Use Regulations
   155.304.020 Accessory Uses                            Maximum Size
155.308 General Standards
   155.308.040 Vision Clearance Area                     Vision Clearance
                                                            Area Exception
   155.308.050 Outdoor Lighting                          Outdoor Lighting
                                                            Exception
155.312 Design Standards
   155.312.040 Building Entries                          Entrance Design
                                                            Exception
155.324 Parking
   155.324.040 Reductions and Alternatives to Automobile Allow Shared
Parking                                                     Parking
   155.324.040 Reductions and Alternatives to Automobile Off-site Non-
Parking                                                     adjoining Parking
   155.324.040 Reductions and Alternatives to Automobile Low Parking Demand
Parking                                                     Reduction
   155.324.040 Reductions and Alternatives to Automobile Low Impact
Parking                                                     Development Parking
                                                            Reduction
   155.324.060 Parking Design and Development Standards  Alley Access to
                                                            Parking Waiver
   155.324.060 Parking Design and Development Standards  Parking Placement
   155.324.070 Bicycle Parking                           Bicycle Parking
                                                            Reductions
   155.324.080 Parking Lot Landscaping                   Alternative
                                                            Landscape Design
155.332 Residential Subdivision Alternatives
   155.332.020 Small Lot Subdivisions                    On-site Parking
                                                            Waiver
 
   (C)   Review authority. The Director reviews and takes action on
administrative adjustment requests.
   (D)   Applications. An applicant must request an administrative adjustment
using an official Department form accompanied by all fees, information and
materials required by the Department.
   (E)   Public notice and hearing. None required.
   (F)   Findings for approval.
      (1)   To approve an administrative adjustment application, the Director
must make all of the following findings:
         (a)   The adjustment is consistent with the purpose of the zoning
district, the General Plan and any applicable specific plan or area plan
adopted by the City Council;
         (b)   The adjustment will not deprive neighboring property owners of
the reasonable economic use and enjoyment of their property; and
         (c)   The adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare.
      (2)   The Director must also make any additional findings required for
the specific modification as identified where the original standard appears in
following subchapters of this Zoning Code: Zoning Districts and Citywide
Standards.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.412.040 DESIGN REVIEW.
   (A)   Purpose. Design review is a discretionary process to ensure that the
street-facing façades of proposed developments exhibit high quality design,
complement neighboring properties, and contribute to Eureka's distinctive
identity and unique sense of place.
   (B)   When required. The following types of projects require design review:
      (1)   Additions adding 30% or more floor area to the total existing floor
area of a building in the residential or mixed-use zoning districts (i.e.,
zoning districts described in §§
155.204 and
155.208);
      (2)   New buildings that are 500 square feet or more in the residential
or mixed-use zoning districts (i.e., zoning districts described in §§
155.204 and
155.208);
      (3)   Any exterior modification to a street-facing building façade
located on a pedestrian-focused frontage (See Figure 208-4 in §
155.208 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts)). "Exterior modification" includes the
addition of a new sign, or the change in the size, shape, or location on the
façade of an existing sign, but does not include refacing an existing sign when
there is no change in the size, shape or location of the sign, and does not
include painting a sign directly on the façade of the structure; and
      (4)   Wireless telecommunication facilities. (See Municipal Code Chapter
159 (Wireless Telecommunications Facilities)).
   (C)   Exemptions. The following projects are exempt from design review:
      (1)   Housing development projects with four or fewer residential units,
including projects with residential units only, and mixed-use developments with
at least two-thirds of the square footage designated for residential use;
      (2)   Transitional, supportive, emergency and farmworker housing;
      (3)   Modifications and additions to existing structures where the
modification or addition is not facing an adjacent public street;
      (4)   Buildings occupied by the following use categories, as identified
in §
155.504 (Land Use Classifications):
         (a)   Agricultural and natural resource uses;
         (b)   Civic and recreation uses; and
         (c)   Infrastructure and utility uses; and
      (5)   Projects or project features to serve a person with disabilities
under the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
   (D)   Signs.
      (1)   The Design Review Committee serves as the review authority for
signs that require a master sign permit or creative sign permit. However, these
sign permit applications are not subject to the design review process required
by this section. To approve a sign permit, the Design Review Committee uses
exclusively the review and approval criteria in § 155.340 (Signs). The Design
Review Committee does not consider the design review criteria in §
155.412.040(J) (Design Review Criteria) when acting on a sign permit.
      (2)   The Design Review Committee serves as the review authority for
modification of the size, shape, or location of an existing sign, or the
addition of a new sign, on the façade facing a pedestrian-focused frontage.
Design review is not required for either a new sign or modification of an
existing sign when the sign is painted directly on the façade facing a
pedestrian-focused frontage; however, a sign permit may be required pursuant to
§
155.340 (Signs).
         (a)   To approve modification of the size, shape, or location on the
façade of an existing sign, the Design Review Committee uses exclusively the
design review criteria (§
155.412.040(J)) for surrounding context, architectural style, and visual
interest.
         (b)   For a new sign, the Design Review Committee uses the design
review criteria noted in division (a) above, and the review and approval
criteria in §
155.340 (Signs) to approve both the façade modification and the sign.
   (E)   Review authority.
      (1)   The Design Review Committee conducts design review for all projects
except as follows:
         (a)   If the project also requires review by the Historic Preservation
Commission (HPC) as provided in Municipal Code
Chapter 157 (Historic Preservation), the HPC conducts design review;
         (b)   If the project also requires a permit from the Planning
Commission, the Planning Commission conducts design review, unless design
review is to be conducted by the Historic Preservation Commission in accordance
with division (a) above; or
         (c)   If the project also requires City Council approval, the City
Council conducts design review, unless design review is to be conducted by the
Historic Preservation Commission in accordance with division (a) above.
      (2)   When the Planning Commission or City Council conducts design
review, the Department may request informal input from individual Design Review
Committee members prior to Planning Commission or City Council action on the
project. The Design Review Committee does not hold a formal meeting on the
proposed project prior to Planning Commission or City Council review.
   (F)   Application submittal and review. Design review applications must be
submitted and reviewed in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Procedures).
   (G)   Consistency. A project must be consistent, as determined by the
Director, with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan or area plan, and
applicable objective design policies and regulations adopted by the City
Council, prior to being scheduled for design review.
   (H)   Public notice and hearing. The review authority must review and act on
a design review application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
   (I)   Scope of design review.
      (1)   When acting on a design review application, the review authority
must consider only those project features directly related to the design
criteria described in §
155.412.040(J) (Design Review Criteria).
      (2)   The review authority may not consider exterior building colors or
other color choices included as part of a proposed project.
      (3)   When conducting design review, the review authority may not require
a modification to a project feature that complies with mandatory development
standards in the Zoning Code. For example, if a project complies with the
minimum setback requirement, the review authority may not require an increased
setback as a condition of design review approval. Design review is intended to
address only aesthetic considerations not otherwise regulated by the Zoning
Code.
      (4)   Design review may not require project changes to improve the
economic viability of a business as perceived by the review authority.
   (J)   Design review criteria. To approve a design review application, the
Review Authority must find that the proposed project complies with all of the
following design review criteria to the extent they apply.
      (1)   Surrounding context. The overall project and associated buildings
enhance the design quality of the area where they are located, and enhance
Eureka's unique character and distinctive sense of place. New buildings may
"fit in" with traditional architecture that complements the surrounding context
or "stand out" with a contemporary and contrasting style. All buildings must
minimize adverse impacts on neighboring properties when possible.
      (2)   Pedestrian environment. Buildings incorporate design features that
support an active public realm and an inviting pedestrian environment.
      (3)   Architectural style. Buildings demonstrate a coherent and
successfully executed architectural style. Building architecture may be
traditional or modern. Buildings are not required to conform to any dominant
architectural style or local vernacular. Creative architectural and artistic
expression is encouraged.
      (4)   Articulation and visual interest. Building façades are distinctive,
create visual interest, and relate to the human scale through vertical and
horizontal articulation, varied building planes, distinctive building elements,
and/or noticeable architectural details. Building elements such as roofs,
doors, windows, and porches are part of an integrated design and relate to the
human scale. Architectural details such as articulation, trim, eaves, window
boxes, and brackets contribute to the visual interest of the building.
      (5)   Materials. Building façades feature high-quality materials that are
appropriate to the architectural style, enhance building articulation, and are
compatible with surrounding development.
      (6)   Safety. The project promotes public safety and minimizes
opportunities for crime through design features such as property access
controls (e.g., placement of entrances, fences), increased visibility, and
features that promote a sense of ownership of outdoor space.
      (7)   Landscaping. Landscaping features low-water-use plants appropriate
for the local climate, contains native plants in compliance with §
155.328.050(D) (Native Plants), and does not include any invasive species that
would be harmful to native plants and habitat, in compliance with §
155.328.050(E) (Invasive Plants).
   (K)   Findings. To approve a design review application, the review authority
must make all of the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed development will not be detrimental to public health,
safety, or welfare or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in
the vicinity.
      (2)   The proposed project complies with all applicable design review
criteria in §
155.412.040(J) (Design Review Criteria).
   (L)   Building permits.
      (1)   For projects subject to design review, the Building Department may
not accept a building permit application until after design review approval.
      (2)   The Building Department may issue a certificate of occupancy or
other final building permit sign-off only after the Department has physically
inspected the project site and verified that the as-built project conforms with
design review approved plans and conditions of approval.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.412.045 GULCH GREENWAY PERMITS.
   See §
155.224.050(C)(3) (Gulch Greenway Permits).
(Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.412.050 HOME OCCUPATION APPROVALS.
   See §
155.304.070(B) (Permits Required).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.412.060 INFILL INCENTIVE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. An infill incentive permit allows deviations from development
standards for projects that provide community benefits and/or public amenities.
Infill incentive permits are discretionary actions intended to encourage high-
quality infill development and/or the adaptive reuse of properties suitable for
redevelopment.
   (B)   Where allowed. An infill incentive permit is available for projects in
the residential, mixed-use and industrial zoning districts.
   (C)   Types of infill incentive permits. The Zoning Code establishes two
types of infill incentive permits: minor infill incentive permits and major
infill incentive permits.
   (D)   Review authority.
      (1)   Minor infill incentive permits. The Director reviews and takes
action on minor infill incentive permit applications. The Director may refer
any application to the Planning Commission for public hearing and decision.
      (2)   Major infill incentive permits. The Planning Commission reviews and
takes action on major infill incentive permit applications.
   (E)   Required benefits. The review authority may approve an infill
incentive permit for projects that provide at least two of the following
community benefits:
      (1)   Architectural features. The project incorporates four of the
architectural features described in §
155.312.050 (Architectural Features);
      (2)   Vertical mixed-use. The project creates two or more new upper-story
residential units as a part of a vertical mixed-use development within 900 feet
of a public transit bus stop where the average interval of time between buses
is 90 minutes or less (90-minute headways) during weekday daytime hours. Mixed-
use development must be permitted in the applicable zoning district to qualify
as a benefit;
      (3)   Historic preservation. The project renovates a designated historic
resource in compliance with
Ch. 157 (Historic Preservation);
      (4)   Environmental remediation. The project remediates contaminated soil
or water;
      (5)   Green building. The project will be a LEED-certified green
building;
      (6)   Blight/nuisance abatement. The project eliminates blight, a public
nuisance or a public health or safety hazard;
      (7)   Child care. The project includes an on-site childcare facility;
      (8)   Supportive housing. The project provides supportive housing as
defined in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65582;
      (9)   Electric vehicle charging stations. The project provides an
electrical vehicle charging station for 50% of the parking spaces required to
serve a residential unit and/or for at least 25% of the parking spaces required
for a non-residential use;
      (10)   Materials and building elements. The project incorporates exterior
materials or building elements of a higher quality than conventional
construction. Examples include:
         (a)   Siding. All exterior walls are sided with wood shake, ornamental
metal, tile, brick, stone or stained wood;
         (b)   Doors and windows. All doors and windows are solid wood and/or
feature shutters, stained glass or true divided muntins;
         (c)   Roofing materials. All roof surfaces feature wood shingle or
shake, standing seam metal, clay or concrete tile, slate shingles or a green/
living roof; and
         (d)   Fixtures. High grade fixtures on all building walls visible from
a public street or sidewalk that add significantly to the architectural
character of the building such as light fixtures, door hinges and handles,
decorative hanging sign or awning brackets.
      (11)   Community amenities. The project creates or preserves a cultural,
recreational, employment, or other amenity that adds significantly to the
quality of life of the neighborhood or the community. The community amenity
must be an allowed use in the applicable zoning district to qualify as a
benefit.
   (F)   Incentives.
      (1)   Available incentives. An infill incentive permit may allow
deviations to development standards as shown in
Table 412-2.
Table 412-2: Allowed Deviation through Infill Incentive Permit
Standards Allowed Deviation
         Minor Infill Incentive Permit Major Infill Incentive Permit
Table 412-2: Allowed Deviation through Infill Incentive Permit
Standards                             Allowed Deviation
                                     Minor Infill       Major Infill Incentive
                                      Incentive Permit   Permit
Increase Maximum Building Height
   Residential zoning districts    15%                25%
   Mixed-use and industrial zoning 20%                35%
districts
Increase Maximum Floor Area Ratio
   Residential zoning districts    15%                25%
   Mixed-use and industrial zoning 20%                35%
districts
Increase Maximum Residential Density [1]
   R1 Zoning District [2]          N/A                1 additional unit
   R2 Zoning District [3]          1 additional unit  33% increase
   R3 Zoning Districts [3]         2 additional units 33% increase
   Hinge Zoning District           1 additional unit  33% increase
Reduce Minimum Lot Line Setbacks
   Residential zoning districts    25%                50%
Increase Maximum Site Coverage
   Residential zoning districts    15%                25%
Reduce Minimum On-Site Parking Spaces
   R1, R2 and R3 Zoning Districts  20%                50%
   Mixed-Use and Industrial Zoning 20%                50%
Districts
NOTES TO TABLE:
[1] See §
155.412.060(G) (Increased Density Requirements).
[2] Minimum lot area of 5,000 square feet required for increased density.
[3] Minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet required for increased density.
 
      (2)   Number of incentives. The maximum number of standards which may be
modified through an infill incentive permit is as follows:
         (a)   Minor infill incentive permits: one deviation to development
standards as shown in
Table 412-1; and
         (b)   Major infill incentive permit: two deviations to development
standards as shown in
Table 412-2.
   (G)   Increased density requirements. To be eligible for increased
residential density as provided in
Table 412-2, a project must meet the following criteria:
      (1)   Adjacency to high volume streets. The project is on a lot within
250 feet from a street designated as a major arterial, minor arterial or a
major collector in the General Plan Figure M-1 Circulation Diagram;
      (2)   Factors supporting higher density. The lot containing the project
satisfies one or more of the following requirements:
         (a)   Any portion of the lot is within 900 feet of a community park as
defined in the General Plan;
         (b)   Any portion of the lot is within 600 feet of a bus stop;
         (c)   Any portion of the lot is within 600 feet of a school;
         (d)   Any portion of the lot is within 900 feet of a mixed-use zoning
district or a residential zoning district with a higher allowed density;
         (e)   The lot has been unimproved (containing no buildings) for ten
years or longer; and/or
         (f)   The Neighborhood Market (NMO) Overlay Zone applies to the lot.
      (3)   Reduced unit size and affordability. The project satisfies one or
more of the following requirements:
         (a)   All of the additional units allowed through the increased
density are 500 square feet or less;
         (b)   For market-rate projects where the majority of units are not
income-restricted, a minimum of one unit or 10% of units (whichever is more)
are deed restricted to households earning 50% or less of the Humboldt County
median income; and/or
         (c)   For affordable housing projects where all units are income-
restricted, a minimum of one unit or 60% of units (whichever is more) are deed
restricted to households earning 50% or less of the Humboldt County median
income.
   (H)   Application submittal and review. Infill incentive permit applications
must be submitted and reviewed in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Procedures).
   (I)   Public notice and hearing.
      (1)   Minor infill incentive permits. Public notice of the Director's
pending action on a minor infill incentive permit application will be provided
in compliance with §
155.408.090 (Notice of Pending Action). The Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing only after receiving a written request for a public hearing.
      (2)   Major infill incentive permits. The Planning Commission must review
and act on a major infill incentive permit application at a noticed public
hearing in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
   (J)   Findings for approval. To approve an infill incentive permit, the
review authority must make all of the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed project substantially advances General Plan objectives
to prioritize development of vacant and underutilized infill properties and/or
revitalize existing properties;
      (2)   The community benefits provided by the project are of a sufficient
value to justify the deviations to development standards allowed by the permit;
      (3)   The adjustment will not deprive neighboring property owners of the
reasonable economic use and enjoyment of their property; and
      (4)   The adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.412.070 MINOR MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. A minor modification allows for small deviations from
development standards to accommodate projects that are compatible with and
appropriate for the area where they are located.
   (B)   When allowed.
      (1)   Permitted modifications.
         (a)   The Director may approve a minor modification to allow deviation
from a physical development standard that applies to the subject property.
Examples of physical development standards include lot area, site coverage,
building height, setbacks, fence and wall height, floor area ratio (FAR) and
on-site parking space dimensions.
         (b)   The maximum deviation allowed with a minor modification is 10%
of the standard; except that, fence and wall height deviation may be increased
by up to 20% with a minor modification.
      (2)   Calculating allowed deviations. The maximum deviation allowed with
a minor modification is calculated as 10% of the amount, distance or area
required by the standard. For example, if the maximum permitted height is 30
feet, up to three additional feet (10% of 30 feet) may be allowed with a minor
modification.
      (3)   Modifications not allowed. A minor modification may not be granted
to allow deviation from:
         (a)   The General Plan;
         (b)   Increased residential density;
         (c)   Required parking spaces; and
         (d)   Design standards with no quantified standard (e.g., building
entries facing the street).
   (C)   Review authority. The Director reviews and takes action on minor
modification applications.
   (D)   Applications. An application is not required for a minor modification.
Department staff will review the project information submitted for a building
permit or other required city approvals when acting on the zoning clearance or
discretionary approval.
   (E)   Public notice and hearing. None required.
   (F)   Findings for approval. To approve a minor modification application,
the Director must make all of the following findings:
      (1)   The modification will be compatible with adjacent structures and
uses and is consistent with the character of the neighborhood or district where
it is located;
      (2)   The modification is consistent with the purpose of the zoning
district, the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan or area plan
adopted by the City Council;
      (3)   The adjustment will not deprive neighboring property owners of the
reasonable economic use and/or enjoyment of their property; and
      (4)   The adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety or welfare.
   (G)   Effect of decision. A Director decision on a minor modification is
based on the merits of an individual application. Approval of a minor
modification does not establish a precedent for future similar applications.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.412.080 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. This section establishes a procedure for requesting
reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations to
provide persons with disabilities equal access to housing consistent with the
Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq.) and the California Fair
Employment and Housing Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 12955 et seq.). A reasonable
accommodation is typically a ministerial adjustment to physical design
standards to accommodate the placement of wheelchair ramps or other exterior
modifications to a dwelling in response to the needs of a disabled resident.
   (B)   When allowed.
      (1)   Eligible applicants. A request for reasonable accommodation may be
made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when
the application of the Zoning Code or other land use or building regulation,
policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.
      (2)   Definition. A PERSON WITH A DISABILITY is a person who has a
physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more
major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having this type of impairment
or anyone who has a record of this type of impairment.
      (3)   Eligible request. A request for reasonable accommodation may
include a request for a modification or exception to the rules, standards and
practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related
facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers.
   (C)   Review authority. The Director takes action on all reasonable
accommodation applications.
   (D)   Application requirements. A request for reasonable accommodation must
be submitted in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Procedures).
   (E)   Application review.
      (1)   The Director must make a written determination to either grant,
grant with modifications or deny a request for reasonable accommodation.
      (2)   If necessary to reach a determination on the request for reasonable
accommodation, the Director may request further information from the applicant
consistent with fair housing laws.
   (F)   Criteria for decision. To approve a reasonable accommodation request,
the Director must make all of the following findings:
      (1)   The housing subject to the request will be used by an individual
with disabilities protected under fair housing law;
      (2)   The request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make
housing available to an individual with disabilities protected under fair
housing law;
      (3)   Potential impacts on surrounding uses are acceptable;
      (4)   Physical attributes of the property and structures reasonably allow
for the accommodation; and
      (5)   Availability of other reasonable accommodations that may provide an
equivalent level of benefit have been assessed.
   (G)   Conditions of approval.
      (1)   In approving a request for reasonable accommodation, the Director
may impose conditions of approval to minimize impacts on surrounding uses and
ensure consistency with the purpose of the zoning district, the General Plan
and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the City Council.
      (2)   A reasonable accommodation approval may be conditioned to provide
for its automatic expiration and/or removal under appropriate circumstance
(e.g., the disabled resident vacates the property).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.412.090 SIGN PERMITS.
   See §
155.340.060 (Sign Permits).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.412.100 TINY HOUSES ON WHEELS PERMITS.
   See §
155.304.130(G) (Permit Required).
(Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22)
§ 155.412.110 TREE PERMITS.
   See §
155.304.140(D) (Tree Permits).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed 7-15-25)
§ 155.412.120 USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Purpose. Use permits are required for land uses that are generally
appropriate within a zoning district, but where the potential impacts of the
use on a site and its surroundings must be evaluated, and where conditions of
approval may be needed. Use permits are discretionary actions that enable the
city to ensure that a proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and will
not create negative impacts to adjacent properties or the general public.
   (B)   Types of use permits. The Zoning Code establishes two types of use
permits: minor use permits and conditional use permits.
   (C)   Review authority.
      (1)   Minor use permits. The Director reviews and takes action on minor
use permit applications. The Director may refer any application to the Planning
Commission for public hearing and decision.
      (2)   Conditional use permits. The Planning Commission reviews and takes
action on conditional use permit applications.
   (D)   When required. Land uses that require a use permit are shown in the
land use regulation tables for each zoning district found in the Zoning
Districts subchapter.
   (E)   Public notice and hearing.
      (1)   Minor use permits. Notice of the Director's pending action on a
minor use permit application must be provided in compliance with §
155.408.090 (Notice of Pending Action). The Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing only after receiving a written request for a public hearing.
      (2)   Conditional use permits. The Planning Commission must review and
act on a conditional use permit application at a noticed public hearing in
compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
   (F)   Findings for approval. To approve a use permit, the review authority
must make all of the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan, Zoning Code
and any applicable specific plan or area plan adopted by the City Council;
      (2)   The site is suitable for the size, design and operating
characteristics of the proposed use;
      (3)   The proposed use will be compatible with existing and planned land
uses in the vicinity of the property;
      (4)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety and welfare; and
      (5)   The proposed use is properly located within the city and adequately
served by existing or planned services and infrastructure.
   (G)   Permits to run with the land. See §
155.420.120 (Permits to Run with the Land).
   (H)   Expiration of use permits. See §
155.420.090(C) (Discontinued Uses).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.412.130 VACATION RENTAL PERMITS.
   See §
155.304.150.F (Permits Required).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22)
§ 155.412.140 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Purpose. A variance is a discretionary approval that allows for
deviation from physical development standards in the Zoning Code. The city may
grant a variance only when the strict application of development standards
creates a unique hardship due to unusual circumstances associated with the
property.
   (B)   When allowed.
      (1)   Allowable variances. The city may grant a variance to allow for
deviation from any physical development standard that applies to the subject
property. Examples of physical development standards include height, setbacks,
open space, floor area ratio (FAR), and off-street parking requirements.
      (2)   Variances not allowed. A variance may not be granted to:
         (a)   Permit a use other than a use permitted in the zoning district
as specified in Part 2 (Zoning District Standards);
         (b)   Allow deviation from a requirement of the General Plan (e.g.,
maximum residential density in zoning district); and
         (c)   Allow deviations to Zoning Code standards to reduce construction
costs.
   (C)   Types of variances. The Zoning Code establishes two types of
variances: major variances and minor variances.
      (1)   Minor variance. A minor variance allows a deviation from a standard
by 20% or less.
      (2)   Major variances. A major variance allows a deviation from a
standard by more than 20%.
   (D)   Calculating deviations. A deviation allowed with a variance is
calculated as a percentage of the distance or area required by the standard.
For example, if the minimum required setback is 20 feet, the setback may be
reduced by four feet to 16 feet (a four-foot reduction is 20% of 20 feet). The
same setback may be reduced to any distance less than 16 feet with a major
variance.
   (E)   Review authority.
      (1)   Minor variance. The Director reviews and takes action on minor
variance applications. The Director may refer any application to the Planning
Commission for public hearing and decision.
      (2)   Major variances. The Planning Commission reviews and takes action
on major variance applications.
   (F)   Application submittal and review. Variance applications must be
submitted and reviewed in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Requirements).
   (G)   Public notice and hearing.
      (1)   Minor variance. Public notice of the Director's pending action on a
minor variance permit application will be provided in compliance with §
155.408.090 (Notice of Pending Action). The Planning Commission will hold a
public hearing only after receiving a written request for a public hearing.
      (2)   Major variance. The Planning Commission must review and act on a
major variance application at a noticed public hearing in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
   (H)   Findings for approval. To approve a variance, the review authority
must make all of the following findings:
      (1)   There are unique circumstances applicable to the subject property,
including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, that do not
generally apply to other properties in the vicinity or in the same zoning
district as the subject property;
      (2)   The strict application of the Zoning Code regulation would deprive
the subject property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity or
in the same zoning district as the subject property;
      (3)   The variance will not be materially detrimental to the public
health, safety, or welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in
the vicinity or in the same zoning district as the subject property; and
      (4)   The variance does not constitute a grant of special privilege
inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity or in
the same zoning district as the subject property.
   (I)   Precedent. The approval of a variance does not set a precedent for the
granting of any future variance. Each application must be considered only on
its individual merits.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.412.150 ZONING CLEARANCES.
   (A)   Purpose. A zoning clearance is a ministerial process to confirm that a
proposed structure or land use complies with the Zoning Code.
   (B)   When required. A zoning clearance is required before:
      (1)   An applicant establishes a land use permitted by right in the
zoning district;
      (2)   The city issues a new or modified business license; or
      (3)   The city issues a building permit, grading permit, or other
construction-related permit to:
         (a)   Establish a new structure or use;
         (b)   Move or reconstruct an existing structure;
         (c)   Modify an existing structure to accommodate a change in use; or
         (d)   Enlarge or expand an existing structure.
   (C)   Relationship to discretionary permits. When a project requires a
discretionary action, a discretionary approval serves as the equivalent of a
zoning clearance.
   (D)   Relationship to other ministerial approvals. When a project requires
another ministerial approval in addition to a zoning clearance (e.g., a
building permit approval), the ministerial approval serves as the equivalent of
a zoning clearance.
   (E)   Applicant requests. A property or business owner may request a zoning
clearance to provide documentation that an existing structure or use complies
with the Zoning Code.
   (F)   Review authority. A zoning clearance is approved by Department staff.
Controversial and complex projects will be referred to the Director for review
and approval.
   (G)   Applications. An application is not required for a zoning clearance,
unless the zoning clearance is the only city approval required for a project.
Department staff will review the project information submitted for a building
permit or other required city approvals when acting on the zoning clearance.
   (H)   Review and action.
      (1)   Department staff will review the project information to verify
compliance with the Zoning Code. If the project complies with all applicable
requirements, the Department staff must approve the zoning clearance.
      (2)   Zoning clearance approval may be in the form of a stamp, signature,
or other official notation on approved plans, a letter to the applicant, or
other similar certification or form.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord.
951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.416 APPEALS AND REVIEWS.
§ 155.416.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.416 establishes procedures for the appeal and review of decisions made on
ministerial and discretionary actions.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.416.020 APPEAL SUBJECTS AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Appealable decisions.
      (1)   
Table 404-1 in §
155.404 (Administrative Responsibilities) identifies decisions that may be
appealed and the body that hears the appeal.
      (2)   In addition to the permits and decisions in
Table 404-1, any discretionary decision made by the Director when administering
the Zoning Code may be appealed to the Planning Commission, and any
discretionary decision by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council. For notices of pending Director action, the Zoning Code allows for a
request for a hearing in lieu of an appeal of the Director's action.
      (3)   Ministerial actions of the Department, Director, and other city
staff when administering the Zoning Code may be appealed to the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   In addition to the permits and decisions in
Table 404-1, any discretionary decision made by the Director when administering
the Zoning Code may be appealed to the Planning Commission, and any
discretionary decision by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City
Council.
   (C)   Ministerial actions of the Department, Director and other city staff
when administering the Zoning Code may be appealed to the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.416.030 FILING AND PROCESSING OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Eligibility.
      (1)   Any aggrieved person may submit an appeal of decisions shown in
Table 404-1 in §
155.404 (Administrative Responsibilities).
      (2)   For decisions made at a public hearing, an appeal may only be filed
by a person who:
         (a)   Submitted written concerns about specific aspects of the project
for consideration by the review authority at the public hearing;
         (b)   Verbally expressed concerns about specific aspects of the
project during the public comment period for the public hearing; or
         (c)   Submitted written comments to the Department prior to the public
hearing expressing concerns about specific aspects of the project.
      (3)   The Director, the Chief Building Official, or two City Council
members may appeal a decision made at a public hearing within ten days
following the date of the decision by filing a written appeal with the
Department or City Clerk pursuant to §
155.416.030(C)(1)(a) or (b).
   (B)   Timing of appeal. An appeal must be filed within ten days following
the date of the decision, unless a longer appeal period is specified as part of
the project approval.
   (C)   Form of appeal.
      (1)   An appeal must be submitted in writing on a form provided by the
city with all required fees. Appeals must be submitted to:
         (a)   The Department for appeals of Director and Design Review
Committee decisions; and
         (b)   The City Clerk for appeals of Planning Commission decisions.
      (2)   The appeal must state the pertinent facts and the basis for the
appeal.
      (3)   The whole decision or part of the decision may be appealed. If an
appellant chooses, an appeal may be taken solely from any finding, action or
condition.
      (4)   For decisions made at a public hearing, an appeal is limited to:
         (a)   Issues raised at or prior to the hearing, either through public
comment or in writing; or
         (b)   Information that was not known by the review authority when the
decision was made.
      (5)   Decisions resulting from the review authority’s abuse of
discretion.
   (D)   Effect of appeal. Once an appeal is filed, any action on the
associated project is suspended until the appeal is processed and a final
decision is rendered by the appeal body.
   (E)   Report and scheduling of hearing.
      (1)   When an appeal has been filed, the Department will prepare a report
on the matter, including all of the application materials in question.
      (2)   The Department must schedule the matter for a public hearing by the
appeal body within 60 days of the filing of the appeal.
      (3)   Notice of the hearing will be provided and the hearing must be
conducted in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
      (4)   Any interested person may appear and be heard regarding the appeal.
      (5)   All appeals on a single project must be considered together at the
same hearing, including any continuation thereof.
   (F)   Hearing and decision.
      (1)   During the appeal hearing, the appeal body may take action on the
subject of the appeal or any aspect of the appealed project (de novo review).
The appeal body must make its own decision supported by findings.
      (2)   The appeal body’s decision may:
         (a)   Affirm, modify or reverse the action that is the subject of the
appeal;
         (b)   Adopt additional conditions of approval that address the matter
appealed;
         (c)   Remand the appeal for further review, recommendation or action
to the previous review authority; or
         (d)   In the case of appeals heard by the Planning Commission, forward
the appeal to the City Council for review and decision.
      (3)   The appeal body’s action must be based on findings of fact about
the particular case. The findings must identify the reasons for the appeal
body’s action and verify the compliance of the subject of the appeal with the
Zoning Code.
      (4)   A matter being heard on appeal may be continued for good cause
(e.g., additional California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review is
required).
      (5)   If the appeal body is unable to reach a decision on the matter
appealed, the appeal is denied and the decision of the previous review
authority remains in effect.
   (G)   Effective date of appeal decision.
      (1)   City Council decision. A decision of the City Council on an appeal
is final and effective on the date the decision is rendered.
      (2)   Other decisions. A decision of the Planning Commission, Historic
Preservation Commission, or Design Review Committee is final and effective ten
days after the decision is made, unless an appeal has been filed in compliance
with this section.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.416.040 [RESERVED].
§ 155.416.050 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   No person has standing to seek judicial review of a city decision on a
permit or other matter under the Zoning Code unless and until all appeals have
been exhausted.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420 POST-APPROVAL PROVISIONS.
§ 155.420.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.420 establishes permit procedures and requirements that apply after an
application is approved.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.020 NOTICE OF DECISION.
   (A)   Notice given. Within two business days following the review
authority’s decision on a permit application, the Department will provide
notice of the decision to the applicant and to any person who specifically
requested notice of the decision.
   (B)   Notice contents. Notice of a final decision must contain applicable
findings, conditions of approval, reporting and monitoring requirements and
appeal procedures.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.030 EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION.
   (A)   City Council decisions.
      (1)   A City Council decision on a Zoning Code Amendment is final and
becomes effective 30 days after the decision is made.
      (2)   A City Council decision on permits, appeals, General Plan
Amendments adopted by resolution and other non-legislative matters is final and
effective on the date the decision is made, unless otherwise stated in the
approving resolution.
   (B)   Other decisions. The following applies to decisions of the Director,
Design Review Committee and Planning Commission.
      (1)   If an appealable decision is not appealed in compliance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews), the decision is final and effective ten days
after the decision is made.
      (2)   For decisions appealed to the Planning Commission, the decision is
final and effective ten days after the Planning Commission decision unless an
appeal of the decision to the City Council is filed in compliance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
      (3)   For decisions appealed to the City Council, the decision is final
when the City Council makes a final decision on the appeal.
      (4)   A non-appealable decision is final and effective on the date the
decision is made.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.420.040 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Permits may not be issued until the effective date.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.050 CONFORMANCE TO APPROVED PLANS.
   (A)   Compliance. All work performed under an approved permit must be in
compliance with the approved plans and any conditions of approval and/or
mitigation measures.
   (B)   Changes. Changes to an approved project must be submitted and
processed in compliance with §
155.420.080 (Changes to an Approved Project).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.060 CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   The Building Department may issue a certificate of occupancy or other final
permit sign-off only after the Department verifies that the project conforms to
the approved plans and any conditions of approval.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.070 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Security required. The city may require an applicant to provide
adequate security to guarantee the proper completion of approved work or
compliance with conditions of approval.
   (B)   Form of security. The security must be in the form of cash, a
certified or cashier’s check or a performance bond executed by the applicant
and a corporate surety authorized to do business in California and approved by
the Department.
   (C)   Amount of security. The Department will determine the amount of the
security necessary to ensure proper completion of the approved work or
compliance with conditions of approval.
   (D)   Duration of security. The security must remain in effect until all
work has been completed and conditions fulfilled to the satisfaction of the
Department or until a specified warranty period has elapsed.
   (E)   Release of security. The Department must release the security upon
completion of the approved work or compliance with conditions of approval.
   (F)   Failure to comply.
      (1)   Upon failure to complete work or comply with conditions, the
Department may complete the work or fulfill the conditions and may collect from
the applicant or surety all costs incurred, including administrative,
engineering, legal and inspection costs.
      (2)   The Department must refund any unused portion of the security to
the funding source.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.080 CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PROJECT.
   This section establishes procedures for an applicant to request a change to
an approved project.
   (A)   Request for a change. An applicant must request changes in writing,
with appropriate supporting materials and an explanation for the request.
   (B)   Major changes. A major change to an approved project means any change
that does not qualify as a minor change under division (C) below. Major changes
must be approved by the same review authority as the original approval. The
same public notice and hearing requirements that applied to the original
approval also apply to the requested major change.
   (C)   Minor changes.
      (1)   The Director may authorize minor changes to an approved project if
the changes:
         (a)   Are consistent with the Zoning Code;
         (b)   Are consistent with the spirit and intent of the original
approval;
         (c)   Do not involve a feature of the project that was a mitigation
measure or a basis for findings in a negative declaration, mitigated negative
declaration or environmental impact report for the project;
         (d)   Do not involve a feature of the project that was a basis for
conditions of approval for the project;
         (e)   Do not involve a feature of the project that was a specific
consideration by the review authority in granting the approval; and
         (e)   Do not involve any expansion, intensification or increase in
size of the land use or structure beyond the original approval.
      (2)   The Director may approve minor changes without a noticed public
hearing.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.420.090 PERMIT/APPROVAL EXPIRATION.
   (A)   General. As provided in this division, permits and other approvals
listed in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals) automatically expire without further
action by the city unless:
      (1)   An extension of time is approved under §
155.420.100 (Extension of Time); or
      (2)   An alternative timeframe is established by the review authority in
accordance with §
155.420.100 (Extension of Time).
   (B)   Time limits.
      (1)   Permits and other approvals listed in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals) expire two years after approval if not
exercised. A permit/approval is exercised when:
         (a)   A building permit is issued and construction has commenced and
is diligently pursued to completion;
         (b)   A certificate of occupancy is issued; or
         (c)   The land use is established.
      (2)   After a permit/approval is exercised, the permit/approval expires
if, prior to occupancy, construction stops for three years.
   (C)   Discontinued uses.
      (1)   Approved use permits that have been vested pursuant to division (B)
above do not expire and remain in effect indefinitely unless the city revokes
the permit as provided in §
155.428.080 (Permit Revocation).
      (2)   If a land use authorized by a use permit ceases operations for any
period of time, the use permit remains valid and the land use may be re-
established without the need for a new use permit. A re-established use must
comply with all conditions of approval attached to the original permit.
      (3)   If a legally established land use without a required use permit
ceases operations for any period of time, the land use may be re-established
only after obtaining city approval of the required use permit.
   (D)   Effect of expiration.
      (1)   An expired permit/approval is void and of no further force and
effect. An applicant retains no rights previously granted under an expired
permit/approval.
      (2)   To establish a use or structure allowed by an expired permit/
approval, an applicant must apply for and receive city approval of a new
permit/approval.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-
C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.420.100 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   An applicant may request an extension of a permit/approval set to
expire under §
155.420.090 (Permit/Approval Expiration) in accordance with this division.
      (2)   An applicant may request two types of extensions:
         (a)   A one-year extension approved by the Director; and/or
         (b)   A two-year extension approved by the original review authority.
   (B)   All extension requests. All extension requests must comply with the
following:
      (1)   The applicant must submit to the Department a written extension
request no later than ten days before the permit/approval expiration date. The
request must be accompanied by all fees, information, and materials required by
the Department.
      (2)   Filing a written extension request suspends the expiration until
the review authority acts on the request. Building, grading, or other
construction-related permits associated with the permit/approval may not be
issued during the suspension period.
      (3)   The review authority may extend the permit/approval if the
applicant has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in
efforts to exercise the permit/approval in a timely manner.
      (4)   The burden of proof is on the applicant to demonstrate that the
permit/approval should be extended.
      (5)   If the Director is the review authority for the extension request,
the Director may choose to refer the request to the Planning Commission for
review and final decision.
   (C)   One-year extension.
      (1)   The Director may approve a one-year extension to a permit/approval
in accordance with division (B) above (All Extension Requests).
      (2)   A noticed public hearing is not required.
   (D)   Two-year extensions.
      (1)   The review authority that originally approved the permit/approval
may approve a two-year extension to the permit/approval in accordance with
division (B) above (All Extension Requests).
      (2)   The same public notice and hearing requirement that applied to the
original permit/approval also applies to the two-year extension request.
      (3)   The two-year extension may be in addition to a one-year extension
previously approved by the Director, for a total extension of three years.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.420.110 RESUBMITTALS FOLLOWING DENIAL OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   Resubmittals prohibited. For a period of 12 months following the
denial or revocation of a permit or other approval, the Department may not
accept an application for the same or substantially similar project for the
same site, unless the denial or revocation was made without prejudice, and so
stated in the record.
   (B)   Determination. The Director determines whether an application is for a
project that is the same or substantially similar to the project approved by
the previously denied or revoked permit/approval.
   (C)   Appeals. The determination of the Director may be appealed to the
Planning Commission in compliance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.420.120 PERMITS TO RUN WITH THE LAND.
   Permits/approvals issued in compliance with the Zoning Code remain valid
upon change of ownership of the site, structure, or land use that is the
subject of the approved permit/approval.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424 NONCONFORMITIES.
§ 155.424.010 PURPOSE.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, this section establishes regulations
for non-conformities, including, but not limited to site features, buildings,
signs, uses, and lots that were legally established prior to the adoption of
the current Zoning Code, but are prohibited, regulated, or restricted
differently under the current Code. These regulations are intended to:
   (A)   Recognize that some non-conforming uses and structures may contribute
in a positive manner to Eureka's unique sense of place and quality of life;
   (B)   Allow for the continued operation of non-conforming uses that are
compatible with neighboring properties;
   (C)   Allow for the continued use of, and improvement to, some non-
conforming structures;
   (D)   Require non-conforming site features to be brought into conformance
with the Zoning Code when reasonable to do so; and
   (E)   Allow for the development and use of legal non-conforming lots.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-
C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Legal non-conformities only. This section applies to legally
established site features, buildings, uses, signs, and lots that do not conform
to the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located.
   (B)   Not applicable to violations.
      (1)   This section does not apply to non-conformities established in
violation of the Zoning Code, or the regulation in effect at the time the non-
conformity was established.
      (2)   A non-conformity that was illegally established is considered a
violation of the Zoning Code subject to §
155.428 (Enforcement and Penalties).
   (C)   Accessory dwelling units. An application for an accessory dwelling
unit shall not be denied because of non-conforming conditions that do not
present a threat to public health and safety and are not affected by the
construction of the accessory dwelling unit.
   (D)   Burden of proof.
      (1)   Any person asserting a right to a non-conformity has the burden of
proof to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Director, that the non-
conformity was legally established. The Director is not responsible to prove
the absence of a legal non-conformity.
      (2)   The Director's decision on the legal status of a non-conformity may
be appealed in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424.030 NON-CONFORMING SITE FEATURES.
   (A)   Applicability. This division applies to existing physical improvements
on a developed lot that do not conform to the Zoning Code, excluding buildings
and signs. See §
155.424.040 (Non-conforming Buildings) for rules that apply to houses, garages,
and other buildings on a lot, and §
155.424.050 (Non-conforming Signs) for rules that apply to signs.
   (B)   Required compliance. Unless excluded by division (D) below
(Exceptions), or the exemptions listed in each code section referenced below,
if a development project requires a building permit where the total
construction value is $55,000 or more, and/or requires a use permit, the
following non-conforming site features must be brought into compliance with the
Zoning Code:
      (1)   Landscaping. Landscaping required by §
155.328.040 (Required Landscape Areas) and §
155.328.050 (General Landscape Requirements);
      (2)   Parking lot landscaping. Parking lot landscaping required by §
155.324.080 (Parking Lot Landscaping) to the extent possible given the
configuration of existing development and physical site constraints. For
example, if the existing parking lot configuration and striping pattern can
only accommodate a two-foot perimeter buffer instead of the required four-foot
buffer, the two-foot buffer is allowed;
      (3)   Parking lot paving/striping. Parking lot paving and striping, as
required by city specifications, when parking lot is not paved or striped;
      (4)   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting required by §
155.308.050 (Outdoor Lighting);
      (5)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage as required by §
155.304.110 (Outdoor Storage);
      (6)   Vision clearance area. Any site feature that conflicts with §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area);
      (7)   Waste storage. Solid waste/recyclable material storage areas
required by §
155.308.070 (Solid Waste/Recyclable Material Storage);
      (8)   Screening. Screening for adjacent residential zoning districts
required by §
155.308.060 (Screening for Residential Zoning Districts);
      (9)   Short-term bicycle parking. Short-term bicycle parking as required
by §
155.324.070 (Bicycle Parking); and
      (10)   Non-conforming signs. Non-conforming signs as required by §
155.424.050 (Non-conforming Signs).
   (C)   Annual adjustment. The $55,000 project valuation threshold in division
(B) above (Required Compliance) will be increased for inflation by 3% annually,
using 2023 as the base year.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Construction project exceptions. The following development projects
are not subject to division (B) above (Required Compliance), and do not trigger
the need to bring non-conforming site features into compliance:
         (a)   Accessory dwelling units. This section does not apply to
applications for new construction, creation, or modification of an accessory
dwelling unit.
         (b)   Reroof. This section does not apply to applications for
residential or commercial reroof permits.
         (c)   Solar systems. This section does not apply to applications for
solar systems.
         (d)   ADA accessibility. This section does not apply to applications
for ADA accessibility additions or upgrades, when the project only consists of
the accessibility additions or upgrades. For example, installation of an
accessible ramp for a commercial office would not be subject to this section. A
tenant improvement for a commercial office which includes the addition of an
accessible ramp would be subject to this section.
         (e)   Electric vehicle charging stations. This section does not apply
to applications for electric vehicle (EV) charging station permits, when the
project only consists of the EV station addition or upgrade, and any associated
striping of the lot. For example, installation of an EV charging station at a
multi-family apartment would not be subject to this section. A remodel of an
apartment building which includes the addition of an EV charging station would
be subject to this section.
      (2)   Site feature exceptions. The following non-conforming site features
may continue and are not subject to division (B) above (Required Compliance):
         (a)   Fences and walls (§
155.320);
         (b)   Number of required on-site parking spaces (§
155.324.030);
         (c)   Long term bicycle parking (§
155.324.070);
         (d)   Parking design and development standards (§
155.324.060); and
         (e)   Other site features not specifically identified in division (B)
above (Required Compliance).
   (E)   Repairs and modifications.
      (1)   If a non-conforming site feature identified in division (B) above
(Required Compliance) is repaired or modified, the site feature must be brought
into compliance with the Zoning Code.
      (2)   A non-conforming site feature identified in division (D)(2) above
(Site Feature Exceptions) may be repaired or modified if the project does not
increase or exacerbate the non-conforming aspect of the site feature. For
example, a fence that exceeds the maximum height allowed by §
155.320 (Fences and Walls) may be repaired or replaced if the fence height is
not increased.
      (3)   A project that increases or exacerbates the non-conforming aspect
of any non-conforming site feature is subject to the permit requirements for
variances and minor modifications in §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals). For example, increasing the height of
a nonconforming fence that exceeds the maximum height allowed by §
155.320 (Fences and Walls) requires a minor modification or variance. See §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals); calculation of the percent deviation
for purposes of qualifying for a minor modification is based on the proposed
incremental increase in non-conformity.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S.,
passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424.040 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Applicability. This division applies to non-conforming houses,
garages, and other buildings as defined in §
155.508 (Defined Terms). See §
155.424.030 (Non-conforming Site Features) for rules that apply to other types
of non-conforming structures.
   (B)   Permitted modifications.
      (1)   A non-conforming building may be repaired, modified, or enlarged if
the project does not increase or exacerbate the non-conforming aspect of the
building. For example, a remodel of a home that exceeds the height standard but
that doesn't increase the home's height is allowed with a zoning clearance; no
other department permits are required.
      (2)   Unless otherwise allowed by this section, a project that increases
or exacerbates the non-conforming aspect of a building requires either a minor
modification or variance depending on the nature of the modification. For
example, a remodel that increases the height of a home exceeding the maximum
building height standard requires a minor modification or variance. See §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals); calculation of the percent deviation
for purposes of qualifying for a minor modification is based on the proposed
incremental increase in non-conformity. For example, if a maximum permitted
height is 30 feet, and a non-conforming building is 35 feet tall, up to three
additional feet (10% of 30 feet) may be allowed with a minor modification,
allowing the building height to be increased to 38 feet.
   (C)   Expansions of use. An increase in floor area occupied by a permitted
use in a non-conforming building is allowed subject to the limitations in
division (B) above (Permitted Modifications).
   (D)   Established side setbacks for building additions. See §
155.204.030(G) (Established Side Setbacks for Building Additions).
   (E)   Demolition and reconstruction.
      (1)   Reconstruction defined. "Reconstructed" or "reconstruction" means
rebuilding a damaged or destroyed building in a manner similar but not
identical to the original structure. A reconstructed building generally
recreates the original building footprint, mass, and height, but may deviate
from design details such as architectural design and the arrangement of doors,
windows, and rooflines.
      (2)   Demolition.
         (a)   If a non-conforming building, or a portion of a non-conforming
building is demolished, whether as a result of involuntary damage or
destruction, or voluntary demolition, the building may be reconstructed as
shown in
Table 424-1.
 
Table 424-1: Permits Required to Reconstruct Demolished Non-conforming
Buildings
Linear Footage of the Interior and Exterior Building Walls Permit Required
Demolished or Removed
Less than 50%                                              By-right
50% or more                                                MUP
Note:
Removal of roof, foundation, or exterior sheathing is not included in
demolition calculation. Interior wall coverings (such as sheet rock) are
not considered walls.
 
         (b)   For reconstruction requiring a minor use permit, the Director
may attach conditions of approval as necessary to protect public health, safety
and welfare, including requirements to reduce or eliminate previously existing
non-conformities.
      (3)   No new or increased non-conformities. Reconstruction of damaged,
destroyed or voluntarily demolished buildings may not increase or exacerbate
previously existing non-conformities or create new non-conformities.
      (4)   Design review. Design review is required for 50% or more
reconstruction of a building under the same circumstances as is required for a
new building pursuant to §
155.412.040(B) (When Required) and §
155.412.040(C) (Exemptions).
      (5)   Design standards. Reconstructed non-residential, mixed-use, and
multi-family buildings must comply with the design standards in §
155.208.040 (Pedestrian-Focused Street Frontages), and §
155.312 (Design Standards), as applicable.
      (6)   Property line trespass. A reconstructed building may not trespass
across a property line and may not extend over or be located within the public
right-of-way.
      (7)   Timing of construction. The construction of the replacement
building must begin within two years of the date the structure was damaged or
destroyed.
      (8)   Buildings not reconstructed. If a damaged or destroyed non-
conforming building is replaced with a new building that does not meet the
definition of reconstruction, the new building must comply with all standards
of the applicable zoning district or obtain a variance (§
155.412.140) or minor modification (§
155.412.070) depending on the nature of the deviations from applicable
standards.
   (F)   Relocated buildings. A non-conforming building that is moved to a new
location must conform to all standards of the applicable zoning district.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424.050 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Applicability. This division applies to signs as defined in §
155.508 (Defined Terms) that are non-conforming.
   (B)   Continuation. Except as otherwise required by this division, a non-
conforming sign may continue its use as a sign if it was legally established in
compliance with all applicable regulations in effect at the time the sign was
installed. It is the applicant's responsibility to demonstrate that the sign
was legally established.
   (C)   Allowed changes.
      (1)   Changes to sign copy/face and repainting of non-conforming signs is
permitted as long as there is no alteration to the physical structure or
support elements of the sign.
      (2)   Routine repairs and maintenance may be performed on a non-
conforming sign. Routine repair and maintenance does not include 50% or more
replacement of the physical structure, or expansion or enlargement of the
physical structure or sign.
      (3)   A non-conforming sign that sustains less than 50% damage to its
structure may be repaired to its original pre-damaged condition, provided that
such repair is completed within 180 days after the date of the damage. The
replacement of 50% or more of the sign's structure is not repair and
maintenance but instead constitutes a replacement structure requiring
compliance with current permitting and development standards.
   (D)   Required compliance.
      (1)   Sign installed on or after January 1, 2000. A non-conforming sign
installed on or after January 1, 2000 must be removed or brought into
compliance with this section when:
         (a)   The sign is damaged or requires maintenance and the cost of
repair exceeds 50% of the replacement value;
         (b)   The sign is relocated to a different lot or building; or
         (c)   The Director determines the sign has become a public nuisance or
hazard due to inadequate maintenance or dilapidation in accordance with §
155.340.080(E) (Maintenance).
      (2)   Sign installed before January 1, 2000. A non-conforming sign
installed before January 1, 2000 must be removed or brought into compliance
with this section when:
         (a)   The sign is associated with a development project requiring a
building permit where the total construction value is $55,000 or more. The
$55,000 project valuation threshold will be increased for inflation by 3%
annually, using 2023 as the base year;
         (b)   A new use requiring a use permit occupies the tenant space
served by the sign;
         (c)   The sign is located on a remodeled building façade;
         (d)   The building containing the use advertised by the sign is
enlarged by 10% or more;
         (e)   The sign is damaged or requires maintenance and the cost of
repair exceeds 50% of the replacement value;
         (f)   The sign is relocated to a different lot or building; or
         (g)   The Director determines the sign has become a public nuisance or
hazard due to inadequate maintenance or dilapidation in accordance with §
155.340.080(E) (Maintenance).
   (E)   Digital signs. Non-conforming digital signs must comply with the
design, message, and brightness standards in
Table 340-9 in
155.340.070 (Sign Standards).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424.060 NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Continuation allowed. A non-conforming use may continue subject to the
requirements of this section.
   (B)   Intensification of use. A minor use permit is required to increase the
floor or site area occupied by a non-conforming use and/or intensify the
operation of a non-conforming use in any way.
   (C)   Change in ownership, tenancy, or management. A change in ownership,
tenancy, or management of a non-conforming use does not affect its legal non-
conforming status.
   (D)   Uses without required permits. A legally established use that is
allowed in a zoning district but which lacks a required permit (e.g.,
conditional use permit) is considered a non-conforming use until the use
receives the permit(s) required by the Zoning Code.
   (E)   Expiration of legal non-conforming status. A legally established non-
conforming use that ceases to operate for a period of six consecutive months or
more is no longer considered legal non-conforming and the use may not be re-
established. A use ceases to operate when a site is vacant or when a use is
non-operational for any reason other than a natural disaster or illness/death
of an owner/immediate family member.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-
C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.424.070 NON-CONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Development permitted. Legally established lots non-conforming to
minimum lot area standards are permitted all development rights of the zoning
district in which they are located.
   (B)   Conformance with standards. Development on non-conforming lots must
comply with all setback, building coverage, parking, and other standards of the
applicable zoning district.
   (C)   Boundary adjustments. The boundaries of a lot non-conforming to
minimum area standards may not be adjusted to decrease the lot area except when
necessary to remedy a situation where a structure or use improperly projects or
extends over a lot line.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 951-
C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.428 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
§ 155.428.010 PURPOSE.
   This §
155.428 establishes procedures to ensure compliance with the Zoning Code,
correct violations of the Zoning Code, and impose penalties for violations.
These procedures supplement code enforcement provisions in Municipal Code §§
10.35 (Administrative Citations) et seq.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.020 VIOLATIONS.
   Any use, structure, sign or activity that is established or maintained
contrary to the Zoning Code is unlawful and a violation of the Zoning Code,
constitutes a public nuisance and is subject to the remedies and penalties
provided for in this section.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.030 PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   Compliance required. All city departments, officials and employees
assigned the authority to issue permits or other forms of authorization must
comply with the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Permits in conflict with the Zoning Code. Permits and other approvals
that conflict with the Zoning Code will not be issued.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.040 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Director.
      (1)   The Director has the primary responsibility to enforce the Zoning
Code, in partnership with the Enforcement Officer as provided in Municipal Code
§§
10.35 (Administrative Citations) et seq.
      (2)   The Director will coordinate enforcement of the Zoning Code as
needed with the City Manager, Police Chief, City Attorney, Building Official,
Public Works Director and/or any other city official(s) as appropriate.
   (B)   City Attorney. The City Attorney may institute any necessary legal
proceedings to enforce the Zoning Code as described in this section or allowed
by law.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.050 INSPECTIONS, ACCESS AND ENTRY.
   (A)   Pre-approval inspections, access and entry.
      (1)   An applicant requesting a permit or other approval must allow city
staff to access the property subject to the application.
      (2)   An owner’s or owner’s authorized agent’s signature on the
application form authorizes city staff to enter the subject property to
evaluate a proposed project.
   (B)   Post approval inspections, access and entry. After an application is
approved, the owner or applicant must allow city staff to access the property
to determine continued compliance with the approved permit, conditions of
approval and/or mitigation measures.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.060 REMEDIES.
   The city may take any one or all of the following legal actions, in addition
to all other remedies available, to correct and/or abate a Zoning Code
violation.
   (A)   Revoke permit. The city may revoke a permit or other form of
authorization consistent with §
155.428.080 (Permit Revocation).
   (B)   Withhold permit. The city may deny or withhold additional permits and
approvals for the property subject to the violation.
   (C)   Approve permit with conditions. The city may approve a permit or
approval subject to the condition that the violation be corrected.
   (D)   Stop work. With or without revoking permits, the city may stop work,
in whole or in part, on any building, structure, lot or use.
   (E)   Civil penalties and fines. The city may issue administrative citations
and impose civil penalties and fines as provided in Municipal Code §§
10.35 (Administrative Citations) et seq.
   (F)   Termination of utility service. The city may terminate utility service
or services to the building, structure, lot or use.
   (G)   Other remedies. The city may exercise any and all other remedies and
enforcement powers granted by law.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.070 REMEDIES ARE CUMULATIVE.
   The remedies and enforcement powers established in this section are
cumulative, and the city may exercise them in any order or combination and at
any time.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.080 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any discretionary permit may be revoked as provided for in this section.
   (A)   Review authority.
      (1)   A permit may be revoked by the review authority that originally
approved the permit.
      (2)   In instances where the Director was the original review authority,
the Director may refer an action to revoke a permit to the Planning Commission
for review and final decision.
   (B)   Property owner notification. Prior to initiating proceedings to revoke
a permit, the Department must notify the property owner of the permit
violations, identify necessary corrections and establish a reasonable period
within which the property owner must correct the violations. If the property
owner has not corrected the violation within the specified period of time, the
Department may proceed with the process to revoke the permit.
   (C)   Public notice and hearing. Public notice and hearing for any action to
revoke a permit must be provided in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
   (D)   Findings. The review authority may revoke a permit only if one or more
of the following findings can be made:
      (1)   The applicant or property owner has altered the circumstances under
which the permit was granted to a degree that one or more of the findings
required to grant the original permit can no longer be made;
      (2)   Permit issuance was based on misrepresentation by the applicant,
either through the omission or embellishment of a material statement in the
application, or in public hearing testimony;
      (3)   One or more conditions of approval or mitigation measures have been
violated, or have not been complied with or fulfilled;
      (4)   The applicant or property owner has failed or refused to allow
inspections for compliance;
      (5)   Improvements authorized by the permit are in violation of the
Zoning Code or any law, ordinance, regulation or statute; and/or
      (6)   The use or structure is being operated or maintained in a manner
which constitutes a nuisance.
   (E)   Appeals.
      (1)   A decision to revoke a permit by any other review authority may be
appealed to the City Council in accordance with §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews).
      (2)   A decision of the City Council to revoke a permit is final and may
not be appealed.
   (F)   Effect of revocation.
      (1)   The revocation of a permit has the effect of terminating the
approval and denying the privileges granted by the permit.
      (2)   The prior holder of a revoked permit may not apply for a new permit
for the same or substantially similar use on the property within one year of
the permit revocation.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.428.090 SIGNS.
   (A)   Illegal signs. It is unlawful for any person to install, place,
construct, repair, maintain, alter or move a sign in a manner that does not
comply with the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Enforcement; general. The Department may enforce the requirements of
this section and undertake legal action to correct violations in accordance
with §
155.428 (Enforcement and Penalties) and Municipal Code §§
10.35 (Administrative Citations) et seq.
   (C)   Removal of hazardous and illegal signs.
      (1)   The Director may immediately remove or cause the removal of any
sign that places the public in immediate peril or that is located within the
public right-of-way.
      (2)   (a)   For illegal signs that do not place the public in immediate
peril and are located on private property, the Director must send the business
owner or person responsible for the sign a written notice by certified mail
that:
            1.   Describes the physical characteristics of the subject sign;
            2.   Explains the nature of the violation;
            3.   States that the sign must be removed or brought into
compliance with this section within 30 days after the notice is served;
            4.   States that the city may remove the sign if the business owner
or person responsible for the sign does not correct the violation within 30
days after the notice is served;
            5.   States that the city may destroy the illegal sign if it is not
retrieved within 30 days after removal by the city; and
            6.   States that the business owner is responsible for all costs
associated with the removal, storage and destruction of the sign.
         (b)   If an illegal sign is not removed or brought into compliance
within 30 days after a notice is served, the Director may issue a citation to
the business owner or person responsible for the sign as provided in Municipal
Code §§
10.35 (Administrative Citations) et seq. and may remove or cause the removal of
the sign.
      (3)   Any accessory structures, foundations or mounting materials
associated with the sign and that are unsightly or a danger to the public
health, safety and welfare may be removed at the time of the sign removal.
   (C)   Storage. A sign removed by the city will be stored for a minimum of 30
days. If the sign is not retrieved by the business owner or person responsible
for the sign within this 30-day period, the city may thereafter destroy the
sign.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432 ZONING CODE AND GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS.
§ 155.432.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General. This section establishes procedures for amending the Zoning
Code and General Plan.
   (B)   Government code requirements. All amendments must be processed as
specified in this section and as set forth in:
      (1)   Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65853 et seq. for Zoning Code Amendments; and
      (2)   Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65350 et seq. for General Plan Amendments, as
these may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.020 INITIATION.
   (A)   Map amendments. A request for an amendment to the Zoning Map and/or
General Plan Land Use Map may be initiated by:
      (1)   The City Council;
      (2)   The Planning Commission;
      (3)   The Director; or
      (4)   One or more owners of the property for which the amendment is
sought.
   (B)   Text amendments. A request for an amendment to the text of the Zoning
Code and/or General Plan may be initiated by:
      (1)   The City Council;
      (2)   The Planning Commission;
      (3)   The Director; or
      (4)   Any resident, property owner or business owner in the city.
   (C)   General plan amendment petition required. For General Plan amendments,
a property owner, resident or business owner may submit an application only
after the City Council approves a General Plan amendment petition in accordance
with §
155.432.030 (General Plan Amendment Petition).
   (D)   Frequency of general plan amendment. A mandatory element of the
General Plan may be amended no more than four times during any calendar year as
set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code § 65358.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.030 GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENT PETITION.
   (A)   Petition required. The City Council must first approve a General Plan
amendment petition before a resident, property owner or business owner may
apply for a General Plan amendment.
   (B)   Petition form and contents. A General Plan amendment petition may be
submitted to the Department using an official Department form accompanied by
all fees, information and materials required by the Department.
   (C)   City Council hearing and action.
      (1)   The City Council must hold a public hearing on the petition in
compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings).
      (2)   The City Council may approve the petition and allow the applicant
to submit the General Plan amendment application upon finding that the proposed
amendment has the potential to serve the public interest.
      (3)   Petition approval is not a tacit, implied or guarantee of approval
of the General Plan amendment, nor does it bind the current or future City
Council with regard to the proposed General Plan amendment.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.040 APPLICATION.
   An application for a Zoning Code and/or General Plan amendment must be filed
and reviewed in compliance with §
155.408 (Permit Procedures). The application must include the information and
materials required by the Department, together with all required application
fees. For amendments submitted by a resident, property owner or business owner,
it is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the
findings required by §
155.432.070 (Findings for Approval).
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.050 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING AND ACTION.
   (A)   General. The Planning Commission must hold a public hearing on a
proposed amendment in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings) for the purpose of recommending action to the
City Council.
   (B)   Recommendation of approval.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council the
approval or conditional approval of the proposed amendment based upon the
findings specified in §
155.432.070  (Findings for Approval).
      (2)   The Planning Commission must adopt a resolution recommending
approval of the proposed amendment within 60 days after the date the hearing
was closed to the public.
   (C)   Denial.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may recommend denial of the proposed
amendment based upon the findings specified in §
155.432.070  (Findings for Approval).
      (2)   For a Zoning Map amendment, if the action of the Planning
Commission is to recommend denial, the City Council is not required to take
further action on the proposed amendment unless an interested party requests a
hearing in writing with the City Clerk. The request for hearing must be filed
within five days after the Planning Commission recommendation is filed with the
City Council. Such a request is not considered an appeal subject to the
requirements in §
155.416 (Appeals and Reviews). The City Council may also review and take action
on the proposed amendment without a hearing request if the City Council
determines to do so.
   (D)   Failure to act. If the Planning Commission takes no action within 60
days after the date the hearing was closed to the public, the City Council will
consider the proposed amendment without a Planning Commission recommendation.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.060 CITY COUNCIL HEARING AND ACTION.
   (A)   General. After receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation on
a proposed amendment, the City Council will hold a public hearing on the
proposal in compliance with §
155.408.100 (Public Hearings); except that, no hearing is required for
recommendations of denial in accordance with §
155.432.050(C) (Denial).
   (B)   Approval or denial. The City Council may approve, approve with
modification or deny the proposed amendment based upon the findings specified
in §
155.432.070 (Findings for Approval).
   (C)   Finality of action. The action by the City Council is final and
conclusive.
   (D)   Referral to Planning Commission. If the City Council proposes to adopt
a substantial modification to an amendment not previously considered by the
Planning Commission, the proposed modification must be first referred to the
Planning Commission for its recommendation before action is taken by the City
Council.
   (E)   Failure to report. The failure of the Planning Commission to report
back to the City Council within 40 days after the reference, or within the time
set by the City Council, will be treated as a recommendation of approval.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.070 FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Zoning Code amendments. The City Council may approve a Zoning Code
amendment only if all of the following findings are made.
   (B)   Findings required for all Zoning Code and map amendments.
      (1)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the General Plan and any
applicable specific plan or area plan.
      (2)   The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other
provisions of the Zoning Code.
      (3)   The proposed amendment will not be detrimental to the public
interest, health, safety, convenience or welfare.
   (C)   Additional finding for Zoning Map amendments. The affected site is
physically suitable in terms of design, location, shape, size and other
characteristics to accommodate development that complies with the Zoning Code
and General Plan and contributes to the health, safety and welfare of the
property, surrounding properties and the community at large.
   (D)   General plan amendments. The City Council may approve a General Plan
amendment only if all of the following findings are made.
   (E)   Findings for all general plan amendments.
      (1)   The proposed amendment is in the public interest.
      (2)   The proposed amendment is internally consistent with all other
provisions of the General Plan.
      (3)   The proposed amendment complies with state law applicable to the
General Plan as established in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65300 et seq.
   (F)   Additional finding for land use map amendments. The affected site is
physically suitable in terms of design, location, shape, size and other
characteristics to accommodate development that complies with the General Plan
and contributes to the health, safety and welfare of the property, surrounding
properties and the community at large.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.432.080 LIMITATIONS ON RESUBMITTALS AFTER DENIAL.
   If the city denies a Zoning Code or General Plan amendment, within one year
of the denial, the Department may not accept a new application for the same or
substantially similar amendment, except in the following cases:
   (A)   Upon initiation by the City Council or Planning Commission;
   (B)   The applicant requests a reclassification to a different zoning
district and/or General Plan land use designation than previously requested; or
   (C)   When a previous Zoning Code amendment application was denied because
the proposed amendment would not conform with the General Plan, and the General
Plan has subsequently been amended in a manner which will allow the proposed
amendment.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
GLOSSARY
§ 155.504 LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS.
§ 155.504.010 PURPOSE.
   Land use classifications describe one or more uses of land having similar
characteristics, but do not list every use or activity that may appropriately
be within the classification. The Director will determine whether a specific
use is within one or more use classifications, based on whether its
characteristics are substantially incompatible with those typical of uses named
within the classification.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.504.020 PRIMARY AND SECONDARY USES.
   This section describes land use classifications classified as either a
primary use or a secondary use. See §
155.108.050(C) (Types of Uses) for requirements that apply generally to primary
and secondary uses.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20)
§ 155.504.030 LAND USE CLASSIFICATIONS - ALPHABETICAL.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). An attached or detached residential
dwelling unit with complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons. An ADU includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as an existing or proposed single-
family residence or an existing multi-family residence is situated and meets
the standards of §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units). An accessory dwelling unit also includes:
         (a)   An efficiency unit, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
17958.1;
         (b)   Junior accessory dwelling unit as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §
65852.22;
         (c)   A tiny house on wheels permitted in a residential zone district
pursuant to §
155.304.130 (Tiny Houses on Wheels); and
         (d)   A manufactured home, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
18007.
      (2)   Accessory use. A land use that is incidental and subordinate to a
primary land use located on the same lot.
      (3)   Adult entertainment. See §
155.304.030 (Adult Entertainment).
      (4)   Agricultural processing. The processing of harvested crops to
prepare them for onsite marketing, off-site sale, or processing and packaging
elsewhere. Includes alfalfa cubing; corn shelling; grist mills; milling of
flour, feed and grain; grain cleaning and grinding; hay baling and cubing; pre-
cooling and packaging of fresh or dried fruits or vegetables; tree nut hulling
and shelling; farm product warehousing and storage; drying of corn, rice, hay;
and sorting, grading and packing fruits and vegetables. Includes the processing
of crops grown off-site. Excludes manufacturing of food and products ready for
sale to consumers (see "Manufacturing, Artisan" and Manufacturing, Light").
      (5)   Agriculture. The use of the land for commercial farming, crop
production, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal raising and
production, including dairies. May include accessory uses for packing,
processing, treating, and storing crops grown on site provided such accessory
uses are secondary to crop production activities. Excludes the processing and
packaging of agricultural products (see "Agricultural Processing"),
slaughterhouses and animal product processing uses (see Animal Processing"),
cannabis cultivation (see Municipal Code Chapter 158), community gardens (see
"Parks and Playgrounds"), and the harvesting of plants and animals in an
aquatic environment (see "Aquaculture").
      (6)   Airport. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes,
including runways, aircraft storage buildings, public terminal building and
parking, air freight terminal, baggage handling facilities, aircraft hangars,
and related support activities.
      (7)   Animal keeping. The keeping of animals for personal use as provided
in Municipal Code
Chapter 91 (Animals).
      (8)   Animal processing. A facility where the slaughtering and/or
processing of animals raised off-site takes place, including rendering plants
and meat cutting and packing uses. Excludes manufacturing of consumer foods
from animal products (see "Manufacturing, Heavy").
      (9)   Aquaculture. Facilities or areas for the cultivation of marine or
freshwater fish, shellfish, or plants under controlled conditions. Includes
aquaponics that integrates aquaculture with hydroponics by recycling the waste
products from fish to fertilize hydroponically growing plants. Includes
cultured oyster beds and similar uses.
      (10)   Automobile sales/repair. See “Vehicle Sales and Rentals (Indoor)”,
“General Retail - Outdoor”, “Vehicle Cleaning and Repair”, or “Heavy Equipment
Sales and Service”.
      (11)   Bars. Businesses devoted to serving alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food and/or
recreation, amusement, and entertainment services are only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages. Includes cocktail lounges, taverns, and other
similar uses. Excludes tasting rooms ancillary to breweries, wineries, and
other alcoholic beverage production uses.
      (12)   Bed and breakfast. See “Vacation Rental”.
      (13)   Business services and heavy commercial. Indoor commercial
establishments providing goods and services to other businesses and/or engaged
in heavy commercial activities that could impact neighboring properties.
Includes contractor supply businesses, building contractors, large equipment
repair, pipe yards, commercial dry-cleaning/laundry services, security
services, custodial services, business-serving printers, taxi and delivery
services, private ambulance dispatch services, property maintenance
contractors, plumbing supply stores, and other similar businesses. Products and
services may be provided to the general public only on a limited, secondary
basis. Outdoor display, storage, and sales is a secondary use and is subject to
separate regulations and restrictions (see General Retail - Outdoor).
      (14)   Cannabis uses. See Municipal Code Chapter 158 (Cannabis).
      (15)   Car dealership. See "Vehicle Sales and Rental (Indoor)" and
“General Retail - Outdoor”.
      (16)   Car share facility. A formal or informal membership organization
that owns motor vehicles that are parked on-site or in off-site areas. Members
use the motor vehicles under the terms of their membership.
      (17)   Check cashing. A retail business owned or operated by a "check
casher" as that term is defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1789.31.
      (18)   Civic institution. Public or non-profit institutions that support
and contribute to the cultural development of the community and provide
community-serving programs and services on-site. Includes libraries, museums,
performing art centers (primarily non-retail), aquariums, zoos, environmental
education centers, non-profit art centers and galleries, botanical gardens, and
other similar uses. Excludes public and private schools, colleges and trade
schools, and other similar educational facilities (see "Instructional Services"
or "Schools, Public and Private").
      (19)   Colleges and trade schools. Institutions of higher education
providing curricula of a general, religious or professional nature, typically
granting recognized degrees or certificates. Includes junior colleges, business
and computer schools, management training, vocational education, and technical
and trade schools.
      (20)   Commercial fishing. The activity of catching fish and other
seafood for commercial profit, mostly from wild fisheries. Includes ancillary
fish and seafood processing; fish and seafood storage and distribution; and
fish and seafood sales. Excludes cultivation of fish and seafood under
controlled conditions (see "Aquaculture").
      (21)   Commercial lodging. A commercial establishment in a non-
residential zoning district providing overnight accommodations to guests for 30
consecutive calendar days or less. Commercial lodging establishments may
provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants,
bars, or recreation facilities available to guests and the general public.
Includes hotels, motels, hostels, and other similar commercial establishments.
Also includes dwelling units or portions thereof located in a non-residential
zoning district rented to guests for 30 consecutive calendar days or less.
      (22)   Day care facility. A facility that provides nonmedical care and
supervision of children or adults for periods of less than 24 hours. Includes
nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers, infant day care centers,
cooperative day care centers, adult day programs, and similar uses. Day care
facilities may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or
as an independent land use.
      (23)   Drive-thru facility. A facility where motorists may purchase
products or obtain services without leaving their vehicles. Drive-thru
facilities are a secondary use that must be associated with a primary use.
Excludes vehicle fueling stations (see "Fuel and Service Stations").
      (24)   Emergency shelters. Housing with minimal supportive services for
homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of one year or less. No
individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability
to pay. Includes drop-in centers that provide food, showers, and laundry
facilities, and other services to the homeless.
      (25)   Family day care home. A state-licensed facility that regularly
provides care, protection, and supervision for children, in the provider's own
home, for periods less than 24 hours per day, while the children's parents or
guardians are away. Family day care homes are a secondary use that must be
associated with a primary use.
      (26)   Family day care home, large. A home that provides family day care
for 9 to 14 children as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 1597.465.
      (27)   Family day care home, small. A home that provides family day care
for up to eight children as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 1597.44.
      (28)   Farmworker housing. Housing for transient labor, such as labor
cabins or camps, incidental to a permitted agricultural use.
      (29)   Fitness, dance, or health facility. An indoor fitness center,
gymnasium, athletic club, dance studio, yoga studio, or other similar use.
      (30)   Fitness, dance, or health facility, large. A facility with a floor
area of 8,000 square feet or more.
      (31)   Fitness, dance, or health facility, small. A facility with a floor
area of less than 8,000 square feet.
      (32)   Food-serving drive-thru facility. A drive-thru facility associated
with a "restaurants, cafes, and beverage sales" use.
      (33)   Food truck. See “Mobile Vendor”.
      (34)   Freight terminals and transfer. Facilities for transfer and
movement of freight, courier, and postal services by truck, rail, or sea.
      (35)   Fuel and service stations. A retail business supplying fuels, oil,
and minor accessories for vehicles. Includes establishments supplying gasoline,
hydrogen, and electric vehicle charging as a primary land use. Includes
incidental food and beverage sales (maximum 3,500 square feet of convenience
market), car wash facilities, and minor automotive repair and service. Excludes
towing service (see "Vehicle Towing and Impound") and body and fender work,
painting, and other major automotive repairs or cleaning and detailing as a
primary use (see "Vehicle Cleaning and Repair"). Excludes electric vehicle
charging stations installed in parking spaces and/or parking lots.
      (36)   Gas station. See “Fuel and Service Station”.
      (37)   General retail. Stores and shops selling merchandise to the
general public, and which may include related services. Includes antique shops,
art galleries, automotive supply stories, book stores, clothing stores,
convenience markets, gift shops, furniture stores, drug stores, florists,
liquor stores, pet shops, retail bakeries, supermarkets, garden supply stores,
lumber yards, and other similar retail-based establishments.
      (38)   General retail - indoor. A general retail establishment where
merchandise is stored and displayed indoors. Includes the temporary outdoor
display of merchandise under covered-entryways, such as produce at grocery
stores. Also includes temporary sidewalk displays of merchandise (which may
require an encroachment permit and other permits). Excludes the prominent
display/storage of merchandise in an outdoor setting as a part of regular
business operations, which is a secondary use subject to separate limitations
(see "General Retail - Outdoor"). General retail - indoor falls into three
categories:
      (39)   General retail - indoor, large. A general retail indoor facility
that is between 20,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet.
      (40)   General retail - indoor, small. A general retail indoor facility
that is less than 20,000 square feet in total floor area.
      (41)   General retail - indoor, very large. A general retail indoor
facility that is larger than 50,000 square feet in total floor area.
      (42)   General retail - outdoor. A supplemental outdoor area associated
with a primary use (such as general retail - indoor) where merchandise is
prominently stored and/or displayed for sale outdoors in a designated outdoor
area as a regular part of business operations. General retail - outdoor is a
secondary use that must be combined with another use (such as “General Retail -
Indoor” or “Heavy Equipment Sales and Service”) and must include a building on-
site that hosts the primary use, such as "Business Services and Heavy
Commercial" or "General Retail - Indoor." General retail - outdoor includes
boat/trailer sales, plant nurseries, garden supplies, lumberyards, statuary
stores, headstone sales, and other similar establishments. Includes the outdoor
sales of automobiles and large vehicle sales. Excludes purely indoor car
dealerships (see "Vehicle Sales and Rental (Indoor)") and purely indoor large
vehicle sales (see "Heavy Equipment Sales and Services"). A car sales business
with both indoor sales rooms and outdoor sales lots requires approval of both
uses ("Vehicle Sales and Rental (Indoor)" and "General Retail - Outdoor") and
is subject to the regulations that apply to both uses. Excludes the temporary
outdoor display of merchandise under covered-entryways, such as produce at
grocery stores. Excludes the temporary sidewalk displays of merchandise (which
may require an encroachment permit or other permits).
      (43)   General services. An indoor commercial establishment that provides
services to the general public, involves frequent visits by customers, and
which may involve limited product sales related to the service provided.
Includes banks, funeral parlors, laundromats, photocopy stores, customer-
serving dry cleaners, household item repairs, veterinary clinics, tattoo/
piercing parlors, customer-serving printers, animal grooming with no overnight
boarding, recording studios, and other similar uses that provide on-site
services to customers. Excludes places of employment that do not provide on-
site services directly to customers (see "Offices") and facilities that provide
medical services (see "Medical Care Services"). Excludes establishments that
provide body-care related services (see "Personal Services") and fitness-
related establishments (see "Fitness, Dance, or Health Facility"). Excludes
indoor commercial establishments that primarily provide recreation, amusement,
and entertainment services (see "Indoor Commercial Recreation"), primarily
serve alcoholic beverages (see "Bars"), or primarily sell prepared food and/or
beverages (see "Restaurants, Cafes, and Beverage Sales").
      (44)   Government facilities. A facility operated by a governmental
agency providing services to the general public. Includes governmental offices,
public recreational facilities, community centers, public meeting spaces, civic
auditoriums, fire stations, police stations, dispatch facilities, vehicle
storage, and other similar facilities. Excludes schools (see "Schools, Public
and Private"), facilities that primarily provide maintenance and repair
services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment (see "Public Agency
Corporation Yard"), parks and playgrounds (see "Parks and Playgrounds"), public
utilities (see "Public Utility"), facilities providing group-services to
persons in need (see "Social Services") and homeless shelters (see "Emergency
Shelters").
      (45)   Heavy equipment sales and service. Indoor retail establishments
selling or renting industrial, construction, farm, or other heavy equipment for
commercial use, including cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, tractor
trailers, combines, and heavy trucks. Outdoor display, storage, and sales is a
secondary use subject to separate regulations and restrictions (see "General
Retail - Outdoor").
      (46)   Home occupation. A business within a dwelling unit or residential
site, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of
the property.
      (47)   Hospice. See “Medical Care Housing”.
      (48)   Hospital. Facilities providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical
services for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and
including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment,
diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to
patients, employees, or visitors. May include facilities for the takeoff and
landing of helicopters.
      (49)   Hostel. See “Commercial Lodging”.
      (50)   Hotel. See “Commercial Lodging”.
      (51)   Indoor commercial recreation. A privately-owned commercial
facility providing indoor recreation, amusement, and entertainment services.
Includes video arcades, movie theaters, bowling alleys, indoor mini-golf,
indoor batting cages, and other similar uses. Excludes businesses primarily
devoted to serving alcoholic beverages (see "Bars") or primarily devoted to
selling prepared food and/or beverages (see "Restaurants, Cafes, and Beverage
Sales) for consumption by guests on the premises. Excludes establishments that
provide body-care related services (see "Personal Services") and fitness-
related establishments (see "Fitness, Dance, or Health Facility").
      (52)   Instructional services. Establishments that offer specialized
programs in personal growth and development. Includes music studios/schools,
drama schools, dance academies dedicated primarily to instruction, art schools,
tutoring schools, and instruction in other cultural and academic pursuits.
      (53)   Kennel-animal boarding. A commercial facility for the keeping,
boarding, training, breeding or maintaining of four or more dogs (four months
of age or older), cats, or other household pet not owned by the facility owner
or operator. Includes kennels, pet day care, and animal shelters. Excludes
household pets for sale in pet shops (see "General Retail") and veterinary
clinics (see "General Services").
      (54)   Manufacturing, artisan. Artistic, artisan, craft-oriented, and
small-scale manufacturing businesses engaged in the on-site assembly of
individually fabricated parts or the fabrication of custom/craft goods, and the
incidental direct sale to consumers of primarily those goods produced on site.
The facilities are compatible with a general retail and mixed-use setting.
Goods are predominantly manufactured and fabricated involving the use of hand
tools or small-scaled mechanical equipment and kilns that do not generate
noise, odors, or vibration detectable beyond the interior walls of the
facility. Typical uses include craft food and beverage, including alcoholic
beverage production, ceramic studios, fabrics, inlays, tile work, weaving,
leather work, limited woodwork, limited metal or glass work, candle making,
custom tailors, custom wedding dress production, custom jewelry, and other
similar uses. May include limited tasting-rooms ancillary to the craft
production of alcoholic beverage production uses.
      (55)   Manufacturing, light. The manufacture of products in a manner that
produces little or no noise, odor, fumes, dust, smoke, dirt, refuse, vibration,
glare, and/or air or water pollution detectable beyond the interior walls of
the facility and is unlikely to cause significant impacts on surrounding land
uses. Products are commonly produced from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, and packaging of such products. Does not produce or utilize toxic,
hazardous, or explosive materials as an integral part of the manufacturing
process. Includes the manufacture and production of clothing; mass-produced
food and beverage products, including alcoholic beverage production;
electronic, optical, and instrumentation products; electronic equipment and
appliances; ice. Excludes the processing of harvested crops (see "Agricultural
Processing"). May include tasting rooms ancillary to the craft production of
alcoholic beverage production uses.
      (56)   Manufacturing, heavy. A facility accommodating manufacturing
processes that involve or produce basic metals, building materials, chemicals,
fabricated metals, paper products, machinery, textiles, or transportation
equipment, and where the use may cause significant impacts on surrounding land
uses. Includes manufacturing of chemical products; concrete, gypsum, and
plaster products; paving and roofing materials; plastics and other synthetics,
and rubber products; lumber and other wood products; tires; mass-produced food
and beverage products, including alcoholic beverage products, paving and
petroleum-based roofing materials; lime products; glass products. Also includes
petroleum refining and related industries, oil and gas processing facilities,
and ready-mix concrete batch plants. Excludes sales of ready-mix concrete
incidental retail establishment (see "General Retail, Outdoor"), artisan and
craftsman type operations (see "Manufacturing, Artisan"), and recapping and
retreading of automobile tires (see "Vehicle Cleaning and Repair"). May involve
the use of toxic, hazardous, or explosive materials. May include limited
tasting rooms ancillary to the craft production of alcoholic beverage
production uses.
      (57)   Medical care housing. A residential facility, licensed as a
skilled nursing facility by the State of California, that provides 24-hour
medical, convalescent or chronic care to individuals who are unable to care for
themselves by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity. Excludes
facilities providing non-medical social and personal care to residents (see
"Non-medical Care Housing").
      (58)   Medical offices and clinics. Facilities where medical, mental,
dental, vision, or other personal health services are provided on an outpatient
basis using specialized equipment. Includes offices for physicians, dentists,
physical therapists, optometrists, diagnostic centers, blood banks and plasma
centers, and emergency medical clinics offered exclusively on an out-patient
basis. Includes mental health services such as marriage/family therapists,
counselors, psychologists, psychiatrists, and other similar uses. Also includes
alternative medicine facilities such as acupuncture, chiropractors, state-
licensed therapeutic massage, nutritional consultation, herbalists, and other
similar facilities. May include educational aspects such as medical instruction
and/or training as well as house a laboratory, radiology/imaging, pharmacy,
rehabilitation and other similar services as accessory uses.
      (59)   Micro/shared housing. Shared living quarters without separate
kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent to
permanent or semi-transient residents for long-term occupancy (30 days or
more). Includes rooming and boarding houses, single-room occupancy housing,
dormitories, convents and monasteries, and other types of organizational
housing. Excludes hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns, and vacation rentals
(see "Commercial Lodging" and "Vacation Rental") and state-licensed facilities
proving social and personal care to residents (see "Non-Medical Care Housing").
      (60)   Mini-storage. One or more building in a controlled access and
fully enclosed compound that contains separate self-storage spaces of varying
size for the storage of customers' goods and possessions.
      (61)   Mobile home park. An area of land where two or more mobile home
spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes for more
than 30 consecutive calendar days.
      (62)   Mobile vendor. Any vehicle from which a product is made, sold, or
distributed at retail.
      (63)   Motel. See “Commercial Lodging”.
      (64)   Multi-family dwellings. Two or more residential units located on a
single lot. Includes units side-by-side, units stacked vertically, and one or
more units occupying the same site as a non-residential uses (mixed-use
development). Excludes detached single-family homes with an accessory dwelling
unit in compliance with §
155.316 (see "Accessory Dwelling Units").
      (65)   Neighborhood-serving retail and service. Retail and service
establishments that primarily serve residents and employees within the
immediate neighborhood. See §
155.224.030 (Neighborhood Market Overlay).
      (66)   Non-commercial places of assembly. Facilities that provides space
for public or private meetings or gatherings. Includes places of worship,
fraternal lodges, meeting space for clubs and other membership organizations,
social halls, union halls, non-profit banquet centers, and other similar
facilities.
      (67)   Non-food serving drive thru facility. A drive-thru facility
associated with another use (such as “General Retail - Indoor”) that is not a
"Food-Serving Drive-Thru Facility."
      (68)   Non-medical care housing. A state-licensed residential facility
that provides non-medical social and personal care for residents. Includes
community care facilities as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 1500 et
seq., residential care facilities for the elderly (Cal. Health and Safety Code
§§ 1569 et seq.), facilities for the mentally disordered or otherwise
handicapped (Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 5000 et seq.), alcoholism or
drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities (Cal. Health and Safety Code §
11834.02), supportive housing (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65582), transitional housing
(Cal. Gov’t Code § 65582), and other similar facilities.
      (69)   Non-medical care housing, large. A non-medical care facility for
seven or more persons.
      (70)   Non-medical care housing, small. A non-medical care facility for
six or fewer persons.
      (71)   Nursing home. See Medical Care Housing.
      (72)   Offices. A place of employment occupied by businesses providing
professional services. Includes offices for accountants, architects, insurance
agents, attorneys, engineers, real estate agents, travel agents, artist
studios, and other similar professions. Excludes businesses that provide
regular service to frequent walk-in customers (see "General Services"), medical
offices (see "Medical Offices and Clinics"), governmental offices (see
"Governmental Facility"), and art galleries that are primarily intended to
display saleable art and attract retail sales (see "General Retail - Indoor").
Internal office space that is incidental to a different primary use is not
considered an "office" use. For example, a manager's office at a manufacturing
facility and the office of an inventory specialist at a grocery store are not
considered separate or stand-alone office uses.
      (73)   Outdoor commercial recreation. A privately-owned commercial
facility providing outdoor recreation, amusement, and entertainment services.
Includes commercial batting cages, outdoor swimming pools, go-cart tracks,
driving ranges, tennis courts, golf courses, miniature golf, and other similar
uses. Excludes municipal parks and non-commercial recreational facilities (see
"Parks and Playgrounds").
      (74)   Outdoor storage, non-retail. Non-retail storage of commercial
goods in open lots as either a primary or secondary use. Excludes storage of
merchandise for sale as part of a retail establishment (see "General Retail -
Outdoor").
      (75)   Parking lots and structures. Surface lots and structures for use
of occupants, employees, or patrons on the subject site or offering parking to
the public for a fee when such use is the primary use on the lot and not
incidental to another on-site activity.
      (76)   Parks and playgrounds. Parks and playgrounds as the primary use on
the site that provides open space and/or outdoor recreational opportunities to
the public. Includes athletic fields, picnic areas, tennis courts, tot lots,
community gardens, cemeteries, and other similar outdoor facilities. Excludes
indoor recreation centers (see "Government Facilities").
      (77)   Personal services. An indoor commercial establishment that
typically provides one-on-one body-care related services that involve frequent
visits by customers and that are typically scheduled on an appointment-basis.
May involve limited product sales related to the service provided. Includes
hair salons, nail salons, make-up application studios, skincare treatment
salons, non-therapeutic massage, health spas, and other similar non-medical
personal service uses. For therapeutic message and other clinical-health-
related uses, see "Medical Offices and Clinics."
      (78)   Restaurants, cafes, and beverage sales. A business selling
prepared food and/or beverages for on- or off-premise consumption. Includes
full service, fast-food and carry-out restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, juice/
smoothie bars, retail bakeries, and other similar eating and drinking
establishments. Includes outdoor seating/service areas which are permitted by
right. Excludes businesses primarily selling alcoholic beverages for on-site
consumption (see "Bars"). Excludes grocery stores and alcohol sales for off-
site consumption (see "General Retail - Indoor").
      (79)   Public agency corporation yard. Governmental facilities that
primarily provide storage, maintenance and repair of vehicles, equipment, and
supplies.
      (80)   Public utility. A permanent structure or facility providing a
utility service to the general public. Includes generating plants, electric
substations, solid waste collection, solid waste treatment and disposal, water
or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities. Excludes electrical
distribution lines, underground water/sewer lines, and similar utilities.
      (81)   Recreational vehicle parks. An establishment designed,
established, or used for exclusive occupancy by two or more recreational
vehicles. Recreational vehicle parks are owned by a single owner or
organizations where RV spaces are temporarily rented or leased to a person
occupying a recreational vehicle.
      (82)   Recycling collection facility. An incidental use that serves as a
drop-off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but where the
processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on site.
      (83)   Recycling processing facility. A facility that receives and
processes recyclable materials. Processing means preparation of material for
efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as
baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical
sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Includes salvage yards,
upcycling, and vehicle salvage and wrecking.
      (84)   Residential lodging. See “Vacation Rental”.
      (85)   Resource protection and restoration. Lands and management
activities dedicated to the protection and conservation of natural resources,
such as aquatic environments, wetland and sensitive riparian habitat, water
recharge areas, and rare or endangered plant or animal habitat.
      (86)   Schools, public and private. Educational institutions providing
instruction to minors as required by the California Education Code. Includes
public and private elementary, junior high, and high schools.
      (87)   Single-family home. A residential structure designed for occupancy
by one household. A single-family dwelling provides complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
      (88)   Single-family home, attached (townhome). Two or more single-family
dwelling units connected by common walls along the side property lines,
sometimes called a townhouse or row house.
      (89)   Single-family home, detached. A detached building that contains
one single-family dwelling. Includes individual mobile homes and manufactured
housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 18551 and meeting the standards of §
155.304.080 (Manufactured Housing) A detached single family home with an
attached ADU remains a single-family home and is not considered a multi-family
dwelling.
      (90)   Single room occupancy (SRO). See “Micro/Shared Housing”.
      (91)   Social services. Establishments providing group outpatient
assistance and aid to those persons requiring counseling, services, activities,
and/or treatment for psychological problems, addictions, learning disabilities,
elderly, and physical disabilities. Includes welfare offices, child/adult
protective services, service centers for disabled individuals, counseling
centers for individuals with substance abuse disorder, and veteran services.
Excludes homeless shelters (see "Emergency Shelters"), transitional and
supportive housing (see "Non-medical Care Housing"), establishments providing
individual (non-group) services (see "Medical Office"), after-school programs
(see "Non-Commercial Places of Assembly") and adult day care centers (see "Day
Care Facility").
      (92)   Supportive housing. See “Non-Medical Care Housing”.
      (93)   Timber production and harvesting. The cutting and removal of
timber or other solid wood forest products for commercial purposes together
with all of the work incidental to the harvest including construction and
maintenance of roads, fuel breaks, fire breaks, stream crossings, landings,
skid trails, beds for the falling of trees, and fire hazard abatement. Excludes
cutting or removal of timber for creating building pads and access to a legal
building site when such cutting or removal is approved as a part of the
building and/or encroachment permit. Also excludes removal of up to five
commercial tree species in residential zoning districts in conformance with §
155.304.140 (Tree Removal).
      (94)   Transitional housing. See “Non-Medical Care Housing”.
      (95)   Tree removal in residential zones. The cutting and removal of
timber or other solid wood forest products for commercial purposes in
conformance with §
155.304.140 (Tree Removal).
      (96)   Vacation rental. A dwelling unit or portions thereof located in a
residential zoning district that is rented to guests for 30 consecutive
calendar days or less. Includes two types of vacation rental, with the
proprietor on-site and without the proprietor on-site as defined in §
155.304.150 (Vacation Rental).
      (97)   Vehicle cleaning and repair. An establishment for the cleaning,
detailing, repair, alteration, restoration, or finishing of any vehicle,
including, but not limited to, car wash and vehicle cleaning and detailing
facilities, body repair, collision repair, painting, tire and battery sales and
installation, motor rebuilding, tire recapping and retreading, and towing.
Excludes cleaning and/or repair shops that are incidental to a vehicle sales or
rental establishment on the same site (see "Vehicle Sales and Rentals (Indoor)"
and "General Retail - Outdoor"). Excludes cleaning and/or repair shops that are
incidental to a fuel or service station (see "Fuel and Service Stations").
      (98)   Vehicle sales and rental (indoor). The indoor sale or rental of
new or used automobiles, motorcycles, light trucks, recreational vehicles,
boats, and other similar vehicles. Includes the sale of vehicle parts and
vehicle cleaning and repair, provided that these activities are incidental to
the sale of vehicles. Excludes the sale and rental of tractor trailers and
construction equipment (see "Heavy Equipment Sales and Service") and vehicle
salvage and wrecking (see "Recycling Processing Facilities"). Outdoor display,
storage, and sales is a secondary use subject to separate regulations and
restrictions (see "General Retail - Outdoor").
      (99)   Vehicle towing and impound. Establishments primarily engaged in
towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance, and the on-
site storage of towed vehicle. May provide incidental services, such as vehicle
storage and emergency road repair services.
      (100)   Warehousing, wholesale, and distribution. A use engaged in
storage, wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and
equipment to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or
professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or
companies. Includes merchant wholesalers; agents, merchandise or commodity
brokers, and commission merchants; assemblers, buyers and associations engaged
in the cooperative marketing of farm products.
      (101)   Wireless communication facility. See Municipal Code
Chapter 159.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S.,
passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23)
§ 155.508 DEFINED TERMS.
§ 155.508.010 PURPOSE.
   This section defines terms and phrases used in the Zoning Code that are
technical or specialized, or which may not reflect common usage. If any
definitions in this section conflict with others in the Municipal Code, these
definitions control in the Zoning Code. If a word is not defined in the Zoning
Code, the Director determines the appropriate definition.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 155.508.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   "A" terms.
      ACCESSORY BUILDING. A building occupied by an accessory use. Includes
detached garages, storage buildings, and sheds.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure secondary and subordinate to the primary
building on the same lot.
      ACCESSORY USE. A use that is subordinate to and dependent on the primary
use on the same lot.
      ADAPTIVE REUSE. The reuse of an existing building or site for a purpose
other than the original use.
      ADDITION. Any development or construction activity that expands the
footprint or increases the habitable floor area of a building.
      ADJACENT LOTS. Lots that share an interior side lot line.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. See §
155.304.030(C) (Definitions).
      ADVERTISE. To provide a notice or announcement in a public medium
promoting a product, service, brand, campaign, or event, or publicizing a job
vacancy. Advertisement includes text displaying the name of a business, text
displaying the name of a product, text publicizing a service, business-specific
logos, and product-specific logos.
      ALLEY. A public or private roadway, not more than 30 feet wide, providing
only secondary means of access to abutting property.
      ALLOWED LAND USE. A land use permitted in a zoning district or overlay
zone, either by right or with a use permit.
      ALLOWED USE TABLES. Tables in the Zoning District Standards that identify
allowed land uses and required permits within each zoning district.
      ALTERATION. See MODIFICATION.
      ANCILLARY USE. A use subordinate to the principal use on the same lot and
serving a purpose incidental to the principal use.
      APPLICANT. Any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture,
corporation, or an entity or combination of entities which seek city permits
and approvals.
      ARBOR. A shelter of vines or branches or of latticework covered with or
intended to be covered with climbing shrubs or vines. See
Figure 508-1.
Figure 508-1: Arbor
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8202.jpg]
      ATTIC. The space within a building between the ceiling beams at the top
story and the roof rafters.
      AVERAGE GROUND SLOPE. See §
155.112.090 (Slope) for rule of measurement.
      AWNING. An overhang used as shelter attached to and projecting from an
exterior building wall.
   (B)   “B” terms.
      BALCONY. A platform that projects from the wall of a building that is
surrounded by a railing or balustrade and may or may not require separate
understructure for support.
      BASEMENT. A story or space in a building whose floor is more than six
feet below the average level of the adjoining ground. See
Figure 508-2.
Figure 508-2: Basement Definition
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7849.png]
 
      BASE ZONING DISTRICT. The primary zoning district, as distinguished from
an overlay zone, that applies to a parcel of land as shown on the Zoning Map.
      BEACON. A beam of light designed to draw attention to a particular
location.
      BUILDING. A structure having a solid roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or
property. Includes “manufactured homes” and “mobile homes.”
      BUILDING HEIGHT. See §
155.112.070 (Height) for rules of measurement.
      BY-RIGHT. Permitted without any form of discretionary approval.
   (C)   “C” terms.
      CALIFORNIA ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ACT (CEQA). California state law (Cal.
Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.) requiring government agencies to
consider the environmental consequences of their actions before taking action
on a proposed project.
      CARETAKER UNIT. A residential dwelling unit for one or more persons
employed to provide oversight services on the site where the caretaker unit is
located.
      CARPORT. An accessory structure open on two, three or four sides and
attached to, or detached from, a building and established for the loading or
unloading of passengers or the storage or parking of an automobile.
      COASTAL LAND USE PLAN. See LAND USE PLAN.
      COASTAL ZONE. The area of land and water extending from the state’s outer
seaward limit of jurisdiction inland to the boundary as shown in Eureka’s Local
Coastal Program (LCP) as certified by the California Coastal Commission.
      COASTAL ZONING DISTRICTS. See ZONING DISTRICTS, COASTAL.
      COVERED PARKING SPACE. An area designated for parking within a garage,
carport or other enclosed building or structure.
      CHANGE OF USE. Conversion from one use classification to a different use
classification as identified in §
155.504 (Land Use Classifications). The establishment of a different use within
the same use classification as the existing use is not a CHANGE OF USE. For
example, establishing a book store (classified as “General Retail”) in a space
previously occupied by a bank (classified as “General Services”) is considered
a CHANGE OF USE. Replacing the bank with a new laundromat (also classified as
“General Services”) is not a CHANGE OF USE.
      CHASE LIGHTING. A series of adjacent light bulbs that cycle on and off
frequently to give the illusion of movement.
      CITY. The City of Eureka.
      CORE AREA. As identified in the General Plan, the traditional business
center and cultural hub of Eureka, including Downtown, Old Town, the Library
District and Bayfront Commercial.
      COURTYARD. An unroofed area enclosed on two or more sides by building
walls.
      COVERED ENTRY. A building entrance covered by a roof, rigid canopy
awning, marquee awning or other similar overhanging feature where the covering
is attached to the building wall and is not supported by columns, walls or
other vertical structural elements that extend to the ground. Excludes building
entry areas that are enclosed on exterior-facing sides and/or where walls,
columns or vertical structural elements support the roof. (See PORCH.)
   (D)   “D” terms.
      DARK SKY COMPLIANT. A lighting fixture that meets the International Dark
Sky Association’s (IDA) requirements for reducing waste of ambient light.
      DECK. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building, that is
supported by pillars or posts.
      DENSITY. The number of dwelling units on a lot. See §
155.112.030 (Density) for rules of measurement.
      DEPARTMENT. The City of Eureka Development Services Department.
      DEVELOPMENT. Any human-caused change to land or a structure that requires
a permit or approval from the city.
      DEVELOPMENT STANDARD. A physical or dimensional standard that applies to
a development project or land use. Includes lot area, building height, setbacks
from lot lines, floor area ratio, residential density, site coverage and other
similar requirements.
      DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. An agreement entered into between the City of
Eureka and a property owner for the development of a property in accordance
with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65864 et seq.
      DIRECTOR. The City of Eureka Director of Development Services.
      DISCRETIONARY ACTION. An action by the city that requires the exercise of
individual/independent judgment or deliberation as a basis to approve or deny a
project.
      DRIVEWAY. A permanently surfaced area on a lot designed and required to
provide direct access for vehicles between a street and a private garage,
carport or other parking space, parking area or loading area.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building or a portion of a building containing one or
more habitable rooms used or designed for occupancy by one family for living
and sleeping purposes, including kitchen and bath facilities.
   (E)   “E” terms. None.
   (F)   “F” terms.
      FEATHER BANNER. A temporary sign in the form of a vertical banner made of
flexible materials, (e.g., cloth, paper or plastic), the longer dimension of
which is typically attached to a pole or rod that is driven into the ground or
supported by an individual stand.
      FAMILY. See HOUSEHOLD.
      FENCE. A structure made of wood, metal, masonry or other material used as
a screen or enclosure for a field, yard or lot. Excludes shrubs, trees and
other vegetation.
      FLAGS. Fabric, textile or material with colors and/or patterns which
display a symbol of a nation, state, company or idea.
      FLOOR AREA. The enclosed area of all floors of a building. See §
155.112.050 (Floor Area and Floor Area Ratio) for rules of measurement.
      FLOOR AREA RATIO. An intensity measurement calculated by dividing the
total floor area on a lot by the lot area.
      FRONT STREET. The street with the highest annual average daily traffic
(AADT) relative to the other streets abutting the site.
      FRONTAGE, BUILDING. The linear measurement of a building wall that is
parallel to a street or that abuts a parking lot or pedestrian walkway.
      FRONTAGE, SITE. The portion of a site that abuts a street.
   (G)   "G" terms.
      GARAGE. An enclosed structure or a part of a building designed or used
for the storage of automobiles and other motor vehicles.
      GENERAL PLAN. The General Plan of the City of Eureka prepared in
accordance with Cal. Government Code §§ 65300 et seq.
      GRADE, FINISHED. The level of the ground after completion of site
preparation, grading, earthwork, or construction associated with a development
project.
      GRADE, NATURAL. The level of the ground prior to the start of any current
or proposed site preparation, grading, earthwork, or construction.
      GRADING. Any and all activities involving earthwork, including placement
or fill and/or excavation.
      GROUND FLOOR. The first level of a building, other than a cellar or
basement, that is closest to finished grade.
      GULCH GREENWAY MANAGEMENT AREA (GGMA). See §
155.224.050(B).
   (H)   “H” terms.
      HABITABLE SPACE. An area within a building that is conditioned (heated or
cooled) with a finished floor and a ceiling height averaging at least seven
feet six inches. Excludes unfinished attics, cellars, crawl spaces and other
similar utility areas.
      HEARING BODY. A review authority that conducts a public hearing.
      HOME OCCUPATION. A business conducted within a dwelling unit or from a
residential site, with the business activity being subordinate to the
residential use of the property.
      HOUSEHOLD. One or more persons living together in a single residential
unit, with common access to, and common use of, all living areas and all areas
and facilities for the preparation and storage of food and who maintain no more
than four separate rental agreements for the single residential unit.
   (I)   “I” terms.
      IMPLEMENTATION PLAN. The Coastal Zoning Code, codified in
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning) of the Eureka Municipal Code, and certified by the
Coastal Commission as meeting the requirements of the California Coastal Act of
1976.
      INTENSITY. The amount or magnitude of development or use on a lot,
typically measured as floor area ratio (FAR).
   (J)   “J” terms. None.
   (K)   “K” terms. None.
   (L)   “L” terms.
      LANDSCAPING. The planting and maintenance of living plant material,
including the installation, use and maintenance of any irrigation system for
the plant material, as well as non-living landscape material (such as rocks,
pebbles, sand, mulch, walls, fences or decorative paving materials).
      LAND USE. An activity conducted on a site or in a structure, or the
purpose for which a site or structure is designed, arranged, occupied or
maintained. The meaning of the term USE is identical to LAND USE.
      LAND USE PLAN (COASTAL LAND USE PLAN). The component of the City of
Eureka’s Local Coastal Program (LPC) establishing the vision, goals, and
policies for the coastal zone in accordance with the California Coastal Act of
1976.
      LAND USE REGULATION. A regulation in the Zoning Code that primarily
relates to the operation or placement of a use on a site as opposed to the
physical form of the structures on the site. (See DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.)
      LIVE/WORK UNIT. A building or space within a building that is used
jointly for commercial and residential uses.
      LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM (LCP). The City of Eureka’s Land Use Plan,
Implementation Plan, maps and other implementing actions certified by the
Coastal Commission as meeting the requirements of the California Coastal Act of
1976.
      LOCAL EMERGENCY. An event, situation or state of emergency that threatens
the safety of persons and property in Eureka declared by the City Council in
accordance with the California Emergency Services Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 8550
et seq.).
      LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lines of a lot. See §
155.112.020 (Lot Area) for rules of measurement.
      LOT. A parcel, site, tract or area of land whose boundaries have been
established by a legal instrument such as a deed or map recorded with the
County of Humboldt, and which is recognized as a separate legal entity for
purposes of transfer of title. The meaning of PARCEL is identical to LOT. See
Figure 508-3 for types of lots.
      LOT, CORNER. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
      LOT, INTERIOR. A lot with only one front lot line.
      LOT, FLAG. A lot where the main portion of the lot area does not have
access to a street other than by means of a corridor less than 20 feet wide.
      LOT, THROUGH. A lot which has two or more front lot lines which do not
intersect.
Figure 508-3: Lot Types
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7851.png]
 
      LOT, LEGALLY ESTABLISHED. A lot established in compliance with the
California Subdivision Map Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq.).
      LOT LINE. The lines bounding a lot. The meaning of PROPERTY LINE is
identical to LOT LINE. See
Figure 508-4 for types of lot lines.
Figure 508-4: Lot Lines
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7853.png]
 
      LOT LINE, EXTERIOR SIDE. A lot line other than a front lot line on a
corner lot abutting a street.
      LOT LINE, FRONT.
         (a)    For an interior lot, the lot line abutting a street.
         (b)   For a through lot, both lot lines abutting a street.
         (c)   For a corner lot, either the shorter lot line facing the street,
the lot line facing the primary street as defined in this section, the lot line
facing the building’s primary entrance, or another lot line as determined by
the Director based on the existing and/or proposed layout and function of the
lot.
      LOT LINE, INTERIOR SIDE. A lot line other than a rear line lot shared
with another lot.
      LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line, where such lot line is not also a street-facing lot line, unless
determined otherwise by the Director based on the existing and/or proposed
layout and function of the lot.
   (M)   “M” terms.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. A single-family home built to the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. Includes
structures known as MANUFACTURED HOUSING or MODULAR HOMES.
      MINISTERIAL ACTION. A city action (approval or denial) that involves only
the use of fixed standards or objective measurements and does not require the
exercise of discretionary or subjective personal judgment.
      MIXED-USE. Two or more different land uses located in one building or on
one lot or development site.
      MIXED-USE ZONING DISTRICTS. The zoning districts listed in §
155.208 (Mixed-Use Zoning Districts).
      MOBILE HOME. A type of “trailer,” “trailer coach” or “semi-trailer” as
defined in the California Vehicle Code, and has the same meaning as “mobile
home,” as defined in the California Health and Safety Code. Excludes modular or
manufactured dwellings intended for assembly on-site on permanent foundations
and not designed for subsequent or repeated relocation. Excludes recreational
vehicles as defined in this section.
      MODIFICATION. Any construction or physical change in the internal
arrangement of rooms, supporting members of a structure or external appearance
of any structure, not including painting.
      MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. The Residential Medium (R2)
and Residential High (R3) Zoning Districts.
   (N)   “N” terms.
      NATURAL GRADE. See GRADE, NATURAL.
      NON-CONFORMING or NON-CONFORMITY. A lot, land use, site feature, sign, or
structure that does not comply with the current Zoning Code, but was legally
established under previous regulations.
      NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A legally established building that does not
comply with the current Zoning Code.
      NON-CONFORMING LOT. A legally established lot that does not comply with
the current Zoning Code.
      NON-CONFORMING SIGN. A legally established sign that does not comply with
the current Zoning Code.
      NON-CONFORMING SITE FEATURE. A legally established site feature that does
not comply with the current Zoning Code.
      NON-CONFORMING USE. A legally established land use that does not comply
with the current Zoning Code.
   (O)   “O” terms.
      OVERLAY ZONE. A secondary zoning designation that imposes additional
regulations, allowances, limitations and/or special provisions beyond what is
required and allowed by the underlying zoning district.
   (P)   “P” terms.
      PARCEL. See LOT.
      PARKING ASSESSMENT DISTRICT. Outside of the coastal zone, the area shown
in
Figure 508-5.
Figure 508-5: Parking Assessment District - Inland Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7855.png]
 
      PARKING INDENTURE. A covenant record filed with the County Recorder
guaranteeing that off-site parking will be maintained exclusively for a use for
the duration of the use.
      PARKING LOT. An area on a lot or within a structure used for or designed
for temporary parking for more than four motor vehicles and available for
public use, whether free, for compensation or as an accommodation for clients,
employees, visitors or customers.
      PARKING SPACE. Land or space privately owned, covered or uncovered, laid
out for, surfaced and used or designed to be used for temporary parking or
storage of standard motor vehicles.
      PEDESTRIAN-FOCUSED FRONTAGE. See §
155.208.040 (Pedestrian-Focused Frontages) and
Figure 208-4.
PERGOLA. A structure usually consisting of parallel colonnades supporting an
open roof of girders and cross rafters. See
Figure 508-6.
Figure 508-6: Pergola
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8206.jpg]
 
      PERMIT. A City approval required by the Zoning Code as listed in
Table 404-1 in §
155.404 (Administrative Responsibilities).
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The City of Eureka Planning Commission.
      PORCH. A covered projecting platform that extends from the main wall of a
building where the covering is supported by columns, walls or other vertical
structural elements. A PORCH may be enclosed or unenclosed. ENCLOSED PORCHES
must be at least 60% transparent on each exterior-facing side.
      PRIMARY BUILDING. The building or structure that accommodates the primary
use of the site.
      PRIMARY DWELLING. On a lot with an accessory dwelling unit (ADU), the
detached single-family home established either before or concurrently with the
ADU.
      PRIMARY USE. The main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied,
including the activities that are conducted on the site a majority of the hours
during which activities occur.
      PRIVATE AGREEMENT. An easement, covenant, deed restriction or other
agreement entered into between private property owners.
      PRIVATELY-OWNED PUBLIC SPACE. An outdoor area on private property which
may be used by customers and/or the general public.
      PROPERTY LINE. See LOT LINE.
      PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any violation of the Municipal Code defined as such by
the Eureka Municipal Code or that is, causes, or creates a condition of public
nuisance as defined in Cal. Civil Code §§ 3479 and 3480.
      PUBLIC UTILITY. A permanent structure or facility operated by a
governmental agency providing a utility service to the general public. Includes
facilities for the production, generation, storage, treatment or transmission
of water; facilities for the production, generation, transmission or
distribution of electrical energy; facilities for the collection, treatment and
disposal of solid waste and wastewater and other similar facilities.
      PUBLIC ZONING DISTRICTS. The zoning districts listed in §
155.216 (Public Zoning Districts).
   (Q)   “Q” terms. None.
   (R)   “R” terms.
      RECONSTRUCTION. See § 155.424.040(E) (Demolition and Reconstruction).
      RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicular-type unit designed for temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, which either has its
own motive power or is mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. The term
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Motor homes constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled
vehicle;
         (b)   Travel trailers built on a chassis and drawn by a motorized
vehicle;
         (c)   Campers mounted on a truck chassis;
         (d)   Camping trailers and similar folding structures mounted on
wheels; and
         (e)   Park trailers built on a single chassis, mounted on wheels, with
a gross trailer area not exceeding 400 square feet in the setup mode, and
certified by the manufacturer as complying with ANSI A119.5.
      REMODEL. A change or alteration in a building that does not increase the
building's square footage.
      RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Any property used for residential purposes.
Examples include single-family homes, condos, cooperatives, duplexes,
townhouses, and multi-family residences.
      RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS. The zoning districts listed in §
155.204 (Residential Zoning Districts).
      RESOURCE-RELATED ZONING DISTRICTS. The zoning districts listed in §
155.220 (Resource-Related Zoning Districts).
      REVIEW AUTHORITY. The city official or body responsible for approving or
denying a permit application or other form of requested approval under the
Zoning Code.
   (S)   “S” terms.
      SECOND USE. A use subject to separate permit requirements and allowed
only if combined with a primary use.
      SETBACK. The required distance of a structure from a lot line or other
feature. See §
155.112.040 (Setback) for rules of measurement.
      SETBACK AREA. The two-dimensional area on a lot subject to the minimum
setback requirement.
      SIDE STREET. The street with a lower annual average daily traffic (AADT)
relative to the other streets fronting the site or as defined by the Public
Works Director.
      SIGN. Any structure, object or device that contains letters, numbers,
graphics, colors or other means of communication to advertise, announce or
communicate information of any kind to the public. A structure, object or
device without sign copy for 180 days or more is no longer considered a sign.
      SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign which physically moves, rotates, revolves or has
visibly moving or rotating parts of any kind.
      SIGN, AWNING. A sign incorporated into, attached to or painted on the
face or valance of an awning.
      SIGN, BANNER. A temporary sign made of flexible vinyl, fabric or any non-
rigid material with no enclosing framework on which a message or image is
painted or otherwise affixed.
      SIGN, BOX. A sign that contains all copy within a single enclosed cabinet
that is mounted to a wall or other structure. BOX SIGNS, also referred to as
CAN SIGNS, typically use slide-in panels to display messages.
      SIGN, CANOPY. A sign attached to a fixed overhead shelter used as a roof,
which may or may not be attached to a building.
      SIGN COPY. The area of a sign occupied by letters, numbers, graphics or
other content intended to communicate information.
      SIGN, DETACHED. Any pole sign, monument sign or other types of sign not
attached to a building.
      SIGNS, DIGITAL. A sign that displays a visual image using liquid crystal
cells or other types of light emitting diodes (LEDs) or their functional
equivalent where the image can be easily changed, typically by remote control
or computer programming. Also known as ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER (EMC) SIGNS.
Excludes fuel price signs and internally illuminated window signs.
      SIGN, DIGITALLY PRINTED. Any of the following:
         (a)   A sign where the entire sign copy is digitally printed onto
wood, aluminum or other material and then trimmed as needed to complete the
sign;
         (b)   A sign where the entire sign copy is digitally printed onto an
adhesive material which is attached to a plastic panel and inserted into a box
sign cabinet; and
         (c)   A sign where a single material is used for the sign copy and
sign face (e.g., a pan face sign with an injected molded plastic).
      SIGNS, DIRECTIONAL. A sign that provides directions to a place, structure
or use, excluding signs installed by a public agency.
      SIGN, DIRECTORY. A sign which lists and identifies the location of the
occupants of a multi-tenant building or site. Excludes “property identification
signs.”
      SIGN FACE. The area of a sign where sign copy is placed.
      SIGN, INFLATABLE BALLOON. A temporary sign consisting of a flexible
envelope of non-porous materials that gains its shape from inserted air or
other gas.
      SIGNS, HUMAN DIRECTIONAL AND ADVERTISING. A sign that is held by or
attached to a human being in any manner. Includes individuals dressed in
costume intended to attract attention as human signs to a business for
advertising purposes.
      SIGN, INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED WINDOW. A sign placed in a window with
individually illuminated letter, numbers or graphic not exceeding 12 square
feet. Includes illuminated “open” signs and signs illuminated with LEDs, neon
or other fluorescing gas.
      SIGN, MARQUEE. A sign with changeable copy that advertises an event,
performance, seminar, conference or show.
         (a)   ATTACHED MARQUEE SIGN. A marquee sign displayed on a permanent
roof-like structure or canopy made of rigid materials supported by and
extending from the facade of a building.
         (b)   DETACHED MARQUEE SIGN. A freestanding marquee sign not attached
to a building.
      SIGN, MONUMENT. A sign detached from a building and supported on the
ground by one or more structural elements that are one-quarter or more of the
width of the sign face. Internal supports, poles or pylons, if any, are
enclosed by decorative covers or otherwise not exposed to view. Includes signs
where supporting structural elements are architecturally dissimilar to the
design of the sign. Excludes “pole signs.”
      SIGN, NEON. A sign that features exposed small diameter tubing
illuminated by neon or other fluorescing gas. Excludes signs with LEDs intended
to simulate the appearance of neon and “internally illuminated window signs.”
      SIGN, OFF-PREMISES. A sign advertising a land use, business, product or
service not located or available on the site where the sign is located.
      SIGN, POLE. A sign detached from a building and supported on the ground
by one or more structural elements that are less than one-quarter the width of
the sign face. Monument signs with supporting poles where the poles are encased
to incorporate design features are not considered POLE SIGNS.
      SIGN, POST. A temporary sign suspended from a horizontal swingpost or
bracket that is attached to a vertical post mounted in the ground. Includes on-
site real estate sales and rental signs.
      SIGN, PROJECTING. A sign permanently attached to a building or wall such
that the sign face or faces are perpendicular to the building or wall. Includes
blade signs suspended under a bracket, armature or other mounting device.
      SIGN, ROOF. A sign erected upon or directly above a roof and the parapet
of a building.
      SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A portable sign with two opposing flat faces
designed to be self-supporting on the ground, typically displayed on a sidewalk
or in a parking lot.
      SIGN, SUSPENDED. A sign which is suspended under an awning, canopy,
fascia or similar structure. Includes signs oriented parallel to the building
façade suspended over a recessed entry.
      SIGN, TICKER. An electronic reader board sign consisting of one or more
lines of scrolling LED text.
      SIGN, WALL. A sign attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a
structure with the display surface of the sign approximately parallel to the
building wall. Includes signs attached to but not extending above a fascia or
parapet.
      SIGN, WINDOW. A sign posted, painted, placed or affixed in or on a window
exposed to public view. Any sign attached to a window, within two feet of a
window or attached to a display located within two feet of a window is
considered a WINDOW SIGN.
      SIGN, YARD. A temporary freestanding sign with an “H”-shaped frame
inserted into the ground within a street-facing yard. Includes political
campaign signs displayed prior to elections.
      SITE. A lot with any adjoining lots that are under single ownership or
single control, and that are considered a unit for the purpose of development
or other use.
      SITE COVERAGE. The total horizontal area of all buildings on a lot
divided by the lot area. See §
155.112.060 (Site Coverage) for rules of measurement.
      SITE FEATURES. Physical improvements and modifications to a site
excluding permanent buildings to serve on-site development and uses. Includes
at grade flatwork, steps, ramps, retaining walls, planter boxes, decorative
ornamental features, ground-mounted mechanical equipment, swimming pools and
other similar improvements.
      SPECIFIC PLAN. Any specific plan of the City of Eureka adopted in
accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65450 et seq.
      STORY. The portion of a building between the upper surface of any floor
and the upper surface of the floor next above; except that, the topmost STORY
is that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. A loft is not considered a STORY, but a
mezzanine covering more than 1/3 of the floor area is a STORY.
      STREET. A travel way more than 20 feet in width which affords a primary
or principal means of access to abutting property. STREETS includes private
roads and highways.
      STREET-FACING BUILDING WALL.
         (a)   A building wall that is:
            1.   Parallel or substantially parallel to a street; and
            2.   Directly across a front or exterior side lot line.
         (b)   This definition excludes building walls parallel to an interior
lot line, a rear lot line or an alley. See Figure 508-7.
Figure 508-7: Street-Facing Building Walls
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9015.png]
 
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected that requires attachment to
the ground, or attachment to something located on the ground. Excludes objects
temporarily attached to the ground, or which are easily moved, including dog
houses, picnic tables, patio furniture and children’s play structures.
      STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor, ceiling or
roof joists and roof rafters, or a change in roof exterior lines which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building.
      SUBDIVISION. The division of land as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410
to 66499 (Subdivision Map Act). Includes condominium and community apartment
projects.
   (T)   “T” terms.
      TANDEM PARKING. An arrangement of parking spaces such that one or more
spaces must be driven across in order to access another space or spaces.
      TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure that is erected for a limited period of
time and that does not permanently alter the character or physical facilities
of a property.
      TEMPORARY USE. A short-term activity that occurs for a limited period of
time and does not permanently alter the character or physical facilities of a
property.
      TENANT SPACE. A defined area within a building rented or occupied by a
business or other non-residential land
      TINY HOUSE ON WHEELS. An unpowered vehicle designed to be towed by
another vehicle on a public street and intended to be permitted and used as an
accessory dwelling unit. A tiny house on wheels is licensed by the California
Department of Motor Vehicles as a recreational vehicle, but appears and
functions as a permanent, year-round residence providing complete, independent
living facilities for one household, while temporarily located on the same lot
as the primary dwelling to which it is an accessory use. A TINY HOUSE ON WHEELS
excludes recreational vehicles where the wheels are removed and the unit is
attached to a conventional foundation (See "Manufactured Home").
      TRELLIS. A frame of latticework used as a screen or as a support for
climbing plants.
Figure 508-8: Trellis
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/1ce6a029fb9b1ff68639c055a05e4b0aac43bc38/
IMAGES/0-0-0-8208.jpg]
 
      TOWNHOME. Two or more single-family dwelling units connected by common
walls along the sides with either shared or unshared foundations.
      TRANSLUCENT. Permitting light to pass through but diffusing it so that
persons or objects on the opposite side are not clearly visible.
   (U)   “U” terms.
      UNCOVERED PARKING SPACE. A parking space in an open area not enclosed in
a garage, carport or other structure.
      USE. See LAND USE.
      USE PERMIT. Either a conditional use permit or a minor use permit.
   (V)   “V” terms.
      VISION CLEARANCE AREA. See §
155.308.040 (Vision Clearance Area).
   (W)   “W” terms.
      WALL. A permanent upright linear structure made of wood, stone, concrete,
masonry or other similar material.
      WEEDS. Plants that were not included in an approved landscape plan for
the property, are not valued where they are growing, are of vigorous growth
relative to other plants within a landscape area and overgrow and choke out
other plants within a landscape area.
   (X)   “X” terms. None.
   (Y)   “Y” terms. None.
   (Z)   “Z” terms.
      ZONING CODE. 
Chapter 155 of the City of Eureka Municipal Code.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A defined area within the City of Eureka where uniform
land use and development standards apply in accordance with the Zoning Code.
      ZONING DISTRICT, COASTAL. A zoning district in the coastal zone regulated
under Municipal Code
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning).
      ZONING DISTRICT, INLAND. A zoning district outside of the coastal zone
regulated under the Zoning Code.
      ZONING MAPS. The official maps adopted by the City Council identifying
the boundaries of the zoning districts within the City of Eureka.
      ZONING MAP, COASTAL. The official adopted and certified Zoning Map
identifying the location of coastal zoning districts, incorporated by reference
into Municipal Code
Ch. 156 (Coastal Zoning).
      ZONING MAP, INLAND. The official adopted Zoning Map identifying the
location of zoning districts outside of the coastal zone, incorporated by
reference into the Zoning Code.
(Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19; Am. Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord.
916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S.,
passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S., passed 10-17-23; Am. Ord. 962-C.S., passed
7-15-25)
§ 155.508.030 [RESERVED.]
§ 155.508.040 LAND USE CLASSIFICATION - USE TYPE.
   (A)   Residential uses.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling unit (ADU). An attached or detached residential
dwelling unit with complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons. An ADU includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as an existing or proposed single-
family residence or an existing multi-family residence and meets the standards
of §
155.316 (Accessory Dwelling Units). An accessory dwelling unit also includes:
         (a)   An efficiency unit, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
17958.1;
         (b)   Junior accessory dwelling unit as defined in Cal. Gov’t Code §
65852.22;
         (c)   A tiny house on wheels permitted in a residential zone district
pursuant to §
155.304.130 (Tiny Houses on Wheels); and
         (d)   A manufactured home, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §
18007.
      (2)   Bed and breakfast. See Vacation Rental.
      (3)   Farmworker housing. Housing for transient labor, such as labor
cabins or camps, incidental to a permitted agricultural use.
      (4)   Hospice. See Medical Care Housing.
      (5)   Hostel. See Commercial Lodging.
      (6)   Medical care housing. A residential facility, licensed as a skilled
nursing facility by the State of California, that provides 24-hour medical,
convalescent or chronic care to individuals who are unable to care for
themselves by reason of advanced age, chronic illness, or infirmity. Excludes
facilities providing non-medical social and personal care to residents (see
"Non-medical Care Housing").
      (7)   Micro/shared housing. Shared living quarters without separate
kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, offered for rent to
permanent or semi-transient residents for long-term occupancy (30 days or
more). Includes rooming and boarding houses, single-room occupancy housing,
dormitories, convents and monasteries, and other types of organizational
housing. Excludes hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns, and vacation rentals
(see "Commercial Lodging" and "Vacation Rental") and state-licensed facilities
providing social and personal care to residents (see "Non-medical Care
Housing").
      (8)   Mobile home park. An area of land where two or more mobile home
spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes for more
than 30 consecutive calendar days.
      (9)   Multi-family dwellings. Two or more residential units located on a
single lot. Includes units side-by-side, units stacked vertically, and one or
more units occupying the same site as a non-residential use (mixed-use
development). Excludes detached single-family homes with an accessory dwelling
unit in compliance with §
155.316 (see "Accessory Dwelling Units").
      (10)   Non-medical care housing. A state-licensed residential facility
that provides non-medical social and personal care for residents. Includes
community care facilities as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 1500 et
seq., residential care facilities for the elderly (Cal. Health and Safety Code
§§ 1569 et seq.), facilities for the mentally disordered or otherwise
handicapped (Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code §§ 5000 et seq.), alcoholism or
drug abuse recovery or treatment facilities (Cal. Health and Safety Code §
11834.02), supportive housing (Cal. Gov’t Code § 65582), transitional housing
(Cal. Gov’t Code § 65582), and other similar facilities.
         (a)   Non-medical care housing, large. A non-medical care facility for
seven or more persons.
         (b)   Non-medical care housing, small. A non-medical care facility for
six or fewer persons.
      (11)   Nursing home. See Medical Care Housing.
      (12)   Single-family home. A residential structure designed for occupancy
by one household. A single-family dwelling provides complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
         (a)   Single-family attached home (townhome). Two or more single-
family dwelling units connected by common walls along the side property lines,
sometimes called a townhouse or row house.
         (b)   Single-family detached home. A detached building that contains
one single-family dwelling. Includes individual mobile homes and manufactured
housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 18551 and meeting the standards of §
155.304.080 (Manufactured Housing). A detached single family home with an
attached ADU remains a single-family home and is not considered a multi-family
dwelling.
      (13)   Single room occupancy (SRO). See Micro/Shared Housing.
      (14)   Supportive housing. See Non-Medical Care Housing.
      (15)   Transitional housing. See Non-Medical Care Housing.
   (B)   Commercial - sales.
      (1)   Automobile sales/repair. See “Vehicle Sales and Rentals (Indoor)”,
“General Retail - Outdoor”, “Vehicle Cleaning and Repair”, or “Heavy Equipment
Sales and Service”.
      (2)   Bars. Businesses devoted to serving alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food and/or
recreation, amusement, and entertainment services are only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages. Includes cocktail lounges, taverns, and other
similar uses. Excludes tasting rooms ancillary to breweries, wineries, and
other alcoholic beverage production uses.
      (3)   Drive-thru facility. A facility where motorists may purchase
products or obtain services without leaving their vehicles. Drive-thru
facilities are a secondary use that must be associated with a primary use.
Excludes vehicle fueling stations (see "Fuel and Service Stations").
         (a)   Food-serving drive-thru facility. A drive-thru facility
associated with a "restaurants, cafes, and beverage sales" use.
         (b)   Non-food serving drive thru facility. A drive-thru facility
associated with another use (such as “General Retail - Indoor”) that is not a
"Food-Serving Drive-Thru Facility."
      (4)   Car dealership. See "Vehicle Sales and Rental (Indoor)" and
“General Retail - Outdoor”.
      (5)   Food truck. See “Mobile Vendor”.
      (6)   Fuel and service stations. A retail business supplying fuels, oil,
and minor accessories for vehicles. Includes establishments supplying gasoline,
hydrogen, and electric vehicle charging as a primary land use. Includes
incidental food and beverage sales (maximum 3,500 square feet of convenience
market), car wash facilities, and minor automotive repair and service. Excludes
towing service (see "Vehicle Towing and Impound"), body and fender work,
painting, and other major automotive repairs or cleaning and detailing as a
primary use (see "Vehicle Cleaning and Repair"). Excludes electric vehicle
charging stations installed in parking spaces and/or parking lots.
      (7)   Gas station. See “Fuel and Service Station”.
      (8)   General retail. Stores and shops selling merchandise to the general
public, and which may include related services. Includes antique shops, art
galleries, automotive supply stories, book stores, clothing stores, convenience
markets, gift shops, furniture stores, drug stores, florists, liquor stores,
pet shops, retail bakeries, supermarkets, garden supply stores, lumber yards,
and other similar retail-based establishments.
         (a)   General retail - indoor. A general retail establishment where
merchandise is stored and displayed indoors. Includes the temporary outdoor
display of merchandise under covered-entryways, such as produce at grocery
stores. Also includes temporary sidewalk displays of merchandise (which may
require an encroachment permit and other permits). Excludes the prominent
display/storage of merchandise in an outdoor setting as a part of regular
business operations, which is a secondary use subject to separate limitations
(see "General Retail - Outdoor"). “General Retail - Indoor” falls into three
categories:
            1.   Very large general retail - indoor. A general retail indoor
facility that is larger than 50,000 square feet in total floor area.
            2.   Large general retail - indoor. A general retail indoor
facility that is between 20,000 square feet and 50,000 square feet.
            3.   Small general retail - indoor. A general retail indoor
facility that is less than 20,000 square feet in total floor area.
         (b)   General retail - outdoor. A supplemental outdoor area associated
with a primary use (such as “General Retail - Indoor”) where merchandise is
prominently stored and/or displayed for sale outdoors in a designated outdoor
area as a regular part of business operations. General retail - outdoor is a
secondary use that must be combined with another use (such as “General Retail -
Indoor” or “Heavy Equipment Sales and Service”) and must include a building on-
site that hosts the primary use, such as "Business Services and Heavy
Commercial" or "General Retail - Indoor." General retail - outdoor includes
boat/trailer sales, plant nurseries, garden supplies, lumberyards, statuary
stores, headstone sales, and other similar establishments. Includes the outdoor
sales of automobiles and large vehicle sales. Excludes purely indoor car
dealerships (see "Vehicle Sales and Rental (Indoor)") and purely indoor large
vehicle sales (see "Heavy Equipment Sales and Services"). A car sales business
with both indoor sales rooms and outdoor sales lots requires approval of both
uses ("Vehicle Sales and Rental (Indoor)" and "General Retail - Outdoor") and
is subject to the regulations that apply to both uses. Excludes the temporary
outdoor display of merchandise under covered-entryways, such as produce at
grocery stores. Excludes the temporary sidewalk displays of merchandise (which
may require an encroachment permit or other permits).
      (9)   Heavy equipment sales and service. Indoor retail establishments
selling or renting industrial, construction, farm, or other heavy equipment for
commercial use, including cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, tractor
trailers, combines, and heavy trucks. Outdoor display, storage, and sales is a
secondary use subject to separate regulations and restrictions (see "General
Retail - Outdoor").
      (10)   Mobile vendor. Any vehicle from which a product is made, sold, or
distributed at retail.
      (11)   Restaurants, cafes, and beverage sales. A business selling
prepared food and/or beverages for on- or off-premise consumption. Includes
full service, fast-food and carry-out restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, juice/
smoothie bars, retail bakeries, and other similar eating and drinking
establishments. Includes outdoor seating/service areas which are permitted by
right. Excludes businesses primarily selling alcoholic beverages for on-site
consumption (see "Bars"). Excludes grocery stores and alcohol sales for off-
site consumption (see "General Retail - Indoor").
      (12)   Vehicle sales and rental (indoor). The indoor sale or rental of
new or used automobiles, motorcycles, light trucks, recreational vehicles,
boats, and other similar vehicles. Includes the sale of vehicle parts and
vehicle cleaning and repair, provided that these activities are incidental to
the sale of vehicles. Excludes the sale and rental of tractor trailers and
construction equipment (see "Heavy Equipment Sales and Service") and vehicle
salvage and wrecking (see "Recycling Processing Facilities"). Outdoor display,
storage, and sales is a secondary use subject to separate regulations and
restrictions (see "General Retail - Outdoor").
   (C)   Commercial - service and office.
      (1)   Adult entertainment. See §
155.304.030 (Adult Entertainment).
      (2)   Business services and heavy commercial. Indoor commercial
establishments providing goods and services to other businesses and/or engaged
in heavy commercial activities that could impact neighboring properties.
Includes contractor supply businesses, building contractors, large equipment
repair, pipe yards, commercial dry-cleaning/laundry services, security
services, custodial services, business-serving printers, taxi and delivery
services, private ambulance dispatch services, property maintenance
contractors, plumbing supply stores, and other similar businesses. Products and
services may be provided to the general public only on a limited, secondary
basis. Outdoor display, storage, and sales is a secondary use and is subject to
separate regulations and restrictions (see “General Retail - Outdoor”).
      (3)   Car share facility. A formal or informal membership organization
that owns motor vehicles that are parked on-site or in off-site areas. Members
use the motor vehicles under the terms of their membership.
      (4)   Check cashing. A retail business owned or operated by a "check
casher" as that term is defined in Cal. Civil Code § 1789.31.
      (5)   Commercial lodging. A commercial establishment in a non-residential
zoning district providing overnight accommodations to guests for 30 consecutive
calendar days or less. Commercial lodging establishments may provide additional
services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, or
recreation facilities available to guests and the general public. Includes
hotels, motels, hostels, and other similar commercial establishments. Also
includes dwelling units or portions thereof located in a non-residential zoning
district rented to guests for 30 consecutive calendar days or less.
      (6)   Day care facility. A facility that provides nonmedical care and
supervision of children or adults for periods of less than 24 hours. Includes
nursery schools, day nurseries, child care centers, infant day care centers,
cooperative day care centers, adult day programs, and similar uses. Day care
facilities may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or
as an independent land use.
      (7)   Family day care home. A state-licensed facility that regularly
provides care, protection, and supervision for children, in the provider's own
home, for periods less than 24 hours per day, while the children's parents or
guardians are away. Family day care homes are a secondary use that must be
associated with a primary use.
         (a)   Large family day care home. A home that provides family day care
for 9 to 14 children as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 1597.465.
         (b)   Small family day care home. A home that provides family day care
for up to eight children as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 1597.44.
      (8)   Fitness, dance, or health facility. An indoor fitness center,
gymnasium, athletic club, dance studio, yoga studio, or other similar use.
         (a)   Large fitness, dance, or health facility. A facility with a
floor area of 8,000 square feet or more.
         (b)   Small fitness, dance, or health facility. A facility with a
floor area of less than 8,000 square feet.
      (9)   General services. An indoor commercial establishment that provides
services to the general public, involves frequent visits by customers, and
which may involve limited product sales related to the service provided.
Includes banks, funeral parlors, laundromats, photocopy stores, customer-
serving dry cleaners, household item repairs, veterinary clinics, tattoo/
piercing parlors, customer-serving printers, animal grooming with no overnight
boarding, recording studios, and other similar uses that provide on-site
services to customers. Excludes places of employment that do not provide on-
site services directly to customers (see "offices") and facilities that provide
medical services (see "Medical Care Services"). Excludes establishments that
provide body-care related services (see "Personal Services") and fitness-
related establishments (see "Fitness, Dance, or Health Facility"). Excludes
indoor commercial establishments that primarily provide recreation, amusement,
and entertainment services (see "Indoor Commercial Recreation"), primarily
serve alcoholic beverages (see "Bars"), or primarily sell prepared food and/or
beverages (see "Restaurants, Cafes, and Beverage Sales").
      (10)   Hospital. Facilities providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical
services for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and
including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment,
diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to
patients, employees, or visitors. May include facilities for the takeoff and
landing of helicopters.
      (11)   Hotel. See “Commercial Lodging”.
      (12)   Indoor commercial recreation. A privately-owned commercial
facility providing indoor recreation, amusement, and entertainment services.
Includes video arcades, movie theaters, bowling alleys, indoor mini-golf,
indoor batting cages, and other similar uses. Excludes businesses primarily
devoted to serving alcoholic beverages (see "Bars") or primarily devoted to
selling prepared food and/or beverages (see "Restaurants, Cafes, and Beverage
Sales) for consumption by guests on the premises. Excludes establishments that
provide body-care related services (see "Personal Services") and fitness-
related establishments (see "Fitness, Dance, or Health Facility").
      (13)   Kennel-animal boarding. A commercial facility for the keeping,
boarding, training, breeding or maintaining of four or more dogs (four months
of age or older), cats, or other household pet not owned by the facility owner
or operator. Includes kennels, pet day care, and animal shelters. Excludes
household pets for sale in pet shops (see "General Retail") and veterinary
clinics (see "General Services").
      (14)   Medical offices and clinics. Facilities where medical, mental,
dental, vision, or other personal health services are provided on an outpatient
basis using specialized equipment. Includes offices for physicians, dentists,
physical therapists, optometrists, diagnostic centers, blood banks and plasma
centers, and emergency medical clinics offered exclusively on an out-patient
basis. Includes mental health services such as marriage/family therapists,
counselors, psychologists, psychiatrists, and other similar uses. Also includes
alternative medicine facilities such as acupuncture, chiropractors, state-
licensed therapeutic massage, nutritional consultation, herbalists, and other
similar facilities. May include educational aspects such as medical instruction
and/or training as well as house a laboratory, radiology/imaging, pharmacy,
rehabilitation and other similar services as accessory uses.
      (15)   Motel. See “Commercial Lodging”.
      (16)   Offices. A place of employment occupied by businesses providing
professional services. Includes offices for accountants, architects, insurance
agents, attorneys, engineers, real estate agents, travel agents, artist
studios, and other similar professions. Excludes businesses that provide
regular service to frequent walk-in customers (see "General Services"), medical
offices (see "Medical Offices and Clinics"), governmental offices (see
"Governmental Facility"), and art galleries that are primarily intended to
display saleable art and attract retail sales (see "General Retail - Indoor").
Internal office space that is incidental to a different primary use is not
considered an "office" use. For example, a manager's office at a manufacturing
facility and the office of an inventory specialist at a grocery store are not
considered separate or stand-alone office uses.
      (17)   Outdoor commercial recreation. A privately-owned commercial
facility providing outdoor recreation, amusement, and entertainment services.
Includes commercial batting cages, outdoor swimming pools, go-cart tracks,
driving ranges, tennis courts, golf courses, miniature golf, and other similar
uses. Excludes municipal parks and non-commercial recreational facilities (see
"Parks and Playgrounds").
      (18)   Parking lots and structures. Surface lots and structures for use
of occupants, employees, or patrons on the subject site or offering parking to
the public for a fee when such use is the primary use on the lot and not
incidental to another on-site activity.
      (19)   Personal services. An indoor commercial establishment that
typically provides one-on-one body-care related services that involve frequent
visits by customers and that are typically scheduled on an appointment-basis.
May involve limited product sales related to the service provided. Includes
hair salons, nail salons, make-up application studios, skincare treatment
salons, non-therapeutic massage, health spas, and other similar non-medical
personal service uses. For therapeutic message and other clinical-health-
related uses, see "Medical Offices and Clinics."
      (20)   Vacation rental. A dwelling unit or portions thereof located in a
residential zoning district that is rented to guests for 30 consecutive
calendar days or less. Includes two types of vacation rental, with the
proprietor on site and without the proprietor on-site as defined in §
155.304.150 (Vacation Rental).
      (21)   Vehicle cleaning and repair. An establishment for the cleaning,
detailing, repair, alteration, restoration, or finishing of any vehicle,
including, but not limited to, car wash and vehicle cleaning and detailing
facilities, body repair, collision repair, painting, tire and battery sales and
installation, motor rebuilding, tire recapping and retreading, and towing.
Excludes cleaning and/or repair shops that are incidental to a vehicle sales or
rental establishment on the same site (see "Vehicle Sales and Rentals (Indoor)"
and "General Retail - Outdoor"). Excludes cleaning and/or repair shops that are
incidental to a fuel or service station (see "Fuel and Service Stations").
      (22)   Vehicle towing and impound. Establishments primarily engaged in
towing light or heavy motor vehicles, both local and long distance, and the on-
site storage of towed vehicle. May provide incidental services, such as vehicle
storage and emergency road repair services.
   (D)   Industrial and storage.
      (1)   Manufacturing, artisan. Artistic, artisan, craft-oriented, and
small-scale manufacturing businesses engaged in the on-site assembly of
individually fabricated parts or the fabrication of custom/craft goods, and the
incidental direct sale to consumers of primarily those goods produced on site.
The facilities are compatible with a general retail and mixed-use setting.
Goods are predominantly manufactured and fabricated involving the use of hand
tools or small-scaled mechanical equipment and kilns that do not generate
noise, odors, or vibration detectable beyond the interior walls of the
facility. Typical uses include craft food and beverage, including alcoholic
beverage production, ceramic studios, fabrics, inlays, tile work, weaving,
leather work, limited woodwork, limited metal or glass work, candle making,
custom tailors, custom wedding dress production, custom jewelry, and other
similar uses. May include limited tasting-rooms ancillary to the craft
production of alcoholic beverage production uses.
      (2)   Manufacturing, light. The manufacture of products in a manner that
produces little or no noise, odor, fumes, dust, smoke, dirt, refuse, vibration,
glare, and/or air or water pollution detectable beyond the interior walls of
the facility and is unlikely to cause significant impacts on surrounding land
uses. Products are commonly produced from previously prepared materials, of
finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, and packaging of such products. Does not produce or utilize toxic,
hazardous, or explosive materials as an integral part of the manufacturing
process. Includes the manufacture and production of clothing; mass-produced
food and beverage products, including alcoholic beverage production;
electronic, optical, and instrumentation products; electronic equipment and
appliances; ice. Excludes the processing of harvested crops (see "Agricultural
Processing"). May include tasting rooms ancillary to the craft production of
alcoholic beverage production uses.
      (3)   Manufacturing, heavy. A facility accommodating manufacturing
processes that involve or produce basic metals, building materials, chemicals,
fabricated metals, paper products, machinery, textiles, or transportation
equipment, and where the use may cause significant impacts on surrounding land
uses. Includes manufacturing of chemical products; concrete, gypsum, and
plaster products; paving and roofing materials; plastics and other synthetics,
and rubber products; lumber and other wood products; tires; mass-produced food
and beverage products, including alcoholic beverage products, paving and
petroleum-based roofing materials; lime products; glass products. Also includes
petroleum refining and related industries, oil and gas processing facilities,
and ready-mix concrete batch plants. Excludes sales of ready-mix concrete
incidental retail establishment (see "General Retail, Outdoor"), artisan and
craftsman type operations (see "Manufacturing, Artisan"), and recapping and
retreading of automobile tires (see "Vehicle Cleaning and Repair"). May involve
the use of toxic, hazardous, or explosive materials. May include limited
tasting rooms ancillary to the craft production of alcoholic beverage
production uses.
      (4)   Mini-storage. One or more buildings in a controlled access and
fully enclosed compound that contains separate self-storage spaces of varying
size for the storage of customers' goods and possessions.
      (5)   Outdoor storage, non-retail. Non-retail storage of commercial goods
in open lots as either a primary or secondary use. Excludes storage of
merchandise for sale as part of a retail establishment (see "General Retail,
Outdoor").
      (6)   Warehousing, wholesale, and distribution. A use engaged in storage,
wholesale and distribution of manufactured products, supplies, and equipment to
retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional
business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in
buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies.
Includes merchant wholesalers; agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and
commission merchants; assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the
cooperative marketing of farm products.
   (E)   Agricultural and natural resources.
      (1)   Agricultural processing. The processing of harvested crops to
prepare them for onsite marketing, off-site sale, or processing and packaging
elsewhere. Includes alfalfa cubing; corn shelling; grist mills; milling of
flour, feed and grain; grain cleaning and grinding; hay baling and cubing; pre-
cooling and packaging of fresh or dried fruits or vegetables; tree nut hulling
and shelling; farm product warehousing and storage; drying of corn, rice, hay;
and sorting, grading and packing fruits and vegetables. Includes the processing
of crops grown off-site. Excludes manufacturing of food and products ready for
sale to consumers (see "Manufacturing, Artisan" and Manufacturing, Light").
      (2)   Agriculture. The use of the land for commercial farming, crop
production, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and animal raising and
production, including dairies. May include accessory uses for packing,
processing, treating, and storing crops grown on site provided such accessory
uses are secondary to crop production activities. Excludes the processing and
packaging of agricultural products (see "Agricultural Processing"),
slaughterhouses and animal product processing uses (see Animal Processing"),
cannabis cultivation (see Municipal Code
Chapter 158), community gardens (see "Parks and Playgrounds"), and the
harvesting of plants and animals in an aquatic environment (see "Aquaculture").
      (3)   Aquaculture. Facilities or areas for the cultivation of marine or
freshwater fish, shellfish, or plants under controlled conditions. Includes
aquaponics that integrates aquaculture with hydroponics by recycling the waste
products from fish to fertilize hydroponically growing plants. Includes
cultured oyster beds and similar uses.
      (4)   Animal processing. A facility where the slaughtering and/or
processing of animals raised off-site takes place, including rendering plants
and meat cutting and packing uses. Excludes manufacturing of consumer foods
from animal products (see "Manufacturing, Heavy").
      (5)   Commercial fishing. The activity of catching fish and other seafood
for commercial profit, mostly from wild fisheries. Includes ancillary fish and
seafood processing; fish and seafood storage and distribution; and fish and
seafood sales. Excludes cultivation of fish and seafood under controlled
conditions (see "Aquaculture").
      (6)   Resource protection and restoration. Lands and management
activities dedicated to the protection and conservation of natural resources,
such as aquatic environments, wetland and sensitive riparian habitat, water
recharge areas, and rare or endangered plant or animal habitat.
      (7)   Timber production and harvesting. The cutting and removal of timber
or other solid wood forest products for commercial purposes together with all
of the work incidental to the harvest including construction and maintenance of
roads, fuel breaks, fire breaks, stream crossings, landings, skid trails, beds
for the falling of trees, and fire hazard abatement. Excludes cutting or
removal of timber for creating building pads and access to a legal building
site when such cutting or removal is approved as a part of the building and/or
encroachment permit. Also excludes removal of up to five commercial tree
species in residential zoning districts in conformance with §
155.304.140 (Tree Removal).
   (F)   Civic and recreation.
      (1)   Civic institution. Public or non-profit institutions that support
and contribute to the cultural development of the community and provide
community-serving programs and services on-site. Includes libraries, museums,
performing art centers (primarily non-retail), aquariums, zoos, environmental
education centers, non-profit art centers and galleries, botanical gardens, and
other similar uses. Excludes public and private schools, colleges and trade
schools, and other similar educational facilities (see "Instructional Services"
or "Schools, Public and Private").
      (2)   Colleges and trade schools. Institutions of higher education
providing curricula of a general, religious or professional nature, typically
granting recognized degrees or certificates. Includes junior colleges, business
and computer schools, management training, vocational education, and technical
and trade schools.
      (3)   Government facilities. A facility operated by a governmental agency
providing services to the general public. Includes governmental offices, public
recreational facilities, community centers, public meeting spaces, civic
auditoriums, fire stations, police stations, dispatch facilities, vehicle
storage, and other similar facilities. Excludes schools (see "Schools, Public
and Private"), facilities that primarily provide maintenance and repair
services and storage facilities for vehicles and equipment (see "Public Agency
Corporation Yard"), parks and playgrounds (see "Parks and Playgrounds"), public
utilities (see "Public Utility"), facilities providing group-services to
persons in need (see "Social Services") and homeless shelters (see "Emergency
Shelters").
      (4)   Emergency shelters. Housing with minimal supportive services for
homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of one year or less. No
individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability
to pay. Includes drop-in centers that provide food, showers, and laundry
facilities, and other services to the homeless.
      (5)   Instructional services. Establishments that offer specialized
programs in personal growth and development. Includes music studios/schools,
drama schools, dance academies dedicated primarily to instruction, art schools,
tutoring schools, and instruction in other cultural and academic pursuits.
      (6)   Non-commercial places of assembly. Facilities that provide space
for public or private meetings or gatherings. Includes places of worship,
fraternal lodges, meeting space for clubs and other membership organizations,
social halls, union halls, non-profit banquet centers, and other similar
facilities.
      (7)   Parks and playgrounds. Parks and playgrounds as the primary use on
the site that provides open space and/or outdoor recreational opportunities to
the public. Includes athletic fields, picnic areas, tennis courts, tot lots,
community gardens, cemeteries, and other similar outdoor facilities. Excludes
indoor recreation centers (see "Government Facilities").
      (8)   Recreational vehicle parks. An establishment designed, established,
or used for exclusive occupancy by two or more recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicle parks are owned by a single owner or organizations where
RV spaces are temporarily rented or leased to a person occupying a recreational
vehicle.
      (9)   Schools, public and private. Educational institutions providing
instruction to minors as required by the California Education Code. Includes
public and private elementary, junior high, and high schools.
      (10)   Social services. Establishments providing group outpatient
assistance and aid to those persons requiring counseling, services, activities,
and/or treatment for psychological problems, addictions, learning disabilities,
elderly, and physical disabilities. Includes welfare offices, child/adult
protective services, service centers for disabled individuals, counseling
centers for individuals with substance abuse disorder, and veteran services.
Excludes homeless shelters (see "Emergency Shelters"), transitional and
supportive housing (see "Non-medical Care Housing"), establishments providing
individual (non-group) services (see "Medical Office"), after-school programs
(see "Non-Commercial Places of Assembly") and adult day care centers (see "Day
Care Facility").
   (G)   Infrastructure and utilities.
      (1)   Airport. Facilities for the takeoff and landing of airplanes,
including runways, aircraft storage buildings, public terminal building and
parking, air freight terminal, baggage handling facilities, aircraft hangars,
and related support activities.
      (2)   Freight terminals and transfer. Facilities for transfer and
movement of freight, courier, and postal services by truck, rail, or sea.
      (3)   Public agency corporation yard. Governmental facilities that
primarily provide storage, maintenance and repair of vehicles, equipment, and
supplies.
      (4)   Public utility. A permanent structure or facility providing a
utility service to the general public. Includes generating plants, electric
substations, solid waste collection, solid waste treatment and disposal, water
or wastewater treatment plants, and similar facilities. Excludes electrical
distribution lines, underground water/sewer lines, and similar utilities.
      (5)   Recycling collection facility. An incidental use that serves as a
drop-off point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials but where the
processing and sorting of such items is not conducted on site.
      (6)   Recycling processing facility. A facility that receives and
processes recyclable materials. Processing means preparation of material for
efficient shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as
baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical
sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Includes salvage yards,
upcycling, and vehicle salvage and wrecking.
   (H)   Other uses.
      (1)   Accessory use. A land use that is incidental and subordinate to a
primary land use located on the same lot.
      (2)   Animal keeping. The keeping of animals for personal use as provided
in Municipal Code
Chapter 91 (Animal Keeping).
      (3)   Cannabis uses. See Municipal Code
Chapter 158 (Medical Cannabis: Cultivation, Processing and Distribution).
      (4)   Home occupation. A business within a dwelling unit or residential
site, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of
the property.
      (5)   Neighborhood-serving retail and service. Retail and service
establishments that primarily serve residents and employees within the
immediate neighborhood. See §
155.224.030 (Neighborhood Market Overlay).
      (6)   Tree removal in residential zones. The cutting and removal of
timber or other solid wood forest products for commercial purposes in
conformance with §
155.304.140 (Tree Removal).
      (7)   Wireless communication facility. See Municipal Code
Chapter 159.
(Ord. 902-C.S., passed 8-18-20; Am. Ord. 916-C.S., passed 7-6-21; Am. Ord. 931-
C.S., passed 2-15-22; Am. Ord. 938-C.S., passed 11-1-22; Am. Ord. 951-C.S.,
passed 10-17-23)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING REGULATIONS (old)
§ 155.080 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for each use as set forth in
§§ 155.115 through 155.123 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.904) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.081 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for each use as set forth in
§§ 155.135 through 155.141 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.905) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.082 SIGNS.
   No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any character shall be
permitted except as set forth in §§ 155.155 through 155.169 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.906) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 786-C.S.,
passed 8-21-12) Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.083 SITE PLAN REVIEW AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
   All permitted uses shall be subject to site plan review as set forth in §§
155.180 through 155.187 of this chapter. Conditional uses shall be subject to
architectural review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.907) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
M INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.095 PURPOSES.
   In addition to the objectives prescribed in § 155.002 of this chapter, the M
Industrial Districts are included in the zoning regulations to achieve the
following purposes:
   (A)   To reserve appropriately located areas for industrial plants and
related activities;
   (B)   To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by
dwellings and other inharmonious uses;
   (C)   To protect residential and commercial properties and to protect
nuisance-free, nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, insect nuisance,
dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat and cold, glare, truck and rail traffic, and
other objectionable influences, and from fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
radiation, and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses;
   (D)   To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to
concentrate in mutually beneficial relationship to each other;
   (E)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial
developments, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and
landscaping;
   (F)   To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to
protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial
plants on nearby residential and agricultural districts; and,
   (G)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1001) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.096 SPECIAL PURPOSES OF ML AND MG DISTRICTS.
   (A)   ML Limited Industrial Districts.
      (1)   To provide locations for industries that can operate in close
proximity to commercial and residential uses with minimum mutual adverse
impact; and,
      (2)   To protect light industrial and related uses from nuisances
associated with heavy industrial uses.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1001.1)
   (B)   MG General Industrial Districts. To provide locations where industries
that are incompatible with most other land uses can operate with minimum
restriction and with minimum adverse effect on other uses.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1001.2)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.097 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§ 155.025 through
155.036 of this chapter, and with the following additional regulations:
   (A)   Air pollution. In an ML District no use shall be permitted which emits
any air pollutant detectable by the human senses without the aid of instruments
beyond the boundaries of the site. In an MG District no use shall be permitted
which emits any air pollutant detectable by the human senses without the aid of
instruments beyond the boundaries of the MG District.
   (B)   Emissions. No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which
endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation, or other
property, or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the
site.
   (C)   Smoke. In an ML District no use shall emit visible gray smoke of a
shade equal to or darker than No. 2 on a standard Ringlemann Chart issued by
the United States Bureau of Mines or smoke of an equivalent opacity, except
that smoke of a shade equal to No. 3 on a Ringlemann Chart or smoke of
equivalent opacity may be emitted for four minutes in any 30-minute period.
   (D)   Noise. In an ML District no use, except a temporary construction
operation, shall be permitted which creates, at any point beyond the boundaries
of the site, noise of a maximum sound pressure level greater than the values
given in the following table. In an MG District no use, except a temporary
construction operation, shall be permitted which creates, at any R District
boundary, noise of a maximum sound pressure level greater than the values given
in the following table:
Octave Band         Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level (Decibels)
(Cycles per Second)
Below 75            72
75 - 149            67
150 - 299           59
300 - 599           52
600 - 1,199         46
1,200 - 2,399       40
2,400 - 4,799       34
4,800 and above     32
 
   (E)   Odor. No use shall be permitted which creates annoying odor in such
quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the M District
when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four volumes of clean
air.
   (F)   Vibration, heat and cold, glare, and electrical disturbances. No use,
except a temporary construction operation, shall be permitted which creates
vibration, changes in temperature, direct or sky reflected glare, or electrical
disturbances detectable by the human senses without the aid of instruments
beyond the boundaries of the site. No use shall be permitted which creates
electrical disturbances that affect the operation of any equipment beyond the
boundaries of the site.
   (G)   Radiation. No use shall be permitted which emits dangerous
radioactivity.
   (H)   Insect nuisance. No use shall be permitted which creates insect
nuisance beyond the boundaries of the site.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1002) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.098 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses shall be permitted:
   (A)   ML Limited Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Light industrial and related uses, including only:
         (a)   Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging, and
processing of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared
materials: asbestos, bone, canvas, cellophane, cellulose, cloth, cork,
feathers, felt, fiber, and synthetic fiber, fur, glass, hair, ink, horn,
leather, paint (not employing a boiling process), paper, plastics, precious or
semiprecious metals or stones, rubber, shells, straw, textiles, tobacco, and
wood (not including a planing mill or a sawmill);
         (b)   Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging, and
processing cosmetics, drugs, pharmaceuticals, perfumes, perfumed toilet soap
(not including refining or rendering of fats or oils), and toiletries;
         (c)   Manufacture of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines, and
small glazed tile; utilizing only previously pulverized clay, provided that
kilns are fired only by electricity or gas;
         (d)   Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs,
commercial advertising structures, and light sheet metal products, including
heating and ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like;
         (e)   Manufacture of scientific, medical, dental, and drafting
instruments, orthopedic and medical appliances, optical goods, watches and
clocks, electronics equipment, precision instruments, musical instruments, and
cameras and photographic equipment, except film;
         (f)   Assembly of small electric appliances, such as lighting
fixtures, irons, fans, toasters, and electric toys, but not including
refrigerators, washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, and similar home
appliances;
         (g)   Assembly of electrical equipment, such as radio and television
receivers, phonographs, and home motion picture equipment, but not including
electrical machinery;
         (h)   Manufacture and assembly of electrical supplies, such as coils,
condensers, crystal holders, insulation, lamps, switches, and wire and cable
assembly, provided no noxious or offensive fumes or odors are produced;
         (i)   Manufacture of cutlery, hardware, and hand tools, die and
pattern making, metal stamping, and extrusion of small products, such as
costume jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons, and
kitchen utensils;
         (j)   Manufacturing, canning, and packing of food products, including
fruits and vegetables, but not including meat products, pickles, sauerkraut,
vinegar, or yeast, dehydrating of garlic or onions, or refining or rendering of
fats or oils;
         (k)   Processing, packing, and canning of seafood for human
consumption, not including processing seafood for fish oils;
         (l)   Bakeries;
         (m)   Blacksmith shops;
         (n)   Boat building;
         (o)   Bottling works;
         (p)   Brewery, craft;
         (q)   Building material storage yards;
         (r)   Bus depots;
         (s)   Cold storage plants;
         (t)   Contractors’ equipment yards;
         (u)   Dairy products plants;
         (v)   Freight forwarding terminals;
         (w)   Furniture manufacture;
         (x)   Ice manufacture;
         (y)   Janitorial services and supplies;
         (z)   Kennels;
         (aa)   Laboratories;
         (bb)   Laundry and cleaning plants;
         (cc)   Lumber yards, not including planing mills or sawmills;
         (dd)   Machine shops not involving the use of drop hammers, automatic
screw machines, or punch presses with a rated capacity of over 20 tons;
         (ee)   Mattress manufacture;
         (ff)   Metal finishing and plating;
         (gg)   Offices, not including medical or dental offices;
         (hh)   Printing, lithographing, and engraving;
         (ii)   Public utility and public service pumping stations, equipment
buildings and installations, service yards, power stations, drainage ways and
structures, storage tanks, and transmission lines;
         (jj)   Railroad stations;
         (kk)   Repair shops, including electrical, glass, and auto-motive;
         (ll)   Sheet metal shops;
         (mm)   Storage yards for commercial vehicles;
         (nn)   Textile, knitting, and hosiery mills;
         (oo)   Trucking terminals;
         (pp)   Warehouses, except for the storage of fuel or flammable
liquids;
         (qq)   Veterinarians’ offices and small animal hospitals;
         (rr)   Welding shops;
         (ss)   Woodworking shops and cabinet shops; and,
         (tt)   Pickup truck camper and canopy assembly.
      (2)   Any other use which is determined by the Planning Commission, as
provided in §§ 155.265 through 155.270 of this chapter to be similar to the
uses listed in subsection (1) of this division;
      (3)   Retail sales establishments with single occupant floor areas of
40,000 square feet or larger;
      (4)   Wholesale stores with single occupant floor areas of 40,000 square
feet or larger and public utility buildings and uses;
      (5)   Parking lots improved in conformity with the standards prescribed
for required parking facilities in § 155.118 of this chapter; and,
      (6)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
permitted use.
      (7)    Emergency shelters pursuant to the requirements and regulations
contained in § 155.040 of this chapter.
      (8)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
issued pursuant to
Chapter 159 .
   (B)   MG General Industrial Districts.
      (1)   All uses permitted in division (A) of this section;
      (2)   Heavy industrial and related uses, including only:
         (a)   Aircraft and aircraft accessories and parts manufacture;
         (b)   Automobile, truck, and trailer accessories and parts
manufacture;
         (c)   Automobile, truck, and trailer assembly;
         (d)   Bag cleaning;
         (e)   Battery manufacture;
         (f)   Boiler works;
         (g)   Box factories and cooperages;
         (h)   Breweries and distilleries;
         (i)   Building materials manufacture and assembly, including
composition wallboards, partitions, panels, and prefabricated structures;
         (j)   Business machines manufacture, including accounting machines,
calculators, card-counting equipment, and typewriters;
         (k)   Can and metal container manufacture;
         (l)   Candle manufacture, not including rendering;
         (m)   Carpet and rug manufacture;
         (n)   Cement products manufacture, including concrete mixing and
batching;
         (o)   Chemical products manufacture provided no hazard of fire or
explosion is created, including adhesives, bleaching products, bluing,
calcimine, dyestuffs (except aniline dyes), essential oils, soda and soda
compounds, and vegetable gelatin, glue, and size;
         (p)   Clay products manufacture, including brick, fire brick, tile,
and pipe;
         (q)   Cork manufacture;
         (r)   Cotton ginning and cotton wadding and linter manufacture;
         (s)   Firearms manufacture;
         (t)   Flour, feed, and grain mills;
         (u)   Food products manufacture, including such processes as cooking,
dehydrating, roasting, refining, pasteurization, and extraction involved in the
preparation of such products as casein, cereal, chocolate and cocoa products;
cider and vinegar, coffee, glucose, milk and dairy products, molasses and
syrups, oleomargarine, pickles, rice, sauerkraut, sugar, vegetable oils, and
yeast;
         (v)   Glass and glass products manufacture;
         (w)   Graphite and graphite products manufacture;
         (x)   Gravel, rock, and cement yards;
         (y)   Hair, felt, and feathers processing;
         (z)   Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, and similar industrial
and household chemical compounds manufacture;
         (aa)    Jute, hemp, sisal, and oakum products manufacture;
         (bb)    Leather and fur finishing and dyeing, not including tanning
and curing;
         (cc)    Machinery manufacture, including heavy electrical,
agricultural, construction, and mining machinery, and light machinery and
equipment, such as air conditioning, commercial motion picture equipment,
dishwashers, dryers, furnaces, heaters, refrigerators, ranges, stoves, ovens,
and washing machines;
         (dd)    Machine tools manufacture, including metal lathes, metal
presses, metal stamping machines, and woodworking machines;
         (ee)    Match manufacture;
         (ff)    Meat products processing and packaging not including
slaughtering and glue and size manufacture;
         (gg)    Metal alloys and foil manufacture, including solder, pewter,
brass, bronze, and tin, lead, and gold foil;
         (hh)    Metal casting and foundries, not including magnesium
foundries;
         (ii)    Motor and generator manufacture;
         (jj)    Motor testing of internal combustion motors;
         (kk)    Painting, enameling, and lacquering shops;
         (ll)    Paper products manufacture, including shipping containers,
pulp goods, carbon paper, and coated paper stencils;
         (mm)    Paraffin products manufacture;
         (nn)    Plastics manufacture;
         (oo)    Porcelain products manufacture, including bathroom and kitchen
fixtures and equipment;
         (pp)    Precious metals reduction, smelting, and refining;
         (qq)    Railroad equipment manufacture, including railroad car and
locomotive manufacture;
         (rr)    Railroad freight stations, repair shops, and yards;
         (ss)    Rubber products manufacture, including tires and tubes;
         (tt)    Sandblasting;
         (uu)    Shoe polish manufacture;
         (vv)    Starch and dextrine manufacture;
         (ww)    Steel products manufacture and assembly, including steel
cabinets, lockers, doors, fencing, and furniture;
         (xx)    Stone products manufacture and stone processing, including
abrasives, asbestos, stone screening, and sand and lime products;
         (yy)    Structural steel products manufacture, including bars,
girders, rails, and wire rope;
         (zz)    Textile bleaching;
         (aaa)    Wire and cable manufacture;
         (bbb)    Wood and lumber processing and woodworking, including planing
mills, saw mills, excelsior, plywood, veneer, and wood-preserving treatment;
and,
         (ccc)    Wool scouring and pulling; and,
      (3)   Emergency shelters pursuant to the requirements and regulations
contained in § 155.040 of this chapter.
      (4)   Any other use which is determined by the Planning Commission, as
provided in §§ 155.265 through 155.270 of this chapter, to be similar to the
uses listed in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this division.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1003) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 121-C.S.,
passed 5-23-69; Am. Ord. 153-C.S., passed 12-4-70; Am. Ord. 551-C.S., passed
12-17-92; Am. Ord. 631 C.S., passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07;
Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Ord. 783-C.S., passed 5-1-12)
§ 155.099 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting of a use
permit in accord with the provisions of §§ 155.280 through 155.299 of this
chapter, and the Planning Commission may require the submission of reports by
technical consultants or other evidence in addition to the data prescribed in §
155.281 of this chapter:
   (A)   ML Limited Industrial Districts.
      (1)   Any of these uses listed in § 155.098(B)(2) of this subchapter
provided that, on the basis of the use permit application and the evidence
submitted, the Planning Commission makes the following findings, in addition to
the findings prescribed in § 155.285 of this chapter:
         (a)   That consideration of all determinable characteristics of the
use that is the subject of the application indicates that the use has the same
essential characteristics as the uses listed in § 155.098(A)(1) of this
subchapter with respect to the method of operation, type of process, materials,
equipment, structures, storage, and appearance;
         (b)   hat the use will conform with each of the required conditions
prescribed for uses in the ML District in § 155.097 of this subchapter; and,
         (c)   That the use will not create significantly more vehicular or
rail traffic than the volumes normally created by the permitted uses listed in
§ 155.098(A)(1) of this subchapter;
      (2)   Storage of fuel or flammable liquids;
      (3)   Storage of logs or wood chips;
      (4)   Recreational vehicle parks in accordance with the provisions of §§
155.230 through 155.232 of this chapter;
      (5)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (6)   Motor vehicle wrecking yards and scrap metal yards;
      (7)   Gymnastics schools, and health clubs;
      (8)   Live-work uses, only where the combining zone, LW has been applied
to the Limited Industrial Zoning District;
      (9)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of an
R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit issued
pursuant to
Chapter 159; and
      (10)   Medical cannabis cultivation, processing and/or distribution
facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
   (B)   MG General Industrial Districts.
      (1)   The following uses and other uses which involve nuisances, dangers
of fire or explosion, or other hazards to health and safety provided the
Planning Commission shall make a specific finding that the use will conform
with each of the required conditions prescribed for uses in the MG District in
§ 155.097 of this subchapter in addition to the findings prescribed in §
155.285 of this chapter:
         (a)   Airports and heliports;
         (b)   Asphalt and asphalt products manufacture;
         (c)   Cement, lime, gypsum, and plaster of paris manufacture;
         (d)   Charcoal, lampblack, and fuel briquettes manufacture;
         (e)   Chemical products manufacture, including acetylene, aniline
dyes, ammonia, carbide, caustic soda, cellulose, chlorine, cleaning and
polishing preparations, creosote, exterminating agents, hydrogen and oxygen,
industrial alcohol, nitrating of cotton or other materials, nitrates of an
explosive nature, potash, pyroxylin, rayon yarn, and carbolic, hydrochloric,
picric, and sulfuric acids;
         (f)   Coal, coke, and tar products manufacture;
         (g)   Drop forges;
         (h)   Dumps and slag piles;
         (i)   Explosives manufacture and storage;
         (j)   Fertilizer manufacture;
         (k)   Film manufacture;
         (l)   Fireworks manufacture and storage;
         (m)   Fish products processing and packaging;
         (n)   Garbage dumps;
         (o)   Gas manufacture or storage;
         (p)   Gas and oil wells;
         (q)   Gelatine, glue, and size manufacture from animal or fish refuse;
         (r)   Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal, and dead animals;
         (s)   Junk yards;
         (t)   Lard manufacture;
         (u)   Linoleum and oil cloth manufacture;
         (v)   Magnesium foundries;
         (w)   Manure, peat, and topsoil processing and storage;
         (x)   Metal and metal ores reduction, refining, smelting, and
alloying;
         (y)   Motor vehicle wrecking yards;
         (z)   Paint manufacture, including enamel, lacquer, shellac,
turpentine, and varnish;
         (aa)    Paper mills;
         (bb)    Petroleum and petroleum products refining, including gasoline,
kerosene, naphtha, and oil;
         (cc)    Petroleum and petroleum products storage;
         (dd)    Pulp mills;
         (ee)    Quarries, gravel pits, mines, and stone mills;
         (ff)    Rifle ranges;
         (gg)    Rolling mills;
         (hh)    Rubber manufacture or processing, including natural or
synthetic rubber and gutta-percha;
         (ii)    Soap manufacture, including fat rendering;
         (jj)    Steam plants;
         (kk)    Stockyards and slaughterhouses;
         (ll)    Storage of inflammable liquids;
         (mm)    Storage of used building materials;
         (nn)    Tallow manufacture;
         (oo)    Tanneries and curing and storage of rawhides;
         (pp)    Wood and bones distillation; and,
         (qq)    Wood pulp and fiber reduction and processing; and,
         (rr)    Storage of logs or wood chips; and,
      (2)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (3)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of an
R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit issued
pursuant to
Chapter 159; and
      (4)   Medical cannabis cultivation, processing and/or distribution
facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1004) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 114-C.S.,
passed 1-12-69; Am. Ord. 152-C.S., passed 11-20-70; Am. Ord. 153-C.S., passed
12-4-70; Am. Ord. 489-C.S., passed 3-12-89; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 6-20-91;
Am. Ord. 593-C.S., passed 8-15-93; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord.
757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 768-C.S., passed 5-3-11)
§ 155.100 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for each use as prescribed
in §§ 155.115 through 155.123 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1005) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.101 OFF-STREET LOADING.
   Off-street loading facilities shall be provided for each use as prescribed
in §§ 155.135 through 155.141 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1006) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.102 SIGNS.
   No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any character shall be
permitted except as prescribed in §§ 155.155 through 155.169 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1007) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 786-C.S.,
passed 8-21-12)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.103 SITE PLAN REVIEW.
   All uses shall be subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§ 155.180
through 155.187 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1008) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES
§ 155.115 PURPOSES.
   In order to alleviate progressively or to prevent traffic congestion and
shortage of curb spaces, off-street parking facilities shall be provided
incidental to new uses and major alterations and enlargements of existing uses.
The number of parking spaces prescribed in this subchapter or to be prescribed
by the Planning Commission shall be in proportion to the need for such
facilities created by the particular type of land use. Off-street parking areas
shall be laid out in a manner that will ensure their usefulness, protect the
public safety, and where appropriate, insulate surrounding land uses from their
impact.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1501) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.116 BASIC REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   At the time of initial occupancy, major alteration, or enlargement of
a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of a major
alteration or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided off-street
parking facilities for automobiles in accord with the schedule of off-street
parking space requirements prescribed in § 155.117 of this subchapter. For the
purposes of this section, the terms MAJOR ALTERATION or ENLARGEMENT shall mean
a change of use or an addition which would increase the number of parking
spaces required by not less than 10% of the total number required. The number
of parking spaces provided for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or
structure shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the alteration
or enlargement unless the preexisting number is greater than the number
prescribed in § 155.117 of this subchapter, in which instance the number in
excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in calculating the number
provided to serve the major alteration or enlargement.
   (B)   If, in the application of the requirements of this subchapter, a
fractional number is obtained, one parking space shall be provided for a
fraction of one-half or more, and no parking space shall be required for a
fraction of less than one-half.
   (C)   For a use not specified in § 155.117 of this subchapter, the same
number of off-street parking spaces shall be provided as is required for the
most similar specified use as determined by the Director of Community
Development.
   (D)   The facilities required by these requirements represent the minimum
that will be required by the various land use types. It shall be the
responsibility of the developer, owner or operator of any specific use to
provide adequate off-street parking even though such parking is in excess of
the minimum requirements set forth in these requirements.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1502) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 480-C.S.,
passed 2-18-89; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 155.117 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Dwellings and lodgings. (See § 155.121)
      (1)   One-family dwellings. In R Districts, two spaces, one of which is
located in a garage or carport; in an OR or C District one space in a garage or
carport.
      (2)   Multi-family dwellings. In R Districts, one space for each dwelling
unit, plus one additional space for each two dwelling units; in an OR or C
District, one space for each dwelling unit.
      (3)   Motels, hotels, lodging houses, and private clubs providing
sleeping accommodations. One space for each guest room or for each two beds,
whichever is greater, plus one space for each two employees.
      (4)   Trailer parks. One space for each unit, plus one additional space
for each three units, none of which shall occupy the area designated for access
drives.
      (5)   Bed and breakfast inns. In addition to the parking required for a
one-family dwelling, one space for each guest room or for each two beds,
whichever is greater.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial uses.
      (1)   Retail sales and service. One space for every 300 square feet of
gross floor area.
      (2)   Nurseries, garden shops and large product retail sales and service
such as furniture, household appliances, machinery, new and used automobiles,
trucks, recreational vehicles. One space for every 500 square feet of gross
floor area.
      (3)   Offices and business services such as administrative and business
offices, professional offices and services, securities and financial brokerage
offices, securities and financial brokerage services, banks and savings and
loan offices. One space for every 300 square feet of gross floor area.
      (4)   Medical and dental offices such as chiropractors, dentists,
doctors, optometrists and similar professions. One space for every 200 square
feet of gross floor area.
      (5)   Restaurants, bars, soda fountains, cafes and other establishments
for the sale and consumption on the premises of food or beverages. One space
for every 200 square feet of gross floor area.
      (6)   Manufacturing plants and other industrial uses. One space for every
500 square feet of gross floor area.
      (7)   Warehousing and distribution. One space for every 1,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
   (C)   Places of assembly and public uses.
      (1)   Auditoriums, churches, synagogues, temples or other institutions of
worship, private clubs, lodge halls, community centers, mortuaries, sports
arenas, stadiums, theaters, auction establishments, and other places of public
assembly, including church, school, and college auditoriums. One space for each
six seats, or one space for each 60 square feet of floor area usable for
seating if seats are not fixed in all facilities in which simultaneous use is
probable as determined by the Director of Community Development. Where division
(D) of this subchapter requires a greater number of spaces on the site of a
church, school, or college auditorium, that section shall apply, and the
requirements of this section shall be waived.
      (2)   Bowling alleys and pool halls. Five spaces for each alley and two
spaces for each billiard table.
      (3)   Dance halls. One space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area
used for dancing.
      (4)   Hospitals and charitable and religious institutions providing
sleeping accommodations. Two spaces for each three beds, one space for each two
employees, and one space for each staff doctor.
      (5)   Libraries, museums, art galleries, and similar uses. One space for
each 600 square feet of gross floor area, and one space for each two employees.
      (6)   Post offices. One space for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area, and one space for each two employees.
      (7)   Cemeteries, columbariums, and crematories. One space for each two
employees, plus the number of additional spaces prescribed by the Director of
Community Development.
      (8)   Public buildings and grounds other than schools and administrative
offices. One space for each two employees, plus the number of additional spaces
prescribed by the Director of Community Development.
      (9)   Public utility structures and installations. One space for each two
employees on the maximum shift, plus the number of additional spaces prescribed
by the Director of Community Development.
      (10)   Bus depots, railroad stations and yards, airports and heliports,
and other transportation and terminal facilities. One space for each two
employees, plus the number of additional spaces prescribed by the Director of
Community Development.
      (11)   Nursing homes and sanitariums. One space for each four beds, one
space for each two employees, and one space for each staff doctor.
   (D)   Educational facilities.
      (1)   Schools and colleges, including public, parochial, and private
elementary and high schools, kindergartens, and nursery schools. One space for
each employee, including teachers and administrators, and one space for each
four students in grade 10 or above. Where subsection (C)(1) of this section
requires a greater number of spaces on the site of a school or college, that
division shall apply, and the requirements of this section shall be waived.
      (2)   Business, professional, trade, art, craft, music, and dancing
schools and colleges. One space for each employee, including teachers and
administrators, and one additional space for each two students 16 years or
older.
   (E)   Parking facilities for the physically handicapped.
      (1)   Facilities accommodating the general public, including but not
limited to auditoriums, theaters, restaurants, hotels, motels, stadiums, retail
establishments, medical offices and office buildings, shall provide parking
spaces for the physically handicapped. The number, size, location, and
identification of handicapped parking spaces shall be as prescribed in the
building codes adopted by the Building Department.
   (F)   Compact car provisions.
      (1)   Compact car spaces may be utilized in meeting the above parking
requirements.
      (2)   No compact car spaces shall be allowed in parking areas containing
less than 10 parking spaces.
      (3)   In lots where compact car spaces are permitted, up to 25% of all
spaces in the lot may be compact car spaces.
      (4)   Compact car spaces, when allowed, shall be visibly marked with
signs and shall be clustered in one section of the parking area.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1503) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 126-C.S.,
passed 8-23-69; Am. Ord. 300-C.S., passed 11-7-78; Am. Ord. 340-C.S., passed 7-
7-81; Am. Ord. 480-C.S., passed 2-18-89; Am. Ord. 513-C.S., passed 3-25-90; Am.
Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.118 STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
   All off-street parking facilities, whether provided in compliance with §
155.117 of this subchapter or not, shall conform with the regulations
prescribed in § 155.036 of this chapter and with the following standards:
   (A)   The minimum off-street parking dimensions for standard parking spaces
shall be as prescribed in the following table, except that a parking space
required to be located in a garage or carport shall be not less than 20 feet in
length and 10 feet in width:
 
Description of       Parking Angle (Degrees)
Dimension
                     0    20    30     40    45    50    60    70    80    90
Parking space width,
perpendicular to     8’68’6�8’6�8’6�8’6�8’6�8’6�8’6�8’6�8’6”
angle
Parking space
dimension,           8’614’616’1018’819’520’ 20’820’920’219’
perpendicular to
aisle
Parking space
dimension, parallel  23’24’817’  13’212’ 11’19’109’  8’7�8’6”
to aisle
Aisle width          12’11’ 11’  12’ 13’615’618’619’624’ 25’
 
   (B)   [Reserved]
   (C)   Compact spaces, when allowed, pursuant to § 155.117(F) of this
subchapter shall be not less than 7½ feet wide and 16 feet long.
   (D)   Sufficient aisle space for readily turning and maneuvering vehicles
shall be provided on the site, except that no more than two parking spaces per
site may be located so as to necessitate backing a vehicle across a property
line abutting a street. Alleys may be used for maneuvering.
   (E)   Each parking space shall have unobstructed access from a street or
alley or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley without
moving another vehicle.
   (F)   Entrances from and exits to streets and alleys shall be provided at
locations approved by the Director of Public Works.
   (G)   The parking area, aisles, and access drives shall be surfaced so as to
provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded as to dispose of
surface water without damage to private or public properties, streets or
alleys.
   (H)   Bumper rails shall be provided at locations prescribed by the Director
of Community Development where needed for safety or to protect property.
   (I)   If the parking area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away
from residential sites so as to cause no annoying glare.
   (J)   No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on a
parking area.
   (K)   No off-street parking space provided in compliance with § 155.117(A)
of this subchapter shall be located in a required front yard or in a required
side yard on the street side of a corner lot, and not more than two spaces per
site shall be located so as to necessitate the use of a required front yard or
a required side yard on the street side yard of a corner lot for backing or
turning.
   (L)   In R Districts parking of vehicles other than automobiles shall be
regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   No off-street parking space shall be located on a portion of a site
required to be landscaped with plant materials.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1504) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 480-C.S.,
passed 2-18-89; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-
20-07)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.119 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
   (A)   In an F, A, R, OR, CP, M, or S District, the off-street parking
facilities prescribed in § 155.117 of this subchapter shall be located on the
same site as the use for which the spaces are required or on an adjoining site
or a site separated only by an alley from the use for which the spaces are
required, provided the site of the parking facilities complies with all the
requirements of this chapter for the location of parking facilities.
   (B)   In an HM, CN, CC, CW, CS, or P District, a use permit may be granted
to permit the off-street parking facilities prescribed in § 155.117 of this
subchapter to be separated if located within 300 feet of the use for which the
spaces are required, measured by the shortest route or pedestrian access,
provided the site of the parking facilities complies with all the requirements
of this chapter for the location of parking facilities.
   (C)   When off-street parking facilities are provided, in compliance with
the requirements of this subchapter, on a site other than the site on which the
use to be served by the parking facilities is located, an indenture shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder designating the off-street
parking facility and the use to be served, with legal descriptions of all sites
involved, and certifying the off-street parking facility shall not be used for
any other purpose unless the restriction is removed by resolution of the
Planning Commission, which resolution shall be approved by the Council. An
attested copy of the recorded indenture shall be filed with the Director of
Community Development. Upon submission of satisfactory evidence that other off-
street parking facilities have been provided in compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter, or that the use has ceased or has been altered
so as no longer to require the off-street parking facility, the Commission
shall by resolution remove the restriction.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1505) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 480-C.S.,
passed 2-18-89; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.120 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   More than one use on a site. If more than one use is located on a
site, the number of parking spaces provided shall be equal to the sum of the
requirements prescribed in this subchapter for each use.
   (B)   Off-street parking facilities to serve one use. Off-street parking
facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required off-street
parking facilities for any other use.
   (C)   Reduction of off-street parking facilities. No off-street parking
facility shall be reduced in capacity or in area without sufficient additional
capacity or additional area being provided to comply with the regulations of
this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1506) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.121 EXEMPTIONS FOR SITES IN PARKING ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS.
   In a Municipal Parking Assessment District, only the uses listed in §
155.117(A) of this subchapter shall be subject to off-street parking facilities
requirements, and only one space per dwelling or lodging unit or trailer space
shall be required, which need not be located in a garage or carport.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1507) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07)
§ 155.122 EXISTING USES.
   No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming
solely because of the lack of off-street parking facilities prescribed in this
subchapter, provided that facilities being used for off-street parking on
October 16, 1966, shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of
spaces prescribed in this subchapter or reduced in area to less than the
minimum standards prescribed in this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1508) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.123 IN LIEU PAYMENTS.
   In a CN, CC or CW District, or in an OR District when that district is
adjacent to a CN, CC, CW, or CS District, in lieu of providing parking
facilities required by the provisions of this subchapter, the requirements may
be satisfied by payment to the city, prior to the issuance of a zoning permit,
of an amount per parking space, prescribed by the Council, for each parking
space required by this subchapter but not provided. The payment shall be
deposited with the city in a special fund and shall be used exclusively for the
purpose of acquiring and developing off-street facilities located, insofar as
practical, in the vicinity of the use for which the payment was made.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1509) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 529-C.S.,
passed 6-20-91)
§ 155.124 ADA PARKING.
   No variance shall be required for development of ADA (Americans with
Disability Act) parking if all of the following apply:
   (A)   The ADA parking space(s) are required by law; and
   (B)   The ADA parking spaces(s) will be located in an existing legal parking
lot serving the use or business that must provide the ADA parking; and
   (C)   There is no reasonable way to provide the required ADA parking space
(s) without reducing the total number of parking spaces in the parking lot
below the minimum number of spaces required by Code or further reducing an
already substandard number of parking spaces; and
   (D)   Site plan review has been approved for the revised parking lot layout.
(Ord. 756-C.S., passed 9-21-10)
OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES
§ 155.135 PURPOSES.
   In order to alleviate progressively or to prevent traffic congestion and
shortage of curb spaces, off-street loading facilities shall be provided
incidental to new uses and major alterations and enlargements of existing uses.
The number of loading berths prescribed in this subchapter or to be prescribed
by the Planning Commission shall be in proportion to the need for such
facilities created by the particular type of use. Off-street loading areas
shall be laid out in a manner that will ensure their usefulness, protect the
public safety, and, where appropriate, insulate surrounding uses from their
impact.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1601) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.136 BASIC REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   At the time of initial occupancy, major alteration, or enlargement of
a site, or of completion of construction of a structure or of a major
alteration or enlargement of a structure, there shall be provided off-street
loading facilities for trucks in accord with the schedule of off-street loading
berth requirements prescribed in § 155.137 of this subchapter. For the purposes
of this section, the terms “major alteration” or “enlargement” shall mean a
change of use or an addition which would increase the number of loading berths
required by not less than 10% of the total number required. The number of
loading berths provided for a major alteration or enlargement of a site or
structure shall be in addition to the number existing prior to the alteration
or enlargement unless the preexisting number is greater than the number
prescribed in § 155.137 of this subchapter, in which instance the number in
excess of the prescribed minimum shall be counted in calculating the number
provided to serve the major alteration or enlargement.
   (B)   Off-street loading berths in addition to those prescribed in the
schedule of off-street loading berth requirements shall be provided if the
Director of Community Development finds that such additional berths are
necessary to ensure that trucks will not be loaded, unloaded, or stored on
public streets. A finding shall be based on an investigation of the anticipated
frequency of truck pickups and deliveries and of the truck storage requirements
of the use for which the off-street loading berths are required.
   (C)   If, in the application of the requirements of this subchapter, a
fractional number is obtained, one loading berth shall be provided for a
fraction of one-half or more, and no loading berth shall be required for a
fraction of less than one-half.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1602) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.137 SCHEDULE OF OFF-STREET LOADING BERTH REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Commercial and industrial establishments, including retail stores,
eating and drinking establishments, personal service establishments, commercial
service enterprises, warehouses, storage facilities, manufacturing plants, and
other industrial uses. No berths for less than 4,000 square feet gross floor
area; one berth for 4,000 to 30,000 square feet gross floor area; two berths
for 30,000 to 70,000 square feet gross floor area; three berths for 70,000 to
120,000 square feet gross floor area; and one additional berth for each 100,000
square feet additional gross floor area.
   (B)   Public and private business offices, professional and administrative
offices, hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, institutions, hotels and
motels. No berths for less than 10,000 square feet gross floor area; one berth
for 10,000 to 100,000 square feet gross floor area; two berths for 100,000 to
200,000 square feet gross floor area; and three berths for 200,000 square feet
and over.
   (C)   Mortuaries. One berth for less than 5,000 square feet gross floor
area, plus one additional berth for each additional 10,000 square feet gross
floor area.
   (D)   Any other use which requires the recurring receipt or distribution of
goods or equipment by truck. One berth, plus the number of additional berths
prescribed by the Director of Community Development.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1603) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07)
§ 155.138 STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   All off-street loading facilities, whether provided in compliance with §
155.137 of this subchapter, or not, shall conform with the regulations
prescribed in § 155.036 of this chapter and with the following standards:
   (A)   Small loading berths are allowed for retail and service commercial
uses and financial and personal services that generally have small business
floor areas of less than 10,000 square feet. These berths shall be not less
than 25 feet in length and 12 feet in width and shall have an overhead
clearance of not less than 14 feet.
   (B)   Large loading berths are required for all industrial uses, markets,
restaurants, large-product commercial uses, warehousing, shopping centers and
large office buildings. These berths shall be not less than 45 feet in length
and 12 feet in width and shall have an overhead clearance of not less than 14
feet.
   (C)   Loading berths for mortuaries, cemeteries, funeral homes,
columbariums, and crematories used exclusively for hearses shall be not less
than 24 feet in length and 10 feet in width and shall have an overhead
clearance of not less than eight feet.
   (D)   Sufficient room for turning and maneuvering vehicles shall be provided
on the site, except that not more than one loading space per site may be
located so as to necessitate backing a vehicle across a property line abutting
a street. Alleys may be used for maneuvering.
   (E)   Each loading berth shall have unobstructed access from a street or
alley or from an aisle or drive connecting with a street or alley. The aisle or
drive shall have a minimum width of 14 feet.
   (F)   Entrances from and exits to streets and alleys shall be provided at
locations approved by the Director of Public Works.
   (G)   The loading area, aisles, and access drives shall be paved so as to
provide a durable, dustless surface and shall be so graded and drained as to
dispose of surface water without damage to private or public properties,
streets, or alleys.
   (H)   Bumper rails shall be provided at locations prescribed by the Director
of Community Development where needed for safety or to protect property.
   (I)   If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away
from abutting residential sites so as to cause no annoying glare.
   (J)   A loading area shall not be located in a required front, side, or rear
yard, but yards may be used for maneuvering.
   (K)   No repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted in a
loading area.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1604) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 480-C.S.,
passed 2-18-89; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-
20-07)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.139 LOCATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The off-street loading facilities prescribed in § 155.140 of this
subchapter shall be located on the same site with the use for which the berths
are required or on an adjoining site in a district in which the use served by
the off-street loading facilities is a permitted use.
   (B)   When off-street loading facilities are provided, in compliance with
the requirements of this subchapter, on a site other than the site in which the
use to be served by the loading facilities is located, an indenture shall be
recorded in the office of the County Recorder designating the off-street
loading facility and the use to be served, with legal description of all sites
involved, and certifying that the off-street loading facility shall not be used
for any other purpose unless the restriction is removed by resolution of the
Planning Commission. An attested copy of the recorded indenture shall be filed
with the Director of Community Development. Upon submission of satisfactory
evidence that other off-street loading facilities have been provided in
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter or that the use has ceased
or has been altered so as no longer to require the off-street loading facility,
the Commission shall by resolution remove the restriction.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1605) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 480-C.S.,
passed 2-18-89; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.140 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   More than one use on a site. If more than one use is located on a
site, the number of loading berths provided shall be equal to the sum of the
requirements prescribed in this subchapter for each use. If more than one use
is located on a site and the gross floor area of each use is less than the
minimum for which loading berths are required, but the aggregate gross floor
area is greater than the minimum for which loading berths are required, off-
street loading berths shall be provided as if the aggregate gross floor area
were used for the use requiring the greatest number of loading berths.
   (B)   Off-street loading facilities to serve one use. Off-street loading
facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required off-street
loading facilities for any other use.
   (C)   Reduction of off-street loading facilities. No off-street loading
facility shall be reduced in capacity or in area without sufficient additional
capacity or additional area being provided to comply with the regulations of
this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1606) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.141 EXISTING USES.
   No existing use of land or structure shall be deemed to be nonconforming
solely because of the lack of off-street loading facilities prescribed in this
subchapter, provided that facilities being used for off-street loading on
October 16, 1966, shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of
berths prescribed in this subchapter or reduced in area to less than the
minimum standards prescribed in this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1607) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
Penalty, see § 150.999
SIGNS
§ 155.155 PURPOSES AND SCOPE.
   In addition to the objectives listed in § 155.002, the specific purposes of
sign regulations are to:
   (A)   Provide each sign user an opportunity for effective identification by
limiting the number and area of signs permitted on all sites.
   (B)   Maintain and enhance the quality of the city's appearance by avoiding
clutter and by implementing design review.
   (C)   Enable users of goods and services to identify establishments offering
services to meet their needs.
   (D)   Regulate the number and size of signs according to standards
consistent with the types of establishments in each zoning district.
   (E)   Protect residential districts adjoining non-residential districts from
adverse impacts of excessive numbers or sizes of signs.
   (F)   Apply on a city-wide basis subject to other more restrictive
regulations which may be applicable in the Design Review and Scenic Coastal
Areas.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 780-C.S., passed 2-21-12; Am. Ord.
786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.156 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERTISING SIGNS. A sign having more than one-half its area devoted to
directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, or service that is
not the primary business, profession, commodity, or service sold, manufactured,
conducted, or offered on the site on which the sign is located.
   AWNING SIGNS. Hoods or covers which project from a wall of a building and
which are outdoor advertising signs which advertise or direct attention to
uses, goods or services, whether located on-premises or off-premises from the
property on which the signs are located.
   BANNER. A temporary, lightweight sign that contains a message which is
attached or imprinted on a flexible surface that deforms under light pressure
and that is typically constructed of non-durable materials, including but not
limited to, cardboard, cloth, or plastic.
   COMMERCIAL SIGNS. An on- or off-premises sign that advertises or directs
attention to uses, goods or services.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGNS. A non-permanent sign identifying the persons, firms or
business directly connected with a construction project.
   DEVELOPMENT SIGNS. A non-permanent sign identifying the persons, firms or
business directly connected with a development project.
   DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign designed to provide artificial light
either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or
translucent material from a light source within the sign.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER. A sign that utilizes computer-generated messages
or some other electronic means of changing copy. ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER
signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, LCDs or a flipper
matrix.
   FOOTCANDLE. A measure of illumination on a surface that is one foot from a
uniform source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen per square foot.
   FREESTANDING SIGNS. Any sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the
ground, supported by one or more structural members, that has air space between
the ground and the sign face.
   FRONTAGE. The property line(s) of a site abutting on a street, and for the
purposes of calculating allowable signage, the property line(s) of a site
abutting on the City of Eureka Boardwalk.
     GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SIGNS. Any sign, including banners, pennants,
streamers, and balloons which announce the closing of a business.
   HOLIDAY DECORATIONS. See SEASONAL EVENT SIGNS.
   INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED SIGN. Any sign designed to show an illuminated sign
face by use of indirect illumination from exterior, non-exposed light sources
aimed at the sign face or otherwise diffused to result in illumination which
complies with § 155.162 of this subchapter.
   INTERIOR PROPERTY LINE. A property line which separates adjoining properties
and which is not adjoining any street, alley or public space.
   INTERIOR SIGNS. Indoor advertising signs located within a building no nearer
than one foot from a window, which advertise or direct attention to uses, goods
and services whether located on or off- premises. INTERIOR SIGNS are exempt
from these regulations per § 155.157(U) of this subchapter.
   MONUMENT SIGNS. Any sign which is permanently affixed in or upon the ground,
that does not have air space between the ground and the sign face.
   NEW BUSINESS ATTRACTION SIGNS. Any sign, including banners, pennants,
streamers, and balloons which direct attention to the opening of a new
business. NEW BUSINESS ATTRACTION SIGNS are not allowed in residentially zoned
areas.
   ON-PREMISES FREESTANDING SIGNS. Outdoor advertising signs which are not
attached or painted to the surface of a building, but which standing apart
therefrom are intended to advertise or direct attention to uses, goods or
services located entirely upon the real property of the occupant of the real
property on which the signs are located.
   ON-PREMISES SIGNS. Outdoor advertising signs which advertise or direct
attention to uses, goods or services located entirely upon the real property of
the occupant of the real property on which the signs are located.
   OFF-PREMISES FREESTANDING SIGNS. Outdoor advertising signs which are not
attached or painted to the surface of an occupied building, but which standing
apart therefrom are intended to advertise or direct attention to uses, goods or
services not located, sold or available on the real property on which the signs
are located. Billboards may be off-premises freestanding signs.
   OFF-PREMISES SIGNS. Outdoor advertising signs which advertise or direct
attention to uses, goods or services not located, sold or available on the real
property on which the signs are located. Billboards are off-premises signs.
   OPEN HOUSE SIGNS. Any non-permanent sign directing prospective buyers to a
single house or condominium that is for sale.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. A structure of any kind or character, erected
or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which an advertising sign
may be placed.
   POLITICAL SIGNS. A sign that pertains to a candidate, ballot measure or
issue to be voted on at an election. POLITICAL SIGNS shall not be placed within
the public right-of-way or placed so as to obstruct a motorist's clear view of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, traffic-control signs or signals; impede a
pedestrian's free use of the sidewalk; or otherwise represent a hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   PROJECTING SIGNS. Signs which project from a wall, eave or parapet, or the
eave of a simulated mansard roof more than 12 inches from the face of the
building; such signs are considered outdoor advertising signs which advertise
or direct attention to uses, goods or services, whether located on-premises or
off-premises from the property on which the signs are located.
   PROMOTIONAL SALES SIGNS. Signs in windows announcing sales or special
features attached to or painted on the surfaces of store windows, facing out.
Advertising in windows is not allowed in residentially zoned districts.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property owned or controlled by a public entity. PUBLIC
PROPERTY includes but is not limited to recreational areas such as public
parks, playgrounds. and gardens; public buildings such as libraries, fire
stations, auditoriums, theaters, and City Hall. Public rights-of-way and
structures on public rights-of-way including but not limited to lampposts,
fences, utility poles, utility wires, street signs, traffic signs, benches,
hydrants, fountains, trees, bushes, public bridges, sidewalks, park strips and
curbstones are PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   REAL ESTATE SIGNS. Any non-permanent sign pertaining to the sale, exchange,
lease, rental or availability of land, buildings, condominium and similar
units, or apartments. Such signs may include building name and address, price
and amenities, identity of seller or broker, and similar information.
   ROOF SIGNS. Any sign erected upon a roof, parapet, or roof-mounted equipment
structure or extending above a roof, parapet or roof-mounted equipment
structure of a building or structure.
   SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS. Any freestanding, portable, moveable, double-faced
sign placed on a sidewalk for the purpose of advertising and identification.
   SEASONAL EVENT SIGNS. Signs or displays which are a non-permanent
installation celebrating national, state, and local holidays or holiday
seasons. SEASONAL EVENT SIGNS include, but are not limited to, holiday bunting,
decoration, lights and displays not advertising a product or sale and uses such
as Christmas tree lots, pumpkin sales, carnivals, parades, and charitable
events. HOLIDAY SIGNS are also seasonal event signs.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a highway, other than a roadway, set apart by
curbs, barriers, and markings or other delineation for pedestrian travel.
   SIGN. Any structure, display, device, balloon or graphic, or any letter,
number, word, illustration, decoration, decal, emblem, trademark, logo, light,
or symbol made of cloth, metal, paint, paper, wood, or other material of any
kind whatsoever placed for advertising, communication identification, or other
purposes on the ground or on any bush, tree, rock, wall, post, fence, building,
structure, vehicle, or on any place whatsoever. The term "placed" shall include
constructing, erecting, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing,
sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing, or making visible in any
manner whatsoever beyond the boundaries of a site.
   SIGN AREA. The area of a sign having an integral part of a building, awning,
canopy, or marquee as its background shall be the area within the shortest line
drawn to include all letters, designs, and tubing which are a part of the sign.
The area of all other signs shall be the largest cross-sectional area of the
sign measured to a line encompassing all portions of the sign, including
background and tubing, but excluding supporting posts without attached
lighting. In computing the area of a sign having more than one face, all faces
of the sign shall be included.
   SUBDIVISION SIGNS. Any sign located either on or off a subdivision tract,
which sign indicates the direction to or advertises the location, existence, or
sale of a subdivision or any part thereof.
   TEMPORARY SIGNS. Signs displayed for a limited duration of time.
   WALL SIGNS. Outdoor advertising signs attached or painted to the surface of
a building which advertise or direct attention to uses, goods or services,
whether located on-premises or off-premises from the real property on which the
signs are located.
   WINDOW AREA. The area of a single window includes all of the window panes in
an area that is separated by mullions or muntins which are less than three
inches wide.
   WINDOW SIGNS. Signs which are placed on the surface of or within one foot of
a window for purposes of viewing outside the premises; such signs are
considered outdoor advertising signs which advertise or direct attention to
uses, goods or services, whether located on-premises or off-premises from the
property on which the signs are located.
   WINDOW SIGNS, LIGHTED. Signs which are placed on the surface of or within
one foot of a window for purposes of viewing outside the premises and are
internally illuminated, such as by neon or LED lighting, and direct attention
to products or goods sold on the premises, or signs indicating the business is
open. LIGHTED WINDOW SIGNS include, but are not limited to beverage signs and
open signs.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord.
786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.157 TEMPORARY AND OTHER EXEMPT SIGNS.
   The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this subchapter:
   (A)   Seasonal event or holiday signs, one sign per street frontage, and no
larger than 32 square feet, erected no sooner than 45 calendar days before the
holiday or event and removed within 14 calendar days following the holiday or
event.
   (B)   Unlighted on-premises real estate signs limited to six square feet,
displayed until the premises is sold, leased or rented.
   (C)   Construction or project development signs limited to 32 square feet,
displayed during the period of development or construction and removed prior to
occupancy of the project site.
   (D)   On-premises subdivision signs limited to 32 square feet, displayed for
a period not to exceed two years.
   (E)   Open House signs displayed only on the day of the Open House (see §
155.159).
   (F)   Political signs limited to 16 square feet, erected no more than 90
calendar days before the election, displayed on any private lot or parcel of
land with the consent of the owner, and removed within ten calendar days
following the election. Exempt political signs shall not be placed within the
public right-of-way or placed so as to obstruct a motorist's clear view of
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, traffic-control signs or signals; impede a
pedestrian's free use of the sidewalk; or otherwise represent a hazard to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
   (G)   New-business attraction signs, displayed during the first 30 days of
occupancy of a new structure or operation of a new business and removed
immediately after the display period.
   (H)   Going out of business signs, displayed during the final 30 days of
operation of a business and removed at the end of the display period.
   (I)   Promotional sales signs covering not more than 25% of the window area,
in place for no longer than 30 days in any 60-day period and removed
immediately after the termination of the subject event. Advertising in windows
is not allowed in residentially zoned districts.
   (J)   One unlighted garage sale sign, provided such sign shall not exceed
four square feet in area and shall be displayed on the property where such sale
shall take place and only on the day of said sale.
   (K)   Promotional signs for outdoor exhibitions or performances on the
premises, and on- or off-premises signs limited to 32 square feet advertising
community events for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days when erected no
sooner than 30 days prior to the event and removed within ten days after the
event.
   (L)   Signs in residentially zoned areas erected for a period not to exceed
100 days in any calendar year and limited to 16 square feet, which display
noncommercial messages, but are otherwise not restricted in content.
   (M)   On-premises window signs expressing the name of the occupant. The
total area of such window signs shall not exceed 10% of a window area.
   (N)   Street address numbers not less than four inches in height for
residential uses, and not less than six inches in height for commercial uses.
   (O)   Public information, identification, special event, and directional
signs erected by a public agency.
   (P)   Names of buildings, dates of erection, commemorative tablets and the
like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze,
aluminum, or other metal material and made a part of the structure. Such signs
shall not exceed four square feet in area and shall not be illuminated.
   (Q)   On-premises parking and other directional signs not displaying a
commercial logo or name, and not exceeding four square feet.
   (R)   Non-illuminated wall signs not over two square feet in area,
displaying the name of the tenant or resident, the name of a home business
approved pursuant to §
155.215 of this chapter, and/or the address at the entrance of each tenant
space.
   (S)   Signs manufactured as a standard, integral part of a mass-produced
product accessory to a commercial or public or semipublic use, including but
not limited to telephone booths, restrooms, vending machines, automated teller
machines, gasoline pumps and other signs of an instructive nature or which
include information required by county, state, or federal enforcement agencies.
   (T)   Credit card, trading stamp, or trade association signs not exceeding
one-half square foot each and which are attached flat to a glass surface.
   (U)   On-premises signs within a building, one foot or more from a window.
   (V)   Signs used exclusively for the posting or display of official notices
by a public agency or official, or by a person giving legal notice, and signs
erected or maintained by a public agency or official or required by law to be
maintained by a public utility for directional, warning, or informational
purposes.
   (W)   Signs on structures posted by the owner of the structure and located
within the right-of-way which, by tradition or designation, are used for the
purpose of communication by the general public. Such structures shall include
kiosks, bulletin boards, benches upon which advertisement is authorized,
newspaper racks, and billboards and sandwich board signs as allowed by §
155.158 of this subchapter.
   (X)   Lighted window signs that do not move or appear to move, do not change
intensity, color, and pattern at any time when the sign is lighted, and does
not create annoying or hazardous glare or an annoying halo effect.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.158 SANDWICH BOARD SIGNS.
   Sandwich board signs shall:
   (A)   Be constructed of a durable material and constructed in such a manner
as not to present a hazard to pedestrian movement.
   (B)   Not exceed 30 inches in width and 42 inches in height.
   (C)   Be weighted at the base so as to provide a stable and secure sign.
   (D)   Be placed so as to allow for a minimum of 48 inches clearance between
obstacles.
   (E)   Not conflict with utilities or parking meters, public parking or
traffic sight distance at street or alley intersections and shall not block
entrances or exits.
   (F)   Be limited to one sign per business, and shall be placed on the
sidewalk that fronts the business.
   (G)   Be classified as on-premises signs.
   (H)   Not conflict with utilities or parking meters, public parking or
traffic sight distance at street or alley intersections and shall not block
entrances or exits.
   (I)   Additional requirements.
      (1)   Sandwich board sign applicants shall provide certificates of
insurance to the Engineering Department in amounts prescribed by the city for
public liability insurance and property damage insurance. Policies shall name
the city as an additional insured, and shall constitute primary insurance to
the city, its officers, agents, employees and volunteers so that other policies
held by the city shall not contribute to any loss under said insurances. Said
policies shall provide for 30 days prior written notice to the city of
cancellation or material changes.
      (2)   All sandwich board signs in the Design Review Area shall be subject
to architectural review in accordance with §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this
chapter.
      (3)   All sandwich board signs shall be included in the allowable sign
area for the zone in which the sign is located.
(Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.159 REGULATIONS FOR ON-PREMISES AND OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any character shall be
permitted except in conformity with the following additional regulations
following the schedule or located elsewhere in this title.
                                           OR; HM                                      CS; ML; MG
          NR; P    RS (Single- RM (Multi-  (Office     CN          CC; CW    CP        (Serv.,     Additiona
Districts (Nat.    Family      Family      Residential (Neighborho (Central  (Planned  Comm.,      l
          Resource Residential Residential Hospital    od          Commercia Commercia Limited     Regulatio
          & Pub.)  )           )           Medical)    Commercial) l)        l)        Industrial, ns
                                                                                       Gen. Ind.)
                                                OR; HM                                        CS; ML; MG
            NR; P (Nat. RS (Single- RM (Multi-  (Office     CN          CC; CW     CP         (Serv.,     Additiona
Districts   Resource &  Family      Family      Residential (Neighborho (Central   (Planned   Comm.,      l
            Pub.)       Residential Residential Hospital    od          Commercia  Commercia  Limited     Regulatio
                        )           )           Medical)    Commercial) l)         l)         Industrial, ns
                                                                                              Gen. Ind.)
            As                      Signs shall Signs shall Signs shall Signs      Signs      Signs shall
            prescribed  1 sq. ft./  not project not project not project shall not  shall not  not project § 155.159
On-premise  by          foot of     above the   above the   above the   project    project    above the   (B)(1),
wall signs  conditional street      parapet or  parapet or  parapet or  above the  above the  parapet or  (5)
            use permit  frontage    roof line   roof line   roof line   parapet or parapet or roof line
                                                                        roof line  roof line
            As                      8 max. ht.; 12 max.     35 ft. max. 35 ft.     35 ft.     35 ft. max.
On-premise  prescribed              1/primary   ht.; 1/     ht.; 1/     max. ht.;  max. ht.;  ht.; 1/     § 155.159
freestandin by                     street      street      street      1/street   1/each 300 street      (B)(2),
g signs     conditional             entrance    frontage    frontage    frontage   ft. street frontage    (5)
            use permit                                                             frontage
                                                1 sq. ft./  1 sq. ft./  2 sq. ft./ 120 sq.    3 sq. ft./
Total       As                                  4 ft. of    ft. of      ft. of     ft./ acre  ft. of
allowable   prescribed              4 sq. ft.   street      street      street     of site in street
on-premise  by                     maximum     frontage up frontage up frontage   the use up frontage up  
sign area   conditional                         to 300 sq.  to 300 sq.  up to 300  to 300 sq. to 300 sq.
            use permit                          ft./sign    ft./sign    sq. ft./   ft./sign   ft./sign
                                                                        sign
Temporary   32 sq. ft., 32 sq. ft.  32 sq. ft.  32 sq. ft.  32 sq. ft.  32 sq. ft. 32 sq. ft. 32 sq. ft.
constructio max., 1/    max.; 1/st. max.; 1/st. max.; 1/st. max.; 1/st. max.; 1/   max.; 1/   max.; 1/st.  
n signs     site        frontage    frontage    frontage    frontage    st.        st.        frontage
                                                                        frontage   frontage
Temporary
real estate
or          16 sq. ft.  6 sq. ft.   12 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft.
constructio max.; 1/    max.; 1/    max.; 1 /   max.; 1/    max.; 1/    max.; 1/   max.; 1/   max.; 1/     
n signs     site        site        site        site        site        site       site       site
(on-
premise)
Temporary   16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft.  16 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft. 16 sq. ft.
political   maximum     maximum     max.; 1/    maximum     max.; 1/    max.; 1/   max.; 1/   max.; 1/     
signs                               site                    site        site       site       site
Off-        § 155.159  § 155.159  § 155.159  § 155.159  § 155.159  § 155.159 § 155.159 § 155.159
premise     (B)(10)     (B)(9)      (B)(9) (10) (B)(9),     (B)(10)     (B)(10)    (B)(10)    (B)(10)      
signs                                           (10)
Illuminated                                                                                       See §
signs                                                                                                     155.162
 
   (A)   Additional sign regulations regarding sign height. Signs located in
commercial districts adjacent to Broadway, south of Hawthorn Street and north
of Highland Avenue and east of Broadway to the Bay, and bounded by Hawthorn
Street and Highland Avenue are to have a maximum sign height of 30 feet.
   (B)   Additional sign regulations.
      (1)   Wall signs. A wall sign shall:
         (a)   Not project above an eave or parapet, including the eave of a
simulated mansard roof.
         (b)   Not project more than 12 inches from the face of the building.
         (c)   Wall signs on a window and interior signs within one foot of a
window shall be deemed both wall and window signs. The total area of window
signs shall not exceed 10% of ground floor window area.
      (2)   Freestanding and monument signs. A freestanding or monument sign
shall:
         (a)   Not be closer than 30 feet to another freestanding sign or to a
projecting sign.
         (b)   Not be closer to an interior property line than one-half its
height.
         (c)   Not extend over a public right-of-way and not be located on the
same frontage as a projecting sign extending over a public right-of-way.
      (3)   Real estate signs. All off-premises real estate signs shall:
         (a)   Not exceed three feet in height and four square feet in size.
         (b)   Be allowed to be placed behind the sidewalk, given that they are
not located within the public right-of-way.
         (c)   Not be placed in the street medians and on the sidewalks.
         (d)   Be allowed only for development that lies within the city.
      (4)   Sign area design bonuses. A property owner or occupant may be
allowed, for every sign, a bonus of 5% additional sign area (as measured in
square feet for signage per frontage foot of a property) for each of the
following factors applicable to the specific sign when documented and requested
at time of sign permit application:
         (a)   Painted signs;
         (b)   Signs attached to the business identified;
         (c)   Single-sided freestanding signs;
         (d)   Signs displaying a name of business only;
         (e)   Signs with three-dimensional lettering or elements;
         (f)   Signs using gold-leaf of 14K or higher count;
         (g)   Signs using neon tube illumination;
         (h)   Signs using indirect illumination;
         (i)   Signs incorporating analogous architectural elements;
         (j)   Layout elements extending beyond the borders of the sign.
      (5)   No single-family permitted use shall be allowed signage except as
specified in § 155.157 of this subchapter.
      (6)   All signs in the Design Review Area shall be subject to
architectural review in accordance with §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this
chapter.
      (7)   One identification sign, not directly lighted, and not exceeding 40
square feet, shall be allowed on the site of public buildings or grounds, or a
building occupied by a private non-profit organization. Any such building in
excess of 10,000 square feet of floor area may be permitted to increase the
sign area by 20 square feet for each 10,000 square feet of building area to a
maximum of 150 square feet.
      (8)   Freestanding signs in the Design Review Area shall have a maximum
height of 24 feet.
      (9)   No new off-premises signs shall be located in residential zones.
      (10)   Square footage of off-premises signs shall be counted toward the
allowed sign square footage of the property on which the sign is located.
      (11)   Eureka Mall. The total allowable on-premises sign area for the
Eureka Mall at 800 W. Harris (APN 008-172-004) is as follows:
         (a)   North face of building (Henderson Street), 599 square feet.
         (b)   West face of building (Central Avenue), 698 square feet.
         (c)   South face of building (Harris Street), 623 square feet.
         (d)   Free-standing signs, 150 square feet total.
         (e)   Stand-alone building (corner of Central and Harris), 100 square
feet.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord.
730-C.S., passed 8-19-08; Am. Ord. 780-C.S., passed 2-21-12; Am. Ord. 786-C.S.,
passed 8-21-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 155.160 SIGNS AND SCENIC COASTAL AREAS.
   No new off-premise advertising signs or billboards shall be located in
scenic coastal resource areas designated in the LCP Land Use Plan. Existing
signs in existing locations may be maintained, relocated, and repaired
consistent with all other applicable sections of this code.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12) Penalty,
see §
150.999
§ 155.161 MURALS, GRAPHIC DESIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   Murals, large graphic designs and statuary shall be subject to review and
approval by the Building Official for the sole purpose of insuring that
construction of such displays will not pose a hazard to public health, safety
or welfare. Murals, graphic designs and decorating of a building in the city’s
Design Review Area shall be subject to site plan and architectural review in
accordance with §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this chapter.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 780-C.S., passed 2-21-12; Am. Ord.
786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.162 ILLUMINATION; MOVEMENT.
   (A)   Illuminated signs.
      (1)   Any illuminated sign shall substantially comply with the average
light levels recommended by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA):
 
Light colors Dark surroundings   20 footcandles
Dark colors  Dark surroundings   50 footcandles
Light colors Bright surroundings 50 footcandles
Dark colors  Bright surroundings 100 footcandles
 
      (2)   Whenever illumination is in issue, the Director of Community
Development may require submission for his review a computer lighting study by
the manufacturer of all lamps used in the particular lighting application. The
Director of Community Development may require that lamps in use produce average
light levels which, in the opinion of the Director, substantially comply with
the standards of the IESNA stated above, or as may be amended from time to time
to reflect changes in the state of the art of illumination as approved by the
IESNA.
      (3)   All indirectly illuminated light levels shall be measured in
footcandles according to the standards of the IESNA as illuminance falling on
the sign face and not as reflectance off the sign face. A sign owner must
produce the requested computer lighting study within 30 days. If the study is
not produced, the city may contract for the performance of a lighting study to
establish the levels of illuminance falling on the particular sign face in
issue and bill the sign or property owner (as appropriate) for the cost of the
lighting study.
   (B)   Sign illumination shall be maintained constant in intensity, color,
and pattern at all times when the sign is lighted. No sign illumination shall
be of such brightness as to create annoying or hazardous glare or an annoying
halo effect.
   (C)   No movement, or apparent movement of, or in, a sign shall be
permitted. A time or temperature sign, barber pole, or a theater canopy sign
consistent with other regulations of this subchapter shall be permitted.
   (D)   Whenever the Director of Community Development may reasonably find
that a particular lighting application is not in substantial compliance with
the recommended light levels established by the IESNA as stated herein, then
the Director of Community Development may proceed to abate the condition as a
nuisance in accordance with the provisions of § 150.041(A)(4) of this title.
   (E)   Electronic message centers.
      (1)   Electronic message centers (EMC) shall comply with the brightness
criteria based on the International Sign Association (ISA) Electronic Message
Display Brightness Guide.
      (2)   EMC illumination shall be limited to the difference between off and
solid-message measurements using the EMC Measurement Criteria, and shall not
exceed 0.3 footcandles at night.
         (a)   The illuminance of an EMC shall be measured with an illuminance
meter set to measure footcandles accurate to at least two decimals.
         (b)   Illuminance shall be measured with the EMC off, and again with
the EMC displaying a white image for a full color-capable EMC, or a solid
message for a single-color EMC.
         (c)   All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the
EMC at the distance determined by the total square footage of the EMC as set
forth in the Sign Area Versus Measurement Distance table.
      (3)   All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device
that automatically determines the ambient illumination and programmed to
automatically dim according to ambient light conditions, or that can be
adjusted to comply with the 0.3 footcandle measurements.
      (4)   The image on electronic message centers shall not change.
   (F)   Sign Area Versus Measurement Distance Table.
AREA OF SIGN Sq. ft. MEASUREMENT Distance (ft.)
AREA OF SIGN Sq. ft. MEASUREMENT Distance (ft.)
10                   32
15                   39
20                   45
25                   50
30                   55
35                   59
40                   63
45                   67
50                   71
55                   74
60                   77
65                   81
70                   84
75                   87
80                   89
85                   92
90                   95
95                   97
100                  100
110                  105
120                  110
130                  114
140                  118
150                  122
160                  126
170                  130
180                  134
190                  138
200                  141
220                  148
240                  155
260                  161
280                  167
300                  173
 
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12) Penalty,
see §
150.999
§ 155.163 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS; SIGN TYPES; MESSAGES.
   (A)   A sign in a required yard (setback area) adjoining a street property
line shall comply with the requirements of §§
71.55 through
71.59 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Except for exempt flags, pennants, balloons, and banners pursuant to §
155.157, use of wind-blown or inflatable devices of any type is prohibited,
including the production of smoke, bubbles, sound, or other substances.
   (C)   Other than when used for traffic direction, signs which contain or are
in imitation of official traffic signs or signals are prohibited. No sign shall
be erected in such a manner that its size, location, content, colors, or
illumination shall interfere with, obstruct, confuse, or mislead traffic.
   (D)   No sign shall contain statements, words, pictures, or other
representations which are in reference to obscene matter which violate the Cal.
Penal Code §§ 311 et seq.
   (E)   No permanent exterior signs shall be made of materials which are
impermanent and will not stand exposure to weather.
   (F)   No sign shall be located within a public right-of-way unless an
encroachment permit is obtained from the Engineering Department as directed by
the Director of Public Works.
   (G)   No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of the sign
or its support is attached to, or will interfere with, the free use of any fire
escape, exit, or standpipe. No sign shall be erected which will obstruct any
required stairway, door, ventilator, or window.
   (H)   Except as allowed in § 155.162(C) for time and temperature devises and
barber poles, signs utilizing flashing lights, changing of color and intensity,
or mechanical moving parts are prohibited.
   (I)   Signs erected upon or extending above any part of a roof or false roof
structure are prohibited.
   (J)   No vehicle may be used as a platform for a billboard whether on
private property or within a public right-of-way.
   (K)   No off-site signs shall be allowed in coastal scenic areas.
   (L)   No person shall paint, mark, or write on, or post or otherwise affix,
or erect, construct, maintain, paste, nail, tack or otherwise fasten or affix
any sign or temporary sign on any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, street lamp post,
pole, bench, hydrant, tree, shrub, bridge, electric light or power or telephone
wire pole, or wire appurtenance thereof or upon any street sign or traffic
sign, or upon any other object located within the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 710-C.S., passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord.
786-C.S., passed 8-21-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 155.164 MAINTENANCE, ABANDONMENT, REMOVAL, RETRIEVAL, AND DESTRUCTION.
   (A)   All signs shall be maintained in good repair and shall be cleaned,
painted, or replaced as necessary to present a neat appearance.
   (B)   An on- or off-premises sign, or the advertising copy shown thereon,
advertising any uses, goods or services, shall be removed within 120 calendar
days following the actual discontinuance or unavailability of the uses, goods
or services.
   (C)   Any sign deemed by the city to be posted on public property contrary
to the provisions of this subchapter, or to be unsafe, due to interfering with
the public's health, safety, welfare, or convenience, may be removed by the
Public Works Department or Police Department.
      (1)   Signs removed by the city shall be taken to the Police Department,
and shall be subject to the Police Department's Property Procedure, Policy 804.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12) Penalty,
see §
150.999
§ 155.165 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   All nonconforming signs and other sign structures which were erected
and in existence prior to the effective date of the adoption of this subchapter
and which were, at the time of such erection or establishment, in compliance
with all then applicable statutes and ordinances, but which do not meet the
requirements of this chapter, shall be permitted to remain in existence
notwithstanding their nonconforming character.
   (B)   Any portion of a legal nonconforming sign which is damaged may be
restored, repaired or completely replaced provided that its owner complies with
each of the following:
      (1)   The area of the sign face is not enlarged upon restoration, repair
or replacement;
      (2)   The restored, repaired or replaced sign face or sign structure
remains on the same parcel of real property and faces the same general
direction as the pre-existing sign;
      (3)   The height of the sign face and structure is not raised; and,
      (4)   The restoration, repair or replacement of the sign face or sign
structure is completed within 360 days following the damaging of the sign face
or sign structure. Upon good cause shown to the satisfaction of the Community
Development Department, additional time may be granted for completing
restoration, repair or replacement of a damaged sign face or sign structure.
   (C)   Any legal nonconforming off-premises sign may be reconstructed or
relocated by its owner upon the same parcel of real property provided that its
owner complies with each of the following:
      (1)   The area of the sign face is not enlarged to greater than that of
the sign it replaces;
      (2)   The sign face or sign structure faces the same general direction as
the sign it replaces;
      (3)   The height of the sign face and structure is not raised above that
of the sign it replaces; and,
      (4)   Any new location selected on the same parcel of real property
otherwise complies with then current setback requirements for new signs within
the applicable zoning.
   (D)   All non-conforming signs advertising a permanent use, goods, or
services, shall be removed within 120 calendar days following the actual
discontinuance, unavailability, or removal of such use, goods or services from
business. Any property owner affected by this provision may apply to the
Director of Community Development for an exemption based upon a claim that the
subject sign has historical significance which is an integral part of the real
property. The Director of Community Development shall make written findings to
approve or deny the exemption request. The determination of the Director of
Community Development may be appealed within 10 days to the Planning
Commission. Any nonconforming sign fitting the description herein may be abated
as a nuisance by action of the Director of Community Development in accordance
with the provisions of §
150.041(A)(4) of this title.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.166 SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A person shall, unless otherwise exempted by §
155.157 of this subchapter, be required to obtain a permit from the Department
of Community Development prior to the placing or erecting of any signs. In most
cases, a building permit and/or electrical permit shall also be required.
   (B)   Application for sign permits. An application for a sign permit shall
be filed with the Director of Community Development on forms provided by the
Community Development Department.
   (C)   Fees. An application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a fee
established by resolution of the City Council to cover the cost of handling the
application as prescribed in this subchapter.
   (D)   Review of sign applications.
      (1)   Staff review. All signs which meet the limitations of this
subchapter shall be reviewed by the Department of Community Development (except
those listed in § 155.157 of this subchapter), unless review by the Design
Review Committee as specified in §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this chapter.
The staff may approve, approve with modification, or deny any application
subject to the criteria of subsection (3) of this division. Any staff decision
may be appealed by the Design Review Committee.
      (2)   Design Review Committee review. When required to be reviewed by the
Design Review Committee in accordance with §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this
chapter, the Design Review Committee shall approve, or shall submit a written
report to the Planning Commission recommending conditional approval,
modification, or disapproval in accordance with § 155.185 of this chapter. Any
decision by the Design Review Committee relative to the review of signs may be
appealed to the Planning Commission pursuant to §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of
this chapter.
      (3)   Review criteria. The staff and/or Design Review Committee shall
apply all of the following criteria as the basis for action:
         (a)   Whether the sign complies with the regulations contained in §
155.159 of this subchapter.
         (b)   Whether the sign is desirable for the applicant’s enjoyment of
substantial trade and property rights, and does the sign not constitute
needless repetition, redundancy or proliferation of signing.
         (c)   Whether the sign is consistent with the purposes and scope of
this subchapter as set forth in § 155.155 of this subchapter.
         (d)   Whether the sign does not constitute a detriment to public
health, safety and welfare.
         (e)   The location and design of the proposed sign shall be considered
in order to determine that the sign will not obscure from view or unduly
detract from existing adjacent signs.
         (f)   The location and design of a proposed sign in a commercial or
industrial district within 100 feet (excluding highway or road right-or-way) of
a residential district shall be considered in order to determine that the sign
shall not have a significant adverse effect on the character of the residential
district.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.167 COMPENSATION.
   Whenever a duly permitted income producing off-premises sign is taken by
power of eminent domain, or by a duly adopted ordinance having such effect,
then the owner thereof shall be compensated by the payment of the fair market
value thereof as determined by an independent appraisal using the income
method. The compensation value of any other duly permitted sign shall be
determined by an independent appraisal of the fair market value of such sign
using generally accepted appraisal methods.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.168 COMPLIANCE WITH CALIFORNIA BUILDING AND ELECTRIC CODES.
   It is the intent of this chapter to comply with the provisions of the
California Building and Electric Codes, as applicable.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
§ 155.169 INVENTORY AND IDENTIFICATION OF ILLEGAL OR ABANDONED SIGNS.
   Within six months of the adoption of this subchapter (the sign ordinance),
the city shall in compliance with Business and Professions Code §§ 5491 et
seq., commence an inventorying and identification of all illegal or abandoned
advertising displays. The city shall commence abatement of illegal or abandoned
signs within 60 days following the six-month period when inventorying and
identification is to commence.
(Ord. 585-C.S., passed 12-20-94; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
SITE PLAN REVIEW AND ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW
§ 155.180 PURPOSES.
   (A)   Site plan review. In order to preserve the natural beauty of the
city's site, to prevent the indiscriminate clearing of property and the
destruction of trees and shrubs, to prevent excessive grading of hillsides and
creation of drainage hazards, to ensure that structures are properly related to
their sites and to surrounding sites and structures and to traffic circulation
in the vicinity, and that parking areas, walkways, and landscaping are arranged
to accomplish the objectives of this chapter site plans for certain permitted
uses and structures shall be subject to site plan review by the Design Review
Committee or the Director of Community Development. The ugly, the inharmonious,
the monotonous, and the hazardous shall be barred, but originality in site
planning shall not be suppressed.
   (B)   Architectural review. In order to prevent the erection of structures
or signs that would be inharmonious with their surroundings or would have an
adverse effect on the value of property or improvements in the vicinity, uses
and structures and certain signs in the AR and PD Districts and conditional
uses in all districts shall be subject to architectural review by the Design
Review Committee. The ugly, the inharmonious, the monotonous, and the hazardous
shall be barred, but originality in architecture, site planning, and landscape
and graphic design shall not be suppressed. Review shall include exterior
design, materials, textures, and colors but shall not consider elements of the
design that do not affect exterior appearance. In reviewing proposals for
development in AR Districts that have an established historical character, the
Design Review Committee shall recommend disapproval of drawings for a structure
or a sign that would be inharmonious with surrounding development, but the
Committee shall not require that new structures duplicate an historic
architectural style as a condition of approval.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1801) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 691-C.S.,
passed 6-21-05)
§ 155.181 DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Design Review Committee which shall review
drawings and report to the Planning Commission when prescribed in this
subchapter. The Design Review Committee shall consist of five members qualified
by reason of training or experience in architecture, land development, city
planning, real estate, landscape architecture, or other relevant business or
profession, or by reason of sound judgment, to judge the effects of a proposed
development on the community, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with
confirmation by the Council for a four year term. Terms of the members of the
committee will be staggered, with at least one term ending on January 1 of each
year. If the membership of the Committee does not include an architect, the
Committee shall by unanimous agreement invite an architect, who may or may not
be a resident of the city, to serve in an advisory capacity. In the event the
Committee is required to review drawings for a project in which one of its
members or its advisors has a business or professional interest, it shall seek
the advice of a disinterested architect.
   (B)   The Design Review Committee shall hold two regular meetings each month
at a time to be designated by the Committee, except that a meeting may be
canceled if no drawings in conformity with the other requirements of this
chapter have been submitted for review. Reports of the Committee shall have the
concurrence of at least three members. The Director of Community Development
shall serve as secretary to the Committee.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1802) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 628-C.S., passed 3-2-99; Am. Ord. 691-C.S., passed 6-
21-05)
§ 155.182 DRAWINGS TO BE APPROVED AND AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   No zoning permit for a use or for a structure or enlargement of an
existing use or structure that is subject to site plan review as prescribed in
this chapter shall be issued until the drawings required by § 155.183(A) of
this subchapter have been approved by the Director of Community Development,
Design Review Committee, the Planning Commission, or the Council.
   (B)   The Director of Community Development is empowered to approve drawings
for site plan review required by § 155.183(A) of this subchapter. Structures or
the enlargement of an existing use or structure that is subject to site plan
review and is also subject to architectural review as prescribed in this
chapter, shall be submitted to the Design Review Committee for approval.
   (C)   No zoning permit for a use or for a structure or sign or exterior
alteration, enlargement, or major remodeling of an existing use, structure, or
sign that is subject to architectural review as prescribed in this chapter
shall be issued until the drawings required by § 155.183(B) of this subchapter
have been approved.
   (D)   No zoning permit for a use or structure in the CP Planned Shopping
Center Commercial District shall be issued until drawings of development plans
for the entire CP District as prescribed in this subchapter have been approved
in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1803) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 691-C.S.,
passed 6-21-05; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord. 754-C.S., passed
8-3-10)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.183 DRAWINGS TO BE SUBMITTED.
   (A)   Site plan review. The owner of the site or his authorized agent shall
submit the following drawings to the Director of Community Development at the
time of or prior to applying for a zoning permit:
      (1)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of
structures and other improvements, including, where appropriate, driveways,
pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading areas, landscaped
areas, fences, and walls. The site plan shall indicate the locations of
entrances and exits and the direction of traffic flow into and out of off-
street parking and off-street loading areas, the location of each parking space
and each loading berth, and areas for turning and maneuvering vehicles;
      (2)   A landscape plan, drawn to scale, showing the locations of existing
trees proposed to be removed and proposed to be retained on the site, the
location and design of landscaped areas, and the varieties of plant materials
to be planted therein, and other landscape features;
      (3)   Drawings showing the height and bulk of proposed structures and
schematic floor plans showing sufficient detail to permit computation of yard
requirements;
      (4)   Grading plans where required by
Chapter 150 of this title; and,
      (5)   The Design Review Committee or the Director of Community
Development may require additional information if necessary to determine
whether the purposes of this subchapter are being carried out or may authorize
the omission of any or all of the drawings required by this section if they are
not necessary.
   (B)   Architectural review. In addition to the drawings required by
subdivisions (A)(1), (2), and (4) of this section, the owner of the site or his
authorized agent shall submit the following drawings to the Director of
Community Development at the time of or prior to applying for a zoning permit:
      (1)   Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, showing all
elevations of the proposed structures as they will appear upon completion. All
exterior surfacing materials and colors shall be specified;
      (2)   Scale drawings of all signs subject to architectural review showing
the size, location, material, colors, and illumination, if any; and,
      (3)   The Design Review Committee or the Director of Community
Development may require additional information if necessary to determine
whether the purposes of this subchapter are being carried out or may authorize
the omission of any or all of the drawings required by this section if they are
not necessary.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1804) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 691-C.S., passed 6-21-05)
§ 155.184 REFERRAL TO DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The Director of Community Development shall check all drawings submitted for
site plan review and architectural review. If he finds that the plans meet the
requirements of this chapter, subject to site plan review and architectural
review, he shall submit the drawings to the Design Review Committee. If the
Director of Community Development determines that a zoning permit could not be
issued without the granting of a use permit, the granting of a variance, or the
enactment of an amendment to this chapter, he shall inform the applicant and
shall not submit the drawings to the Design Review Committee.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1805) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 691-C.S., passed 6-21-05)
§ 155.185 ACTION OF DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Within 21 days of the date the drawings meeting, all other
requirements of this chapter were submitted for site plan review or
architectural review, the Design Review Committee shall approve the drawings or
shall submit a written report to the Planning Commission recommending
conditional approval, modification, or disapproval. Conditions may include, but
shall not be limited to, the conditions prescribed in §§ 155.280 through
155.299 of this chapter.
   (B)   If the Committee approves the drawings, or if the conditions or
modifications recommended by the Committee are acceptable to the applicant, the
drawings shall be approved in the form recommended by the Committee and the
drawings shall not be submitted to the Commission.
   (C)   Failure of the Committee to act within 21 days of the date of
submission shall be deemed denial of the drawings and the Committee shall
prepare a written report to the Planning Commission as prescribed in division
(A) of this section unless a time extension is requested by the applicant.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1806) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S.,
passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 691-C.S., passed 6-21-05)
§ 155.186 ACTION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 10 days following the Design Review Committee's report
recommending conditional approval, modifications, or disapproval; or to the
next available meeting of the Planning Commission whichever is later, the
Commission shall review the Committee's action.
   (B)   Within 45 days after the Planning Commission's receipt of the Design
Review Committee's report recommending conditional approval, modification, or
disapproval of the drawings, the Planning Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the drawings or shall request the
applicant to revise them, provided that if the conditions or modifications
requested by the Committee are acceptable to the applicant, no action by the
Commission shall be required.
   (C)   Revised drawings shall be reviewed as prescribed for drawings first
submitted.
   (D)   Failure of the Commission to act within 45 days after the receipt of
the Design Review Committee's report shall cause the drawings to be
automatically referred to the City Council accompanied by a written report
unless a time extension is requested by the applicant and granted by the
Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1807) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S.,
passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 691-C.S., passed 6-21-05)
§ 155.187 APPEALS TO COUNCIL; ACTION OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   Appeals to Council.
      (1)   Within 10 days following the date of a decision by the Planning
Commission, the decision may be appealed to the Council by the applicant. The
appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Commission and shall be filed
with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein the decision
of the Commission is not in accord with the purposes prescribed in § 155.180 of
this subchapter.
      (2)   Within five days of the filing of an appeal, the Secretary shall
transmit to the Council the drawings, the report of the Design Review
Committee, and the minutes of the Commission meeting at which the drawings were
considered.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the time when the
appeal will be considered by the Council.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1808)
   (B)   Action of Council. Within 45 days following an appeal of a decision of
the Planning Commission or a failure of the Commission to act pursuant to §
155.186(D) of this subchapter, the Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the
decision provided, if a decision is reversed or modified, the Council shall
make a finding that the decision was not in accord with the purpose prescribed
in § 155.180 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1809)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S., passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord.
691-C.S., passed 6-21-05)
SECONDARY DWELLING UNITS
§ 155.200 PURPOSES.
   The Council finds and declares that secondary dwelling units are a valuable
form of housing in California. Secondary dwelling units provide housing for
family members, students, the elderly, in-home health care providers, the
disabled, and others, at below market prices within existing neighborhoods.
Homeowners who create secondary dwelling units benefit from added income, and
an increased sense of security.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.1851) (Ord. 515-C.S., passed 5-19-90; Am. Ord. 669-C.S.,
passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord. 732-C.S., passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 777-C.S., passed 1-
17-12; Am. Ord. 778-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.201 SECONDARY DWELLING UNIT PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS;
FEES.
   (A)   Permit. An approved secondary dwelling unit permit shall be obtained
prior to construction, conversion and/or development of a secondary dwelling
unit. Pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 65852.2, the secondary dwelling unit
permit shall be considered ministerially without discretionary review or a
hearing.
   (B)   Data to be furnished. Applications for secondary dwelling unit permits
shall be filed with the Director of Community Development on forms provided by
the Community Development Department.
   (C)   Fees. An application for a secondary dwelling unit permit shall be
accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council to cover the
cost of handling the application as prescribed in this subchapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.1852) (Ord. 515-C.S., passed 5-19-90; Am. Ord. 669-C.S.,
passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord. 732-C.S., passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 777-C.S., passed 1-
17-12; Am. Ord. 778-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.202 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - COASTAL ZONE.
   All secondary dwelling units shall comply with the following development
standards:
   (A)   A secondary dwelling unit is permitted only on a lot in the One-Family
Residential (RS) zone district;
   (B)   The secondary dwelling unit shall be accessory to a principal one-
family dwelling in that it is subordinate and incidental in scale and location
to the principal dwelling;
   (C)   The secondary dwelling unit may either be attached to the principal
dwelling, or detached from the principal dwelling;
   (D)   The maximum gross floor area of the secondary dwelling unit shall not
exceed 640 square feet;
   (E)   The size of the secondary dwelling unit shall be counted towards the
maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for the site;
   (F)   When a one-family dwelling of less than 640 square feet exists on a
lot, a larger one-family dwelling may be constructed as the principal dwelling,
provided that the existing dwelling complies with the regulations for a
secondary dwelling unit as prescribed herein;
   (G)   A secondary dwelling unit attached to the principal dwelling shall
comply with the applicable development standards for additions to a one-family
residence; a detached secondary dwelling unit shall conform to the applicable
development standards for an accessory structure in the RS District;
   (H)   Not more than one secondary dwelling unit shall be permitted on any
one lot. A secondary dwelling unit shall not be permitted on a lot already
having two or more dwelling units located thereon and shall not be permitted in
addition to a guesthouse. A guesthouse shall not be permitted on any lot
developed with a secondary dwelling unit;
   (I)   In accordance with the Off-Street Parking regulations, § 155.116, the
lot on which the secondary dwelling unit is sited shall be developed with one
off-street parking space in addition to those legally existing at the time of
application for the secondary dwelling unit, but not more than three off-street
spaces. When development of the secondary dwelling unit displaces existing
required off-street parking (e.g., conversion of a garage) the required parking
shall be replaced on the property in compliance with the Off-Street Parking
regulations;
   (J)   The secondary dwelling unit shall provide complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation;
   (K)   The secondary dwelling unit may have utility services metered
separately from, or with the principal dwelling unit;
   (L)   The secondary dwelling unit shall comply with all local, state and
federal codes and standards, including the building codes as adopted by the
city. Development of the secondary dwelling unit shall not cause the principal
dwelling to violate any local, state or federal codes and standards, including
the building codes as adopted by the city;
   (M)   A secondary dwelling unit that conforms to the requirements of this
section shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot
upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a residential use that is
consistent with the existing general plan and zoning designations for the lot;
   (N)   Secondary dwelling unit permits shall not be issued for secondary
dwelling units that result in adverse impacts to the adequacy of water and
sewer services, and/or that result in adverse impacts on traffic flow, and/or
that result in adverse impacts on any real property that is listed in the
California Register of Historic Places;
   (O)   All new construction, or exterior alterations to existing structures
proposed under the secondary dwelling unit permit shall be subject to
architectural review as prescribed in §§ 155.180 through 155.187.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.1853) (Ord. 515-C.S., passed 5-19-90; Am. Ord. 537-C.S.,
passed 2-6-92; Am. Ord. 669-C.S., passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord. 732-C.S., passed 12-
2-08; Am. Ord. 777-C.S., passed 1-17-12; Am. Ord. 778-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 155.203 EXISTING SECONDARY DWELLING UNITS.
   This subchapter shall in no way validate an illegal secondary dwelling unit.
An application for a secondary dwelling unit permit may be made pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter to convert an illegal secondary dwelling unit to a
lawful secondary dwelling unit, or to allow for the replacement, alteration or
expansion of an existing nonconforming secondary dwelling unit. The conversion
of an illegal secondary dwelling unit to a lawful secondary dwelling unit, or
the replacement, alteration or expansion of an existing nonconforming secondary
dwelling unit shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.1855) (Ord. 515-C.S., passed 5-19-90; Am. Ord. 669-C.S.,
passed 6-3-03; Am. Ord. 732-C.S., passed 12-2-08; Am. Ord. 777-C.S., passed 1-
17-12; Am. Ord. 778-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.204 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS - INLAND.
   All secondary dwelling units shall comply with the following development
standards:
   (A)   A secondary dwelling unit is permitted only in an RS, RM, OR, HM, or C
zone district that allows residential uses;
   (B)   The secondary dwelling unit shall be accessory to a principal dwelling
in that it is subordinate and incidental to the principal dwelling;
   (C)   The secondary dwelling unit may either be attached to the principal
dwelling, or detached from the principal dwelling;
   (D)   The maximum gross floor area of the secondary dwelling unit shall not
exceed 640 square feet;
   (E)   The size of the secondary dwelling unit shall be counted towards the
maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for the site;
   (F)   When a one-family dwelling of less than 640 square feet exists on a
lot, a larger one-family dwelling may be constructed as the principal dwelling,
provided that the existing dwelling complies with the regulations for a
secondary dwelling unit as prescribed herein;
   (G)   A secondary dwelling unit attached to the principal dwelling shall
comply with the applicable development standards for additions to dwellings; a
detached secondary dwelling unit shall conform to the applicable development
standards for an accessory structure in the RS District;
   (H)   In an RS District, not more than one secondary dwelling unit shall be
permitted on any one lot. In an RS District, a secondary dwelling unit shall
not be permitted on a lot already having two or more dwelling units located
thereon and shall not be permitted in addition to a guesthouse. A guesthouse
shall not be permitted on any lot developed with a secondary dwelling unit in
any zone district;
   (I)   In accordance with the Off-Street Parking regulations, § 155.116, the
lot on which the secondary dwelling unit is sited shall be developed with one
off-street parking space in addition to those legally existing at the time of
application for the secondary dwelling unit. In an RS District, not more than
three off-street parking spaces shall be required. When development of the
secondary dwelling unit displaces existing required off-street parking (e.g.,
conversion of a garage) the required parking shall be replaced on the property
in compliance with the Off-Street Parking regulations;
   (J)   The secondary dwelling unit shall provide complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation;
   (K)   The secondary dwelling unit may have utility services metered
separately from, or with the principal dwelling unit;
   (L)   The secondary dwelling unit shall comply with all local, state and
federal codes and standards, including the building codes as adopted by the
city. Development of the secondary dwelling unit shall not cause the principal
dwelling to violate any local, state or federal codes and standards, including
the building codes as adopted by the city;
   (M)   In an RS District, a secondary dwelling unit that conforms to the
requirements of this section shall not be considered to exceed the allowable
density for the lot upon which it is located, and shall be deemed to be a
residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan and zoning
designations for the lot;
   (N)   In an RM, OR, HM, or C District that allows residential uses, a
secondary dwelling unit that conforms to the requirements of this section shall
be included in the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located, and
shall be deemed to be a residential use that is consistent with the existing
general plan and zoning designations for the lot;
   (O)   (1)   In an RM, OR, HM, or C District that allows residential uses,
when only one secondary dwelling unit and one one-family dwelling unit are
proposed on the same lot, then the requirements for usable open space shall not
apply;
      (2)   When three or more units, one or more of which is a secondary
dwelling unit are proposed on the same lot in an RM, OR, HM, or C District that
allows residential uses, then the requirements for usable open space shall
apply;
   (P)   Secondary dwelling unit permits shall not be issued for secondary
dwelling units that result in adverse impacts to the adequacy of water and
sewer services, and/or that result in adverse impacts on traffic flow, and/or
that result in adverse impacts on any real property that is listed in the
California Register of Historic Places;
   (Q)   All new construction, or exterior alterations to existing structures
proposed under the secondary dwelling unit permit shall be subject to
architectural review as prescribed in §§ 155.180 through 155.187.
(Ord. 778-C.S., passed 1-17-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
HOME OCCUPATIONS; TEMPORARY SUBDIVISION SALES OFFICES
§ 155.215 HOME OCCUPATIONS; REQUIRED CONDITIONS AND APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Required conditions. Home occupations in the A, R, and OR Districts
shall comply with the following regulations:
      (1)   There shall be no stock-in-trade other than products manufactured
on the premises.
      (2)   A home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the use of the
structure as a dwelling.
      (3)   There shall be no storage of equipment or supplies outside a
structure.
      (4)   The existence of a home occupation shall not be apparent beyond the
boundaries of the site except for a nameplate in accord with the provisions of
§ 155.159 of this chapter.
      (5)   In an RS District, no one other than a resident of the dwelling
shall be employed at the residence in the conduct of a home occupation. In an
A, RM, or OR District, not more than one nonresident in addition to residents
of the dwelling shall be employed at the residence in the conduct of a home
occupation.
      (6)   No motor power other than electrically operated motors shall be
used in connection with a home occupation. The horsepower of any single motor
shall not exceed one-half horsepower, and the total horsepower of such motors
shall not exceed one horsepower.
      (7)   A home occupation shall not create any radio or television
interference or create noise audible beyond the boundaries of the site.
      (8)   No smoke, odor, liquid, or solid waste shall be emitted.
      (9)   The home occupation shall not result in the loss of existing
required off-street parking.
      (10)   No large vehicles such as delivery vans and semi-trailers
incidental to the home occupation shall be kept on the site.
      (11)   A home occupation shall not create pedestrian, automobile, or
truck traffic significantly in excess of the normal amount in the neighborhood.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1901)
   (B)   Applications. Applications for home occupation permits shall be made
to the Director of Community Development on forms prescribed by the Planning
Commission. The Director shall issue a permit upon determining that the
proposed home occupation meets all of the requirements of this subchapter. The
permit shall become void, and the home occupation shall be removed one year
following the date on which the permit was issued unless the permit is renewed
prior to expiration. Pre-existing home occupations shall require home
occupation permits after October 16, 1967.
('63 Code, § 10-5.1902)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord.
710-C.S., passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.216 SUBDIVISION SALES OFFICE PERMITS.
   One temporary sales office in a subdivision of not less than five acres
located not less than 200 feet from any existing dwelling outside the
subdivision measured along street lines shall be permitted subject to the
granting of a subdivision sales office permit. A permit for a subdivision sales
office may be issued by the Director of Community Development at any time after
the recordation of the subdivision and shall become void one year following the
date on which the permit was issued, and the office shall be removed unless,
prior to the expiration of one year, renewal of the permit for a period of not
more than one year shall be approved by the Planning Commission. The Commission
may approve subsequent renewal requests.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2001) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
MANUFACTURED HOMES, MOBILEHOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
§ 155.230 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR OCCUPANCY; COMPLIANCE WITH STANDARDS.
   (A)   No mobilehome or recreational vehicle, as defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 18200, Chapter 1, Part 2.1, Division 13 of the “Mobile Home Park
Act” and Cal. Admin. Code Title 20, as amended, shall be occupied or used for
living or sleeping purposes unless it is located in a state licensed mobile
home or recreational vehicle park.
   (B)   Manufactured homes certified under the National Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 USC 5401 et seq.) shall be
considered as one-family dwellings. In addition to the regulations prescribed
in §§ 155.025 through 155.036 of this chapter, placement of manufactured homes
on lots zoned for conventional one-family dwellings shall be in accordance with
the following standards:
      (1)   The unit shall be installed on a foundation system in compliance
with all applicable requirements of the Uniform Building Code to the
satisfaction of the Building Official.
      (2)   The unit shall be covered with an exterior material customarily
used on conventional dwelling to the satisfaction of the Director of Community
Development. The exterior covering material shall extend to the ground except
that, when a solid concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the
exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation.
      (3)   The unit shall have a minimum 12-inch roof overhang on each of the
units perimeter walls.
      (4)   The unit shall have a roof constructed of shingles or other
material customarily used for conventional dwellings to the satisfaction of the
Director of Community Development.
      (5)   The unit shall have a manufacture date no older than ten years from
the date of the application for issuance of a permit to install the
manufactured home on the lot.
   (C)   Commercial coaches meeting the commercial property requirements,
pursuant to Cal. Admin. Code Title 25, shall be allowed in the MG, ML and MC
Zone Districts.
   (D)   In the CC, CN, CP, CS, CW, HM, and OR Zone Districts, commercial
coaches meeting the commercial occupancy requirements, pursuant to Cal. Admin.
Code Title 25, shall be allowed on a temporary basis for up to five years from
the date of initial placement. On or before the end of five years, the unit
shall be removed and shall be not replaced by another commercial coach. In
addition to the regular permit approval process, commercial coaches in the HM
or OR Zoning District shall be first subject to site plan and architectural
review as prescribed in §§ 155.180 through 155.187 this chapter.
   (E)   A commercial coach meeting the commercial occupancy requirements,
pursuant to Cal. Admin. Code Title 25 may be used as an office for a
construction project, circus, or carnival, and one mobilehome, manufactured
home or recreational vehicle may be used for the temporary residence of a
watchman on the site of a construction project, and recreational vehicles may
be used as temporary residences for circus or carnival personnel in accordance
with the conditions of a use permit.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2101) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 152-C.S.,
passed 11-20-70; Am. Ord. 485-C.S., passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed
6-20-91)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.231 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR MOBILEHOME PARKS.
   Mobilehome parks shall comply with the requirements of Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 18200, being Part 2.11, Division 13 of the “Mobile Home Park Act”
and Cal. Admin. Code Title 20, as amended, and shall also comply with the
regulations prescribed in §§ 155.025 through 155.036 of this chapter except as
provided in this section as follows:
   (A)   The minimum site area for a mobilehome park shall be 100,000 square
feet, provided that preexisting mobile home parks shall not be deemed
nonconforming by reason of failure to meet the minimum site area requirements.
A preexisting mobilehome park conforming in all respects except site area may
be expanded but shall not be reduced in area.
   (B)   There shall be 3,300 square feet of site area for each mobilehome or
manufactured home space. A preexisting mobilehome park shall not be deemed
nonconforming by reason of failure to meet the minimum site area per mobilehome
or manufactured home space requirement and may be enlarged provided there shall
be 3,300 square feet of additional site area for each mobilehome or
manufactured home space added.
   (C)   A mobilehome park shall meet the usable open space requirements for
the RM-1,000 District, provided that each mobilehome park shall have in
addition at least one recreation space not less than 5,000 square feet in area.
   (D)   Not more than one permanent dwelling unit shall be located on the site
of a mobilehome park in a CS District.
   (E)   No mobilehome, manufactured home or permanent dwelling unit shall be
located in a required yard, not less than 20 feet from a street property line
or another mobilehome, manufactured home or permanent dwelling unit not less
than 15 feet from the property line not abutting a street.
   (F)   All areas used for automobile circulation or parking shall be improved
as prescribed for required parking facilities in § 155.118 of this chapter.
   (G)   The site shall be landscaped as required in § 155.036 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2103) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 152-C.S.,
passed 11-20-70; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 6-20-91)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.232 REQUIRED CONDITIONS FOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS.
   Recreational vehicle parks shall comply with the requirements of Cal. Admin.
Code Title 25, Article 7, Division 2, Trailer Parks, as amended, and in
addition thereto shall also comply with the following minimum development
standards:
   (A)   Each recreational vehicle park shall have a minimum of one common
sanitation station, as set forth in Cal. Admin. Code Title 25, Article 5, as
amended.
   (B)   Such sanitation station shall provide a common container or containers
about the site in which to dispose of garbage or trash.
   (C)   Recreational vehicles parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet in
width and 60 feet in length, except that spaces provided exclusively for camper
units hauled on a motor vehicle or camp cars shall be a minimum of 12 feet in
width and 25 feet in length. No portion of any recreational vehicle shall
extend into a circulation or access aisle when parked.
   (D)   Spacing between each recreational vehicle space shall be a minimum of
nine feet, and the minimum yard between any parking space and a property line
shall be 10 feet, and no space shall be so located to be less than five feet
from any structure on the site.
   (E)   Yard requirements between recreational vehicle parking spaces and
other spaces, property lines, and structures shall be landscaped with minimum
appropriate plant materials suitable for assuring privacy and ornamenting the
site.
   (F)   All areas for motor vehicle circulation and parking shall be improved
as prescribed for required parking facilities in § 155.118 of this chapter.
   (G)   The site shall be as set forth in § 155.036 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2104) (Ord. 152-C.S., passed 11-20-70; Am. Ord. 526-C.S.,
passed 6-20-91)
Penalty, see § 150.999
NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND SIGNS
§ 155.244 PURPOSES.
   This subchapter is intended to limit the number and extent of nonconforming
uses by prohibiting their enlargement. While permitting the use and maintenance
of nonconforming structures and signs, this subchapter is intended to limit the
number and extent of nonconforming structures and certain nonconforming signs
by prohibiting their being moved, altered, or enlarged in a manner that would
increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and the standards
prescribed in this chapter and by prohibiting their restoration after
destruction. Eventually certain classes of nonconforming uses, nonconforming
structures of nominal value, and certain nonconforming signs are to be
eliminated or altered to conform.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2201) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 779-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.245 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Structural repairs or maintenance including, but not limited to
replacement or reconstruction of foundations, bearing walls and trusses.
Voluntary razing is considered an ALTERATION.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any building or structure lawfully occupying a site on
October 16, 1966, or that is listed in the "Green Book" EUREKA, An
Architectural View, or on or potentially eligible for the Local Register of
Historic Places as an individual or contributing building or structure in a
district which is historically or archaeologically significant, or which is
significant in architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural,
educational, social, political, military, or cultural history of the city,
county, state, or nation.
   ROUTINE MAINTENANCE AND REPAIRS. Non-structural repairs or maintenance,
including, but not limited to re-roofing; replacement of fixtures, wiring or
plumbing; window replacement; painting; replacement of trim and siding; and
repair or relocation of non-bearing walls.
(Ord. 779-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.246 CONTINUATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site on October 16, 1966, or
at the time of subsequent amendments to this chapter, that does not conform
with the use regulations or the site area per dwelling unit regulations for the
district in which the use is located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use
and may be continued except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   A structure lawfully occupying a site on October 16, 1966, or at the
time of subsequent amendments to this chapter, that does not conform with the
standards for front yard, side yards, rear yard, height, or basic floor area of
structures, distances between structures, courts, or usable open space for the
district in which the structure is located shall be deemed to be a
nonconforming structure and may be used and maintained, except as otherwise
provided in this subchapter, and for historic structures as defined in this
subchapter.
   (C)   A sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any character,
lawfully occupying a site on October 16, 1966, or at the time of subsequent
amendments to this chapter, that does not conform with the standards for
subject matter, location, size, lighting, or movement prescribed for signs,
outdoor advertising structures, and displays for the district in which it is
located shall be deemed to be a nonconforming sign and may be displayed and
maintained, except as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
   (D)   Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or
site the use of which is nonconforming, on a nonconforming structure, and on a
nonconforming sign.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2202) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 779-C.S.,
passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.247 ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS.
   (A)   No structure, the use of which is nonconforming, and no nonconforming
sign shall be moved, altered, or enlarged unless required by law or unless the
moving, alteration, or enlargement will result in the elimination of the
nonconformity, except that a structure housing a nonconforming residential use
in an A, R, OR, HM, C, ML, NR or S District may be altered or enlarged,
provided that the number of dwelling units is not increased.
   (B)   No structure partially occupied by a nonconforming use shall be moved,
altered, or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the space
occupied by the nonconforming use, except as permitted in this section.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no nonconforming
use shall be enlarged or extended in such a way as to occupy any part of the
structure or site or another structure or site which it did not occupy on
October 16, 1966, or at the time of subsequent amendments to this chapter, that
caused it to become a nonconforming use, or in such a way as to displace any
conforming use occupying a structure or site, except as permitted in this
section.
   (D)   Except as provided in division (H) of this section, no nonconforming
structure shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy
between existing conditions and the standards for front yard, side yards, rear
yard, height of structures, distances between structures, courts, or usable
open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which the
structure is located. No nonconforming structure shall be moved or enlarged
unless the new location or enlargement shall conform to the standards for front
yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures, basic floor area, distances
between structures, courts, or usable open space prescribed in the regulations
for the district in which the structure is located, except for historic
structures as defined in this subchapter.
   (E)   The nonconforming use of a structure or site shall not be changed to
another nonconforming use.
   (F)   No use which fails to meet the required conditions for the district in
which it is located by reason of air pollution, emissions, smoke, noise, odor,
vibration, heat, cold, glare, electrical disturbance, radiation, or insect
nuisance shall be enlarged or extended or shall have equipment replaced unless
the enlargement, extension, or replacement will result in elimination of
nonconformity with required conditions.
   (G)   For each structure or sign, alterations are limited to a cumulative
total of 50% or less, as percentage is defined in § 155.249.
   (H)   Alterations and additions to historic structures, as defined in this
subchapter, may be allowed, provided:
      (1)   The structure shall be compliant with the existing underlying
zoning and development standards, excluding setbacks; and
      (2)   The Building Code can allow the proposed alteration or addition;
      (3)   Nonconforming front yard setbacks or nonconforming projections into
front yard setbacks are not increased; however, structures may be extended
laterally from the existing footprint at the front of the structure to within
five feet of the side property line, or to a point not closer then the
extension of the greatest projection on the side of the structure, whichever is
greater, except to provide for new covered parking;
      (4)   Nonconforming rear yard setbacks or projections into rear yard
setbacks are not increased; however structures may extend laterally from the
existing footprint at the rear of the structure to within five feet of the side
property line, or to a point not closer then the extension of the greatest
projection on the side of the structure, whichever is greater.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2203) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 299-C.S.,
passed 11-7-78; Am. Ord. 592-C.S., passed 7-18-95; Am. Ord. 779-C.S., passed 1-
17-12)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.248 ABANDONMENT OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   Whenever a nonconforming use has been abandoned, discontinued, or changed to
a conforming use for a continuous period of 90 days or more, the nonconforming
use shall not be reestablished, and the use of the structure or site thereafter
shall be in conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is
located, provided that this section shall not apply to nonconforming dwelling
units. Abandonment or discontinuance shall include cessation of a use
regardless of intent to resume the use.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2204) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 779-C.S.,
passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.249 RESTORATION OF DAMAGED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Whenever a structure which does not comply with the standards for
front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures, distances between
structures, courts, or usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the
district in which the structure is located, or the use of which does not
conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, is
destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act of God, or by the public enemy to
the extent of 50% or less, the structure may be restored and the nonconforming
use may be resumed provided restoration is started within one year and
diligently pursued to completion.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, whenever a
structure which does not comply with the standards for front yard, side yards,
rear yard, height of structures, distances between structures, courts, or
usable open space prescribed in the regulations for the district in which it is
located, or the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the
district in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act
of God, or by the public enemy to an extent greater than 50% or is voluntarily
razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored
except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is
located, and the nonconforming use shall not be resumed. Before issuing a
zoning permit for a structure to be restored, the Director of Community
Development shall determine that the structure will be suitable for occupancy
by a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
   (C)   The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the
ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior
to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the
entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall
be made by, or shall be reviewed and approved by, the Director of Public Works.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to historic structures, as defined in
this subchapter.
   (E)   Previously existing structures on properties that are listed on the
Local Register of Historic Places may be reconstructed on their previously
existing footprint provided:
      (1)   Proof of the previous existence of the structure, and the location
on the property is provided to the satisfaction of the Community Development
Department. Proof shall include, but not be limited to, Sanborn maps, personal
photographs, old plans, historical photographs, Assessor's records, witness
marks, or foundations;
      (2)   The Building Code can allow the proposed reconstruction;
      (3)   The use complies with the existing underlying zoning and
development standards, excluding setbacks; and
      (4)   Reconstruction shall comply with the current Building Code in
effect at the time of application for reconstruction.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2205) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 710-C.S.,
passed 3-20-07; Am. Ord. 779-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
DETERMINATION AS TO USES NOT LISTED
§ 155.265 PURPOSE AND INITIATION.
   In order to ensure that the zoning regulations will permit all similar uses
in each district, the Planning Commission, upon its own initiative or upon
written request, shall determine whether a use not specifically listed as a
permitted use or a conditional use in an F, A, OR, HM, C, or M District shall
be deemed a permitted use or a conditional use in one or more districts on the
basis of similarity to uses specifically listed. The procedures of this
subchapter shall not be substituted for the amendment procedure as a means of
adding new uses to the lists of permitted uses and conditional uses but shall
be followed to determine whether the characteristics of a particular use not
listed are sufficiently similar to a listed use to justify a finding that the
use should be deemed a permitted use or a conditional use in one or more
districts.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2301) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.266 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for determinations that specific uses should be included as
permitted uses or conditional uses in an F, A, OR, HM, C, or M District shall
be made in writing to the Director of Community Development and shall include a
detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be
required by the Director of Community Development to facilitate the
determination.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2302) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.267 INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTS.
   The Director of Community Development shall make such investigations of the
application as he deems necessary to compare the nature and characteristics of
the proposed use with those of the uses specifically listed in this chapter and
shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission to aid the Commission in making its determination of the
classification of the proposed use.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2303) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.268 DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   The determination of the Planning Commission shall be rendered in
writing within 45 days after the Commission's receipt of the Director of
Community Development's report and shall include findings supporting the
conclusion.
   (B)   Failure of the Commission to act within 45 days after the receipt of
the Director of Community Development's report shall cause the request to be
automatically referred to the City Council accompanied by a written report
unless a time extension is requested by the applicant and granted by the
Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2304) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S.,
passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.269 EFFECTIVE DATE OF DECISION.
   Within five days following the date of a decision of the Planning Commission
on a request for a determination as to a use not listed, the Secretary shall
transmit to the Council written notice of the decision. The decision shall
become effective 10 days following the date on which the determination was made
or on the day following the next meeting of the Council, whichever is later,
unless an appeal has been taken to the Council or unless the Council shall
elect to review the decision of the Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2305) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.270 APPEALS TO COUNCIL; DETERMINATIONS BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Appeals to Council. Within 10 days following the date of a decision of
the Planning Commission on a request for a determination as to a use not
listed, the decision may be appealed to the Council by the applicant or by any
other person. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there
was an error or abuse of discretion by the Commission or wherein its decision
is not supported by the evidence in the record.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2306)
   (B)   Determination by Council. The determination of the Council shall be
rendered in writing within 45 days following an appeal of a decision of the
Planning Commission or a failure of the Commission to act pursuant to § 155.268
(B) of this subchapter, unless the applicant consents to an extension of the
time period and shall include findings supporting the conclusion.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2307)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S., passed 4-20-89)
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 155.280 PURPOSES AND AUTHORIZATION.
   In order to give the district use regulations the flexibility necessary to
achieve the objectives of this chapter, in certain districts conditional uses
shall be permitted subject to the granting of a use permit. Because of their
unusual characteristics, conditional uses require special consideration so that
they may be located properly with respect to the objectives of the zoning
regulations and with respect to their effects on surrounding properties. In
order to achieve these purposes, the Planning Commission is empowered to grant
and deny applications for use permits for such conditional uses in such
districts as are prescribed in the district regulations and to impose
reasonable conditions upon the granting of use permits, subject to the right of
appeal to the Council or to review by the Council.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2401) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.281 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Data to be furnished. Applications for use permits shall be filed with
the Director of Community Development and shall be on forms prescribed by the
Planning Commission which shall include the following data:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner of the property on which the use is proposed to be located;
      (3)   Address or description of the property; and,
      (4)   Statement indicating the precise manner of compliance with each of
the applicable provisions of this chapter, together with any other data
pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit as
prescribed in §§ 155.285 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Maps. The application shall be accompanied by the following plans and
drawings:
      (1)   An accurate scale drawing of the site and the surrounding area for
a distance of at least 300 feet from each boundary of the site showing the
existing locations of streets and property lines;
      (2)   An accurate scale drawing of the site showing the contours at
intervals of not more than five feet and existing and proposed locations of
streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-
street parking and off-street loading facilities, landscaped areas, fences and
walls; and,
      (3)   The Director of Community Development may require additional
information, plans, and drawings if they are necessary to enable the Planning
Commission to determine whether the proposed use will comply with all the
applicable provisions of this chapter. The Director may authorize omission of
any or all of the plans and drawings required by this section if they are not
necessary.
   (C)   Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by
resolution of the Council to cover the cost of handling the application as
prescribed in this subchapter, except that there shall be no fee for an
application for a conditional use in an S District.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2402) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.282 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing
on each application for a use permit within 45 days of the date when the
application is filed. The secretary shall set the time and place of the
hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given not less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by mailing a notice of the time
and place of the hearing to the applicant and to all tenants of property and
persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the county as
owning property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the area occupied or to be
occupied by the use which is the subject of the hearing, and by publication in
a newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by posting a notice of
minimum size, approximately two-and-a-half by three feet, in a conspicuous
place on or near the property affected. Failure to post notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings. In the coastal zone, notice of public hearings
shall also comply with the notice requirements of
Chapter 156 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2403)
   (B)   Procedure. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application and the drawings submitted therewith and shall receive
pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions
under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to
the findings prescribed in § 155.285 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2404)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord.
727-C.S., passed 6-17-08)
§ 155.283 INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTS.
   The Director of Community Development shall make an investigation of the
application and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2405) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.284 ACTION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 45 days following the closing of a public hearing on a use
permit application, the Planning Commission shall act on the application. The
Commission may grant by resolution an application for a use permit as the
permit was applied for or in modified form, or the application may be denied. A
use permit may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may
be granted subject to such conditions as the Commission may prescribe.
Conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, requiring special yards,
open spaces, buffers, fences, and walls; requiring the installation and
maintenance of landscaping; requiring street dedications and improvements;
regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress; regulation of on-site
traffic circulation; regulation of signs; regulation of hours of operation and
methods of operation; control of nuisances; prescribing standards for the
maintenance of buildings and grounds; and the prescription of development
schedules. Except as provided in § 155.057 of this chapter, a use permit may
not grant variances to the regulations prescribed by this chapter for fences,
walls, hedges, screening, and landscaping; site area, width, frontage, and
depth; front, rear and side yards; basic floor area; height of structures;
distance between parking facilities and off-street loading facilities for which
variance procedures are prescribed by §§ 155.310 through 155.325 of this
chapter.
   (B)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days following the
closing of a public hearing on a use permit application shall cause the
application to be automatically referred to the City Council accompanied by a
written report unless a time extension is requested by the applicant and
granted by the Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2406) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S.,
passed 4-20-89)
§ 155.285 FINDINGS BEFORE GRANTING USE PERMIT.
   The Planning Commission shall make the following findings before granting a
use permit:
   (A)   That the proposed location of the conditional use is in accord with
the objectives of this chapter and the purposes of the district in which the
site is located;
   (B)   That the proposed location of the conditional use and the conditions
under which it would be operated or maintained will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity;
   (C)   That the proposed conditional use will comply with each of the
applicable provisions of this chapter; and,
   (D)   That the proposed conditional use, if located in the coastal zone, is
consistent with the certified local coastal program and is consistent with the
intent of the zoning district.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2407) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 417-C.S.,
passed 12-6-84)
§ 155.286 EFFECTIVE DATE OF USE PERMITS.
   Within five days following the date of a decision of the Planning Commission
on a use permit application, the secretary shall transmit written notice of the
decision to the Council and to the applicant. A use permit shall become
effective 10 days following the date on which the use permit was granted or on
the day following the next meeting of the Council, whichever is later, unless
an appeal has been taken to the Council, or unless the Council shall elect to
review the decision of the Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2408) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.287 APPEALS TO COUNCIL; COUNCIL REVIEW.
   (A)   Appeals to Council. Within 10 days following the date of a decision of
the Planning Commission on a use permit application, the decision may be
appealed to the Council by the applicant or by any other person. An appeal
shall be made on a form prescribed by the Commission and shall be filed with
the City Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there
was an error or abuse of discretion by the Commission or wherein its decision
is not supported by the evidence in the record.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2409)
   (B)   Council review. Within 10 days following the decision of the Planning
Commission on a use permit application, or at the next meeting of the Council,
whichever is later, the Council may elect to review such action. If the Council
elects to review the Commission's action and declines to affirm the Commission
decision, a public hearing shall be held as prescribed in § 155.289 of this
subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2410)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.288 TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS.
   Upon notification that an appeal has been filed with the City Clerk, or upon
receipt of notice that the Council has elected to review and declines to affirm
a decision of the Planning Commission, the secretary shall transmit to the
Council the complete record of the case.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2411) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.289 PUBLIC HEARINGS BY COUNCIL.
   The Council shall hold at least one public hearing within 45 days of the
date when an appeal from a decision of the Planning Commission on a use permit
application is filed or the date when the Council elects to review and declines
to affirm the Commission's action. Unless otherwise directed by the Council,
the City Clerk shall set the time and place of the hearing. Notice of the
public hearing shall be given as prescribed in § 155.282(A) of this subchapter
and shall also be given to the Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2412) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.290 ACTION OF COUNCIL.
   Within 45 days following the closing of a public hearing on a use permit
application, the Council shall act on the application. The Council may by
resolution affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the Planning Commission,
provided that if a decision denying a use permit is reversed or a decision
granting a use permit is modified, the Council, on the basis of the record
transmitted by the Secretary and such additional evidence as may be submitted,
shall make the findings prerequisite to the granting of a use permit as
prescribed in § 155.285 of this subchapter. A use permit that has been the
subject of an appeal to the Council or review by the Council shall become
effective immediately after it is granted by resolution of the Council. Within
five days following the date of a decision of the Council on a use permit
application, the City Clerk shall transmit written notice of the decision to
the applicant and Commission and shall return the Commission record to the
secretary.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2413) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.291 LAPSE OF USE PERMITS.
   (A)   A use permit shall lapse and shall become void one year following the
date on which the use permit became effective unless, prior to the expiration
of one year, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and
diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the
use permit application, or a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
structure which was the subject of the use permit application, or the site is
occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required.
   (B)   A use permit may be renewed for an additional period of one year
provided that, prior to the expiration of one year from the date when the use
permit or the renewal became effective, an application for renewal of the use
permit is filed with the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may grant or deny an application for the
renewal of a use permit.
   (D)   Sections 155.281 through 155.290 of this subchapter shall apply to an
application for the renewal of a use permit.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2414) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.292 PREEXISTING CONDITIONAL USES.
   (A)   A conditional use legally established prior to October 16, 1966, shall
be permitted to continue provided it is operated and maintained in accord with
the conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment, if any.
   (B)   Alteration or expansion of a preexisting conditional use shall be
permitted only upon the granting of a use permit as prescribed in this
subchapter.
   (C)   A use permit shall be required for the reconstruction of a structure
housing a preexisting conditional use if the structure is destroyed by fire or
other calamity, by act of God, or by the public enemy to a greater extent than
50%. The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio
of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such
damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire
structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made
by, or shall be reviewed and approved by, the Director of Public Works.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2415) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.293 MODIFICATION OF CONDITIONAL USES.
   Sections 155.281 through 155.290 of this subchapter shall apply to an
application for modification, expansion, or other change in a conditional use,
provided that if the Director of Community Development determines that the
proposed modification, expansion, or other change would not affect the findings
prescribed in § 155.285 of this subchapter, he shall issue a zoning permit.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2416) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.294 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   Upon the violation of any applicable provision of this chapter, or, if
granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, a use
permit shall be suspended automatically. The Planning Commission shall hold a
public hearing within 45 days, in accord with the procedure prescribed in §
155.282(A) of this subchapter, and, if not satisfied that the regulation,
general provision, or condition is being complied with, may revoke the use
permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the
regulation, general provision, or condition. Within five days following the
date of a decision of the Planning Commission revoking a use permit, the
secretary shall transmit to the Council written notice of the decision. The
decision shall become final 10 days following the date on which the use permit
was revoked or on the day following the next meeting of the Council, whichever
is later, unless an appeal has been taken to the Council, or unless the Council
shall elect to review and decline to affirm the decision of the Planning
Commission, in which cases §§ 155.287 through 155.290 of this subchapter shall
apply.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2417) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.295 NEW APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Following the denial of a use permit application or the revocation of
a use permit, no application for a use permit for the same or substantially the
same conditional use on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed
within one year from the date of denial or revocation of the use permit.
   (B)   The City Council by motion may waive the one-year moratorium on filing
of a new application where it finds any of the following facts exist:
      (1)   Inadequate or defective notice was given during the use permit
process; or,
      (2)   Procedural errors were committed in the use permit process which
errors substantially prejudiced the applicant or the public generally and the
Council finds there is relevant new evidence which, in the exercise of
reasonable diligence could not have been presented at the hearing, or if there
was an error of fact or law that occurred which has the potential for changing
the Council's original decision.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2418) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 390-C.S.,
passed 11-15-83)
§ 155.296 USE PERMITS TO RUN WITH THE LAND.
   A use permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter shall run
with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the
site or structure which was the subject of the use permit application.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2419) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.297 TIME OF APPLICATIONS WHERE ZONING RECLASSIFICATION IS REQUIRED.
   Applications for use permits may be made at the same time as applications
for changes in district boundaries including the same property, in which case
the Planning Commission shall hold the public hearing on the zoning
reclassification and the use permit at the same meeting and may combine the two
hearings. For the purposes of this section, the date of the Commission decision
on the use permit application shall be deemed to be the same as the date of
enactment by the Council of an ordinance changing the district boundaries,
provided that if the Council modifies a recommendation of the Commission on a
zoning reclassification, the use permit application shall be reconsidered by
the Commission in the same manner as a new application.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2420) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.298 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW.
   All conditional uses shall be subject to architectural review as prescribed
in §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2421) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.299 ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION LINES.
   Any other provision of this subchapter or of this chapter to the contrary
notwithstanding, electric transmission lines may be constructed in any district
without the necessity of first obtaining a use permit therefor provided the
Commission by resolution shall first have approved the routes and design
thereof.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2422) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
VARIANCES
§ 155.310 PURPOSES AND AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   A variance is a waiver or modification of certain requirements
prescribed in this chapter. The variance process provides for modifications of
zoning requirements when the strict application of a given set of requirements
will result in a practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship.
   (B)   The Planning Commission and the Director of Community Development is
empowered to grant variances in order to prevent or lessen such practical
difficulties and unnecessary physical hardships inconsistent with the
objectives of this chapter as would result from a strict or literal
interpretation and enforcement of certain of the regulations. A practical
difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship may result from the size, shape, or
dimensions of a site or the location of existing structures thereon, from
geographic, topographic, or other physical conditions on the site or in the
immediate vicinity, or from population densities, street locations, or traffic
conditions in the immediate vicinity. Cost to the applicant of strict or
literal compliance with a regulation shall not be the sole reason for granting
a variance.
   (C)   The power to grant variances shall not extend to use regulations.
Variances which request approval to locate a use in a zoning district in which
it is not allowed are specifically prohibited.
   (D)   The Director of Community Development shall have the following
variance granting authority:
      (1)   Authority to grant 100% variances on all fences, walls, hedges,
screening, landscaping, site area, width, frontage, and signs.
      (2)   Authority to grant 50% variances with regard to front, side, and
rear yards; basic floor area; height of structures; distance between
structures; courts; usable open space; and off-street parking and loading
facilities. No public hearing shall be required on variances approved by the
Director of Community Development. The Director may, at his or her discretion,
schedule for hearing by the Planning Commission any application for a variance
under his or her authority.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2501) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 155.311 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Data to be furnished. Applications for variances shall be filed with
the Director of Community Development and shall be made on forms prescribed by
the Planning Commission which shall include the following data:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner of the property on which the variance is being requested;
      (3)   Address or description of the property; and,
      (4)   Statement of the precise nature of the variance requested and the
practical difficulty or unnecessary physical hardship inconsistent with the
objectives of the zoning regulations that would result from a strict or literal
interpretation and enforcement of a specified regulation of this chapter,
together with any other data pertinent to the findings prerequisite to the
granting of a variance prescribed in § 155.315 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Maps.
      (1)   The application shall be accompanied by an accurate scale drawing
of the site and any adjacent property affected, showing, when pertinent, the
contours at intervals of not more than five feet and all existing and proposed
locations of streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian
walks, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, and landscaped
areas.
      (2)   If required for a public hearing as prescribed in § 155.313(A) of
this subchapter, the application shall be accompanied by an accurate scale
drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least 100
feet from each boundary of the site, showing the existing locations of streets
and property lines.
      (3)   The Director of Community Development may require additional
information, plans, and drawings if they are necessary to enable a
determination as to whether the circumstances prescribed for the granting of a
variance exist. The Director may authorize omission of any or all of the plans
and drawings required by this action if they are not necessary.
   (C)   Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by
resolution of the Council to cover the cost of handling the application as
prescribed in this subchapter. A single application may include requests for
variances from more than one regulation applicable to the same site or for
similar variances on two or more sites with similar characteristics.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2502) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.312 ACTION BY THE DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Within 15 days of the date when a variance application is filed, the
Director of Community Development shall set the application for public hearing
before the Planning Commission or shall grant in modified form, or deny the
request, provided that the Director of Community Development may make decisions
only on such types of variances as he or she may be authorized to act upon as
listed in §
155.310 of this subchapter.
   (B)   Within five days after the Director has granted, or granted in
modified form, a variance request, the secretary shall send mail notice of the
action to the applicant, to the Planning Commission and to all persons whose
names appear on the latest tax roll of the county as owning property within 100
feet of the boundaries of the site of the variance, stating that the applicant,
a Planning Commission member or any other person may request a hearing by the
Planning Commission within 15 days following the date of the action by the
Director of Community Development. The decision of the Director of Community
Development shall become effective 15 days after it is made unless a request
for hearing has been received by the secretary. Within 15 days after making a
decision on a variance, the Director of Community Development shall submit a
report to the Planning Commission stating his other reasons for the action.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2503) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.313 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notification. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
an application for a variance if requested by the applicant by the Director of
Community Development, or by any other person in accord with § 155.312 of this
subchapter or if the Commission has not authorized the Director to make a
decision on the type of variance requested. The public hearing shall be held
within 45 days for the date when the application was filed or the request for a
public hearing received, whichever is later. Notice of the hearing shall be
given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the
hearing by mailing a notice of the time and place of the hearing to all tenants
of property and persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax roll of
the county as owning property within 100 feet of the boundaries of the site of
the variance, and by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city, and by posting a notice of a minimum size, approximately two-and-a-half
by three feet, in a conspicuous place on or near the property affected. Failure
to post notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2504)
   (B)   Procedure. At a public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application, statements, and drawings submitted therewith and shall receive
pertinent evidence concerning the variance, particularly with respect to the
findings prescribed in § 155.315 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2505)
(Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89; Am. Ord. 727-C.S., passed 6-17-08)
§ 155.314 INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTS.
   The Director of Community Development shall make an investigation of each
application that is the subject of a public hearing and shall prepare a report
thereon which shall be submitted to the Planning Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2506) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.315 ACTION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 45 days following the closing of a public hearing on a variance
application, the Planning Commission shall act on the application. The
Commission may grant by minute order a variance as the variance was applied
for, or on modified form, or the application may be denied. A variance may be
revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject
to such conditions as the Commission or Director may prescribe.
   (B)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days following the
closing of a public hearing or a variance application shall cause the
application to be automatically referred to the City Council accompanied by a
written report by the Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2507) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89; Am. Ord. 417-C.S.,
passed 12-16-84; Am. Ord. 514-C.S., passed 3-25-90)
§ 155.316 FINDINGS; CRITERIA FOR GRANTING VARIANCE.
   The Planning Commission or Director of Community Development may grant a
variance to a regulation prescribed by this chapter with respect to fences,
walls, hedges, screening or landscaping; site area; height of structures; or
distances between structures, courts or usable open space as the variance was
applied for, or in modified form, if on the basis of the application and the
evidence submitted, the Commission or the Director of Community Development
makes findings of fact that establish the following:
   (A)   That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to properties or
improvements in the vicinity; and,
   (B)   That the granting of the variance will not constitute a grant of
special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties
classified in the same zoning district, and one of the following findings:
      (1)   That the strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary
physical hardship inconsistent with the objectives of this chapter;
      (2)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved or to the intended use of the
property that do not apply generally to other properties classified in the same
zoning district; or,
      (3)   That the strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation would deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by the
owners of other properties classified in the same zoning district.
   (C)   In the coastal zone granting of variances is consistent with and
implements the certified local coastal program, and that the granting of such
variances does not reduce or in any way adversely affect the requirements to
protect coastal resources as specified in the zones included in this chapter,
and that the variance implements the purposes of the zones adopted in
implementation of the local coastal program.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2507.1) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89; Am. Ord. 514-C.S.,
passed 3-25-90)
§ 155.317 ADDITIONAL FINDINGS REGARDING SIGNS; PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Additional findings. The Planning Commission or Director of Community
Development, when authorized, may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed
by this chapter with respect to signs as the variance was applied for, or in
modified form, if, on the basis of the application and the evidence submitted,
the Commission or Director of Community Development makes findings of fact that
establish that the circumstances prescribed in § 155.316 of this subchapter
and, for signs in the coastal zone, those in § 155.156 of this chapter apply
and the following circumstances also apply:
      (1)   That the granting of the variance will not detract from the
attractiveness or orderliness of the city's appearance;
      (2)   That the granting of the variance will not introduce an
inharmonious visual element into the district in which the sign would be
located; and,
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not create a hazard to
public safety.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2507.2)
   (B)   Parking and loading. The Planning Commission or Director Community
Development, when authorized, may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed
by this chapter with respect to off-street parking facilities or off-street
loading facilities as the variance was applied for, or in modified form, if, on
the basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Commission or the
Director of Community Development makes findings of fact that establish that
the circumstances prescribed in §
155.316 of this subchapter apply and the following circumstances also apply:
      (1)   That neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes
generated by the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity
reasonably require strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the
specified regulation;
      (2)   That the granting of the variance will not result in the parking or
loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the
free flow of traffic on streets; and,
      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not create a safety hazard
or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2507.3)
(Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.318 EFFECTIVE DATE OF VARIANCE.
   Within five days following the date of a decision of the Planning Commission
on a variance application, the Secretary shall transmit written notice of the
decision to the Council and to the applicant. A variance shall become effective
10 days following the date on which the variance was granted or on the day
following the next meeting of the Council, whichever is later, unless an appeal
has been taken to the Council or unless the Council shall elect to review the
decision of the Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2508) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.319 APPEALS TO COUNCIL; COUNCIL REVIEW.
   (A)   Appeals to Council. Within 10 days following the date of a decision of
the Planning Commission on a variance application, the decision may be appealed
to the Council by the applicant or any other person. An appeal shall be made on
a form prescribed by the Commission and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The
appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed there was an error or
abuse of discretion by the Commission or wherein its decision is not supported
by the evidence in the record.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2509)
   (B)   Council review. Within 10 days following the decision of the Planning
Commission on a variance application, or at the next meeting of the Council,
whichever is later, the Council may elect to review such action. If the Council
elects to review the Commission's action and declines to affirm the
Commission's decision, a public hearing shall be held as prescribed in §
155.321 of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2510)
(Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.320 TRANSMISSION OF RECORDS TO COUNCIL.
   Upon notification that an appeal has been filed with the City Clerk, or upon
receipt of notice that the Council has elected to review and declined to affirm
a decision of the Commission, the secretary shall transmit to the Council the
complete record of the case.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2511) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.321 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICES.
   The Council shall hold at least one public hearing within 45 days of the
date when an application is filed or the Council elects to review and declined
to affirm the Commission's action. Unless otherwise directed by the Council,
the City Clerk shall set the time and place of the hearing. Notice of the
public hearing shall be given as prescribed in § 155.313(A) of this subchapter
and shall also be given to the Commission and the Director of Community
Development.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2512) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.322 ACTION OF COUNCIL.
   Within 45 days following the closing of a public hearing on a variance
application, the Council shall act on the application. The Council may affirm,
reverse, or modify a decision of the Planning Commission on a variance
application, provided that if a decision denying a variance is reversed or a
decision granting a variance is modified, the Council, on the basis of the
record transmitted by the secretary and such additional evidence as may be
submitted, shall make findings of fact that establish that the circumstances
prerequisite to the granting of a variance prescribed in § 155.315 of this
subchapter apply. A variance which has been the subject of an appeal to the
Council or review by the Council shall become effective immediately after it is
granted by resolution of the Council. Within five days following the date of a
decision of the Council on a variance application, the City Clerk shall
transmit written notice of the decision to the Planning Commission and to the
applicant and shall return the Commission record to the secretary.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2513) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.323 LAPSE OF VARIANCES.
   (A)   A variance shall lapse and shall become void one year following the
date on which the variance became effective unless, prior to the expiration of
one year, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and
diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the
variance application, or a permit is issued authorizing occupancy of the site
or structure which was the subject of the variance application, or the site is
occupied if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required.
   (B)   A variance may be renewed for an additional period of one year
provided that, prior to the expiration of one year from the date when the
variance or the renewal became effective, an application for renewal of the
variance is filed with the Director of Community Development.
   (C)   The Planning Commission or Director of Community Development, when
authorized, may grant or deny an application for renewal of a variance.
   (D)   Sections 155.311 through 155.322 of this subchapter shall apply to an
application for renewal of a variance.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2514) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.324 REVOCATION.
   A variance granted by the Planning Commission subject to conditions shall be
revoked by the Commission if the conditions are not complied with, and a
variance granted by the Director of Community Development subject to conditions
shall be revoked by the Director of Community Development if the conditions are
not complied with. The decision of the Director of Community Development shall
become final 10 days following the date on which the variance was revoked
unless an appeal has been filed with the secretary of the Planning Commission.
Within 15 days after revoking a variance, the Director of Community Development
shall submit a report to the Planning Commission stating his reasons for the
action. The decision of the Planning Commission revoking a variance shall
become final 10 days following the date on which the variance was revoked or on
the day following the next meeting of the Council, whichever is later, unless
an appeal has been taken to the Council, or unless the Council shall elect to
review and decline to affirm the decision of the Commission in which case §§
155.319(B) through 155.322 of this subchapter shall apply. A variance granted
by the Council subject to conditions shall be revoked by the Council if the
conditions are not complied with.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2515) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
§ 155.325 NEW APPLICATIONS.
   Following the denial or revocation of a variance application, no application
for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or substantially
the same site shall be filed within one year of the date of denial or
revocation of the variance.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2516) (Ord. 503-C.S., passed 12-9-89)
ZONING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
§ 155.335 PURPOSES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   To ensure that each new or expanded use of a structure or site and
each new structure or alteration of an existing structure complies with all
applicable provisions of this chapter, and in order that the city may have a
record of each new or expanded use of a structure or site, a zoning permit
shall be required before any building permit may be issued or any structure or
site used, and a certificate of occupancy required by
Chapter 150 of this title shall be issued only for a structure that conforms
with the zoning permit.
   (B)   To ensure that each new sign subject to architectural review or
requiring a sign permit, and each enlargement or change in the design,
lighting, or movement of a sign subject to architectural review or requiring a
sign permit, complies with all the applicable provisions of this chapter, a
zoning permit shall be required before the sign may be displayed or altered or
before a sign permit may be issued.
   (C)   To ensure that development in the coastal zone complies with all
applicable provisions of the local coastal program, a coastal development
permit shall be required before any building permit may be issued for any
structure or site used for new development.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2601) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 417-C.S.,
passed 12-6-84)
§ 155.336 APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE OF ZONING PERMITS.
   Applications for zoning permits shall be made on forms prescribed by the
Planning Commission and shall be accompanied by plans and additional
information as necessary, in the opinion of the Director of Community
Development, to demonstrate conformity with this chapter. The Director of
Community Development shall check the application and all, data submitted with
it and shall issue a zoning permit if he finds that all the provisions of this
chapter will be complied with.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2602) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.337 ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS AND SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   The Building Official shall not issue a building permit until the
Director of Community Development has approved a zoning permit, and in the
coastal zone, a coastal development permit, for the structure included in the
building permit.
   (B)   The Building Official shall not issue a sign permit until the Director
of Community Development has approved a zoning permit, and in the coastal zone,
a coastal development permit, for the sign included in the sign permit.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2603) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 417-C.S.,
passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.338 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The Building Official shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for a
structure or alteration until he has found that the structure or alteration
conforms with the zoning permit, or a coastal development permit, where
applicable, and until all required screening and landscaping and off-street
parking and loading facilities are complete, and that all conditions attached
to a use permit, a variance, and site plan approval or architectural review
have been met.
   (B)   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building
Official prior to the time that all of the requirements for a certificate of
occupancy have been met, provided that no permit other than a temporary permit
shall be issued for gas or electric utilities until the Building Official
determines that all of the requirements for a certificate of occupancy have
been met. A temporary permit for gas or electric utilities shall be valid for
15 working days and may be renewed upon application to the Building Official
for not more than two additional periods of 15 working days. If temporary
permits for gas or electric utilities expire without the requirements for the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy having been met, the Building Official
shall request the public utility to discontinue service.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2604) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 417-C.S.,
passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
AMENDMENTS
§ 155.350 PURPOSE; INITIATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The zoning map and zoning regulations may be amended by
changing the boundaries of any district, by combining a district with a Planned
Unit Development District or Qualified Combining District, or by changing any
district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities requirement,
general provision, exception, or other provision of this chapter in accord with
the procedure prescribed in this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2701)
   (B)   Initiation.
      (1)   A change in the boundaries of any district or the combining of a
district with a Planned Unit Development District or Qualified Combining
District may be initiated by the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of
the property filing an application for a change in district boundaries as
prescribed in § 155.351 of this subchapter. If the property for which a change
of district is proposed is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their
authorized agents shall join in filing the application.
      (2)   A change in the boundaries of any district, a combination of a
district with a PD, Q, or an AR District, or a change in a district regulation,
off-street parking or loading facilities requirement, general provision,
exception, or other provision may be initiated by resolution of the Planning
Commission or by action of the Council in the form of a request to the
Commission that it consider a proposed change, provided that in either case the
procedure prescribed in §§ 155.352 through 155.356 of this subchapter shall be
followed.
      (3)   A proposal for a change in district boundaries initiated by the
Commission and one initiated by a property owner for all or part of the same
area may be considered simultaneously.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2702)
(Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 621-C.S., passed 11-25-97)
§ 155.351 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Data to be furnished. A property owner desiring to propose a change in
the boundaries of the district in which his property is located or his
authorized agent may file with the Director of Community Development an
application for a change in district boundaries on a form prescribed by the
Planning Commission which shall include the following data:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner of the property for which the change in district boundaries is
proposed; and,
      (3)   Address or description of the property.
   (B)   Maps. The application shall be accompanied by an accurate scale
drawing of the site and the surrounding area for a distance of at least 300
feet from each boundary of the site showing the location of streets and
property lines.
   (C)   Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by
resolution of the Council to cover the cost of processing the application as
prescribed in this subchapter.
   (D)   Applications for C Commercial zoning; additional requirements. In
addition to the drawing of the site prescribed in division (B) of this section,
an application for a change in district boundaries to increase the amount of
land zoned C Commercial shall be accompanied by the following plans and
drawings:
      (1)   An accurate scale drawing of the site showing the contours at
intervals of not more than five feet and existing and proposed locations of
streets, property lines, uses, structures, driveways, pedestrian walks, off-
street parking and off-street loading facilities, landscaped areas, fences, and
walls.
      (2)   The Director of Community Development may require additional
information, plans, and drawings if they are necessary to enable the Planning
Commission to determine whether the circumstances listed in § 155.354(B) of
this subchapter apply.
   (E)   Applications for Planned Unit Development Districts; additional
requirements. In addition to the drawing of the site prescribed in division (B)
of this section, an application for combining a district with a PD District
shall be accompanied by a preliminary plan including all of the elements
prescribed in § 155.057(E) of this chapter.
   (F)   Applications for CP Planned Shopping Center Commercial Districts;
additional requirements. In addition to the drawings of the site prescribed in
division (B) of this section, an application for a CP Planned Shopping Center
Commercial District shall be accompanied by supporting data, including, but not
limited to, a market analysis determining the trade area of the proposed
development, the present and future population within the trade area, and other
economic indexes, including, but not limited to, data on the effective buying
power within the trade area.
   (G)   Applications for Q Qualified Combining District; additional
requirements. In addition to the requirements prescribed in divisions (A)
through (C) of this section, an application for combining a district with a Q
District shall be accompanied by supporting data and information, including,
but not limited to, draft language of the special qualification to the base
zone, a discussion why the need for the special qualification, and information
supporting a finding that the change is not “spot zoning.”
('63 Code, § 10-5.2703) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 621-C.S., passed 11-25-97)
§ 155.352 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing
on each application for a change in district boundaries or for combining a
district with a PD or Q District, and on each proposal for a change in district
boundaries or for combining a district with a PD, Q, or an AR District, or for
a change of a district regulation, off-street parking or loading facilities
requirement, general provision, exception, or other provision of this chapter
initiated by the Commission or the Council within 45 days of the date when the
application was filed or the proposal was initiated. Notice of the public
hearing shall be given not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city and, in the case of an application or proposal for a change in district
boundaries, by mailing notice of the time and place of the hearing to all
tenants of property and persons whose names appear on the latest adopted tax
roll of the county as owning property within 300 feet of the boundaries of the
property that is the subject of the hearing, and by posting a notice of minimum
size, approximately two-and-a-half by three feet, in a conspicuous place on or
near the property affected. Failure to post notice shall not invalidate the
proceedings.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2704)
   (B)   Procedure. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review
the application or the proposal and may receive pertinent evidence as to why or
how the proposed change is consistent with the objectives of this chapter
prescribed in § 155.002 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2705) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 621-C.S.,
passed 11-25-97; Am. Ord. 727-C.S., passed 6-17-08)
§ 155.353 INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTS.
   The Director of Community Development shall make an investigation of the
application and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2706) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.354 ACTION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   All applications and proposals.
      (1)   Within 45 days following the closing of a public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall make a specific finding as to whether the change is
consistent with the objectives of this chapter prescribed in § 155.002 of this
chapter and shall recommend that the application be granted, granted in
modified form, or denied or that the proposal be adopted, adopted in modified
form, or rejected. Within five days following the date of a decision, the
Secretary shall transmit written notices of the decision to the Council and to
the applicant, if any. Within 10 days after receiving notice of a public
hearing to be held by the Council, the secretary shall transmit to the Council
the complete record of the case.
      (2)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 45 days following
the closing of a public hearing on the amendment application shall cause the
application to be automatically referred to the City Council accompanied by a
written report unless a time extension is requested by the applicant and
granted by the Commission.
   (B)   Applications and proposals for C Commercial zoning; additional
requirements.
      (1)   In the case of an application or proposal for a change in district
boundaries to increase the amount of land zoned C Commercial, the Planning
Commission may recommend the granting of the application as applied for or in
modified form, or may propose the change in district boundaries only if, on the
basis of the application and the evidence submitted, the Commission makes
findings of fact that establish that the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The development as proposed in the plans and drawings
accompanying the application or proposal will be consistent with the objectives
of this chapter;
         (b)   The development will be of sustained desirability and stability;
         (c)   The development will be harmonious with the character of the
surrounding area;
         (d)   The development will be consistent with the general plan adopted
by the Council and subsequent amendments thereto, if any; and,
         (e)   The development will not result in undue traffic congestion or
traffic hazards.
      (2)   This division shall not apply to annexed territory which was zoned
C Commercial immediately prior to annexation.
   (C)   Applications for Planned Unit Development Districts; additional
requirements. In the case of an application for combining a district with a PD
District, the Planning Commission may recommend the granting of the application
as applied for or in modified form only if, on the basis of the application and
the evidence submitted, the Commission makes findings of fact that establish
that the following circumstances apply:
      (1)   The development as proposed in the plans and drawings accompanying
the application will be consistent with the objectives of this chapter;
      (2)   The proposed location of the planned unit development is consistent
with the purposes of the district in which the site is located;
      (3)   The proposed development will comply with each of the applicable
provisions of this chapter;
      (4)   The development standards will produce an environment of sustained
desirability and stability harmonious with the character of the surrounding
area and consistent with the objectives of the general plan adopted by the
Council and subsequent amendments thereto, if any; and,
      (5)   The combination of dwelling types, lot sizes, and uses in the
development will complement each other and will harmonize with existing and
proposed land uses in the vicinity.
   (D)   Applications for Qualified Combining District; additional
requirements. In the case of an application for combining a district with a Q
District, the Planning Commission may recommend that granting of the
application as applied for or in modified form only if, on the basis of the
application and the evidence submitted, the Commission makes findings of fact
that establish that the following circumstances apply:
      (1)   The development as proposed in the plans and drawings accompanying
the application will be consistent with the objects of this chapter;
      (2)   The location of the specific property and the special qualification
of the district is consistent with the purposes of the district in which the
site is located;
      (3)   The location of the specific property and the special qualification
of the district complies with each of the applicable provisions of this
chapter;
      (4)   The location of the specific property and the special qualification
of the district will produce an environment of sustained desirability and
stability harmonious with the character of the surrounding area and consistent
with the objectives of the general plan adopted by the Council and subsequent
amendments thereto, of any.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2707) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 493-C.S.,
passed 4-20-89; Am. Ord. 621-C.S., passed 11-25-97)
§ 155.355 REQUESTS FOR COUNCIL HEARINGS ON DENIED APPLICATIONS.
   Within 10 days following the date of a decision of the Planning Commission
recommending denial of an application for a change in district boundaries, the
applicant may request a hearing by the Council.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2708) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.356 ACTION OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   All applications and proposals. The Council shall hold a public
hearing on the application or proposal within 45 days after receipt of the
resolution or report of the Planning Commission, provided that no hearing shall
be held on an application for a change in district boundaries that the
Commission has recommended be denied unless a request is received by the
Council as prescribed in § 155.355 of this subchapter, and no hearing shall be
held on a proposal initiated by the Commission that the Commission has
recommended be rejected. Notice of a public hearing shall be given as
prescribed in § 155.352(A) of this subchapter and shall also be given to the
applicant, if any, and to the Commission. At the public hearing, the Council
shall review the application or the proposal and the resolution or the report
of the Commission and may receive additional evidence. Within 45 days following
the closing of a public hearing, the Council shall make a specific finding as
to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this chapter
prescribed in § 155.002 of this chapter. If the Council finds that the change
is consistent, it shall enact an ordinance amending the zoning map or an
ordinance amending the regulations of this chapter, whichever is appropriate.
If the Council finds that the change is not consistent, it shall deny the
application or reject the proposal. The Council shall not modify a decision of
the Commission recommending granting of an application or adoption of a
proposal until it has requested and considered a report of the Commission on
the modification. Failure of the Commission to report within 30 days after
receipt of the Council request shall be deemed concurrence. Within five days
following the date of final action by the Council, the City Clerk shall
transmit a written notice of the decision to the applicant, if any, and to the
Commission and shall return the Commission record to the secretary.
   (B)   Applications and proposals for C Commercial zoning; additional
requirements. In the case of an application or proposal for a change in
district boundaries to increase the amount of land zoned C Commercial, the
Council may affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the Planning Commission
recommending the granting or denial of an application or the adoption or
rejection of a proposal by the Commission, provided that if a decision
recommending denial of an application or rejection of a proposal is reversed by
the Council, or a decision recommending granting an application or adoption of
a proposal is modified by the Council, the Council shall make, on the basis of
the application and the evidence submitted, the findings prerequisite to
recommending the granting of an application or adoption of a proposal as
prescribed in § 155.354(B) of this subchapter.
   (C)   Applications for Planned Unit Development Districts; additional
requirements. In the case of an application for combining a district with a PD
District, the Council may affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the Planning
Commission recommending the granting or denial of the application, provided
that if a decision recommending denying the application is reversed by the
Council, or a decision recommending granting the application is modified by the
Council, the Council shall make, on the basis of the application and the
evidence submitted, the findings prerequisite to recommending the granting of
an application prescribed in § 155.354(C) of this subchapter.
   (D)   Applications for Qualified Districts; additional requirements. In the
case of an application for combining a district with a Q district, the Council
may affirm, reverse, or modify a decision of the Planning Commission
recommending the granting or denial of the application, provided that if a
decision recommending denying the application is reversed by the Council, or a
decision recommending granting the application is modified by the Council, the
Council shall make, the granting of an application prescribed in § 155.354(D)
of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2709) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 621-C.S.,
passed 11-25-97; Am. Ord. 727-C.S., passed 6-17-08)
§ 155.357 RECLASSIFICATION OF C DISTRICT TO FORMER ZONING DISTRICT.
   (A)   In order that opportunity for commercial development in conformity
with the general plan may be permitted on an alternate site if development does
not proceed on a rezoned site, the Planning Commission shall initiate action,
hold a hearing, and transmit a recommendation to the Council on
reclassification of the undeveloped portion of the site rezoned to a C
Commercial District to its former zoning district in accord with §§ 155.350(B)
through 155.354 of this subchapter unless the following actions are completed
within the prescribed time periods dating from the enactment of the ordinance
changing the district boundaries:
      (1)   Within one year, approval as required by §§ 155.180 through 155.187
of this chapter of the plans and drawings prescribed in § 155.351(D)(1) of this
subchapter;
      (2)   Within two years, completion of construction and installation of at
least one-half of the building floor space and improvements shown on the
approved plans and drawings; and,
      (3)   Within five years, completion of construction and installation of
all buildings and improvements shown on the approved plans and drawings.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to annexed territory which was zoned C
Commercial immediately prior to annexation.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2710) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.358 MODIFICATIONS OF SUBMITTED PLANS FOR C DISTRICT DEVELOPMENTS.
   Modifications may be made in the submitted plans prescribed in § 155.351(D)
(1) of this subchapter, provided that if the Director of Community Development
determines that the changes are of a magnitude that affects the findings
prescribed in § 155.354 of this subchapter, he shall refer the modifications to
the Planning Commission and Council for review. If the Commission makes the
findings prescribed in § 155.354(B) of this subchapter, it shall recommend that
the modifications be approved. If the Council makes the findings prescribed in
§ 155.354(B) of this subchapter, the modifications shall be approved, and the
Director of Community Development shall issue a zoning permit provided the
requirements of § 155.357 of this subchapter are met. If the modifications are
not approved by the Council, all development shall conform with the plans
submitted at the time the site was reclassified. The Commission or the Council
may hold a public hearing on a request for modification of submitted plans in
accord with the procedure prescribed in §§ 155.352(A) through 155.356 of this
subchapter. Modifications of plans shall be subject to site plan review as
prescribed in §§ 155.180 through 155.187 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2711) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.359 CHANGE OF ZONING MAP.
   A change in district boundaries or the combining of a district with a PD or
an AR District shall be indicated on the zoning map with a notation of the date
and number of the ordinance amending the map.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2712) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.360 NEW APPLICATIONS.
   Following the denial of an application for a change in district boundaries
or the combining of a district with a PD, Q, or AR District, no application for
the same or substantially the same change shall be filed within one year after
the date of denial of the application.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2713) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 621-C.S.,
passed 11-25-97)
§ 155.361 PREZONING OF UNINCORPORATED TERRITORY.
   Prezoning of unincorporated territory adjoining the city may be initiated as
set forth in § 155.350(B)(2) of this subchapter for the purpose of determining
in which zoning district it should be classified in the event of subsequent
annexation to the city. An ordinance designating a zoning district in
unincorporated territory shall become effective at the same time annexation
becomes effective.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2714) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.362 UNZONED TERRITORY.
   All property within the city which is found to be unzoned for any reason
shall be classified in the same zoning district as adjoining property, if all
adjoining property is in the same district, or in the same district as
adjoining property in the same ownership, or, if these conditions do not exist,
in the S District. All territory which is annexed to the city and which has not
been prezoned shall be classified in the S District. Within 60 days, the
Planning Commission shall make a study of the territory to determine in which
zoning district it should be classified in order to carry out the objectives of
the zoning regulations set forth in § 155.002 of this chapter. If the
Commission finds that a change of district is required, it shall initiate the
change as set forth in § 155.350(B) of this subchapter. The owner of annexed
property or the authorized agent of the owner may file an application for a
change in district as set forth in § 155.350(B) of this subchapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2715) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 144-C.S.,
passed 8-12-70)
GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS
§ 155.365 PURPOSE; AUTHORIZATION; PETITION.
   (A)   Purpose. The General Plan is the foundational policy document of the
City of Eureka. It establishes farsighted policy that forms the basis for and
defines the framework by which the city's physical and economic resources are
to be developed, managed and utilized. As a long-range document, it may be in
the public interest to, from time-to-time, amend the General Plan to respond to
the changing or evolving needs of the community. This subchapter establishes
the processes and procedures required for an amendment to the General Plan. For
the purposes of this subchapter, any reference to the "General Plan" shall
mean, as applicable, reference to the Local Coastal Plan.
   (B)   Authority. Under the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code § 65358, authority
to initiate an amendment to the General Plan shall be vested with the
legislative body of the City of Eureka.
   (C)   Petition. The Planning Commission, or the owner(s) or authorized agent
(s) of the owner(s) of property subject to a proposed General Plan Amendment,
shall petition the City Council requesting that the Council of the City of
Eureka initiate upon their behalf an amendment to the General Plan.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.366 PETITION REQUIREMENTS; MAPS AND FEES.
   (A)   Data to be furnished. The property owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of
the owner(s) of property desiring a General Plan Amendment shall file with the
Director of Community Development a Petition for a General Plan Amendment on
forms prescribed by the Planning Commission, which shall include the following
data:
      (1)   Name and address of the petitioner(s);
      (2)   Statement that the petitioner is the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner of property for which a General Plan Amendment is proposed;
      (3)   Address or description of the property subject to the General Plan
Amendment;
      (4)   A written description of the purpose of the proposed General Plan
Amendment and including a description of the intended development, use, and
improvements to the property subject of the General Plan Amendment;
      (5)   A written statement as to why the petitioner believes the General
Plan Amendment is in the public interest, which shall include evidence to
support at least one of the following:
         (a)   How the fundamental information upon which the General Plan was
prepared and adopted has changed;
         (b)   How the physical conditions or infrastructure servicing the area
has changed;
         (c)   How the community values, standards or principles have changed;
         (d)   How there is an error in the General Plan;
      (6)   A written statement that includes evidence supporting the fact that
the proposed General Plan Amendment is internally consistent with the adopted
General Plan.
   (B)   Maps.
      (1)   The petition shall be accompanied by draft maps, plans, drawings,
photographs, pictures, or other representations of the property subject to the
proposed General Plan Amendment adequately illustrating, at a minimum, the
existing and proposed buildings and uses, locations of streets, property lines,
driveways, pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading
facilities, landscaped areas, drainage facilities, resource protection
measures, fences, and walls.
      (2)   The Director of Community Development may require additional
information, plans, and drawings if they are necessary for an accurate
understanding of the requested General Plan Amendment.
      (3)   The Director may authorize omission of any or all of the plans and
drawings required by this section if the Director determines that they are not
necessary for an accurate understanding of the requested General Plan
Amendment.
   (C)   Fees. The petition shall be accompanied by a fee established by
resolution of the Council to cover the cost of processing the petition as
prescribed in this subchapter.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.367 PUBLIC MEETING; NOTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Notice. The City Council shall consider the petition at a public
meeting. A notice of the petition request shall be given not less than ten days
nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the meeting by publication of the
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
   (B)   Procedure. At the meeting, the City Council shall review the petition
and may receive public testimony regarding the proposed General Plan amendment.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.368 INVESTIGATIONS AND REPORTS.
   The Director of Community Development shall make an investigation of the
petition and shall prepare a report thereon which shall be submitted to the
City Council. The report shall include a discussion of whether, in the opinion
of the Director, the proposed General Plan amendment is in the public interest,
whether the proposed General Plan amendment conflicts with the adopted General
Plan, and, if in the Coastal Zone, whether the proposed General Plan amendment
conflicts with the adopted Local Coastal Plan and/or Coastal Act.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.369 ACTION OF CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The City Council shall review the report prepared by the Director of
Community Development, the materials submitted by the petitioner along with any
public testimony and determine whether the Council believes that the requested
General Plan amendment is in the public interest.
      (1)   If the City Council believes that the requested General Plan
amendment is, or has the potential to be in the public interest, the City
Council shall by a majority vote initiate the proposed General Plan amendment
on behalf of the petitioner(s); and shall direct the petitioner to file a
complete application as prescribed herein and as regulated and stipulated by
law.
         (a)   The City Council's action to initiate the General Plan amendment
on behalf of the petitioner is not a tacit, implied or guarantee of approval of
the General Plan amendment, nor does it bind the current or future City Council
with regard to the proposed General Plan amendment.
      (2)   If the City Council believes that the requested General Plan
amendment is not in the public interest, and/or that further study and
evaluation will not show that the proposed General Plan amendment is in the
public interest, the City Council shall by a majority vote deny the petition
request.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.370 INITIATION REQUIREMENTS; MAPS AND FEES.
   (A)   Data to be furnished. If the City Council by majority vote initiated
the proposed General Plan amendment on behalf of the petitioner, the petitioner
(s) shall be responsible for filing with the Director of Community Development
a complete application initiating the proposed General Plan amendment. The
proposed General Plan amendment shall be as initiated by the City Council. The
application shall be on forms prescribed by the Planning Commission and shall
include the following data:
      (1)    Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner of property for which the General Plan amendment is proposed;
      (3)   Address or description of the property subject to the General Plan
amendment;
      (4)   A written description of the purpose of the proposed General Plan
amendment and including a description of the intended development, use, and
improvements to the property subject of the General Plan amendment;
      (5)   A written statement as to why the petitioner believes the General
Plan amendment is in the public interest, which shall include evidence to
support at least one of the following:
         (a)   How the fundamental information upon which the General Plan was
prepared and adopted has changed;
         (b)   How the physical conditions or infrastructure servicing the area
has changed;
         (c)   How the community values, standards or principles have changed;
         (d)   How there is an error in the General Plan;
      (6)   A written statement that includes evidence supporting the fact that
the proposed General Plan amendment is internally consistent with the adopted
General Plan;
      (7)   Studies, reports, analysis, information and documentation necessary
for processing the General Plan amendment as prescribed by law.
   (B)   Maps.
      (1)   The application for initiation of the General Plan amendment shall
be accompanied by scale maps, plans, drawings, photographs, pictures, or other
representations of the property subject to the proposed General Plan amendment
adequately and precisely illustrating, at a minimum, the existing and proposed
buildings and uses, locations of streets, property lines, driveways, pedestrian
walks, off-street parking and off-street loading facilities, landscaped areas,
drainage facilities, resource protection measures, fences, and walls.
      (2)   The Director of Community Development may require additional
information, plans, and drawings as necessary to comply with law.
   (C)   Fees. The General Plan amendment application shall be accompanied by a
fee established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.371 PUBLIC HEARINGS; NOTICE AND PROCEDURE.
   The Community Development Department shall process the General Plan
amendment application as regulated and stipulated by law, including but not
limited to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65358 et seq., and as prescribed in §§ 155.350 et
seq.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
§ 155.372 NEW PETITION APPLICATIONS.
   Following the denial of a petition for a General Plan amendment, no
application for the same or substantially the same amendment shall be filed
within two years after the date of denial of the petition. However, the
Planning Commission or City Council, at their discretion, may allow the filing
of a new or substantially new petition application within the two year time
period provided it can be shown that a change in the conditions or
circumstances under which the Council determined that the proposed General Plan
amendment was not in the public interest have occurred.
(Ord. 665-C.S., passed 1-7-03)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.375 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   An appeal may be made to the Planning Commission by any interested party
from any administrative determination or interpretation made by the Director of
Community Development or the Building Official under this chapter. An appeal
shall be made on a form prescribed by the Board and shall be filed with the
secretary. The Board may affirm, modify, or reverse any administrative
determination or interpretation from which an appeal is made and, in making its
decision, shall be guided by the objectives and purposes of this chapter. The
decision of the Board shall be rendered within 30 days after filing, except
that the time for consideration may be extended by agreement between the
applicant and the Board. In the absence of an agreement for time extension,
failure of the Board to render a decision within 30 days shall be deemed to
reverse the administrative determination or interpretation. A decision of the
Board may be appealed to the Council by the applicant as provided in §§
39.01 through
39.03 of this code.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2801) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 155.376 PERMITS, CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES.
   All officials, departments and employees of the city vested with the
authority or duty to issue permits, certificates or licenses shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit, certificate or
license which conflicts with the provisions of this chapter. Any permit,
certificate or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter
shall be void.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2802) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.377 DUTIES OF CITY OFFICIALS.
   The Community Development Director shall be the official responsible for the
enforcement of the zoning regulations. The Director of Community Development
and the Building Official, or their deputies, shall have the right to enter on
any site or to enter any structure for the purpose of investigation and
inspection related to any provision of this chapter, provided that the right of
entry shall be exercised only at reasonable hours and that in no case shall any
structure be entered in the absence of the owner or tenant without the written
order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The Director of Community
Development or the Building Official may serve notice requiring the removal of
any structure or use in violation of the regulations on the owner or his
authorized agent, on a tenant, or on an architect, builder, contractor, or
other person who commits or participates in any violation. The Director of
Community Development or the Building Official may call upon the City Attorney
to institute necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, and the City Attorney hereby is authorized to institute appropriate
actions to that end. The Director of Community Development or the Building
Official may call upon the Chief of Police and his authorized agents to assist
in the enforcement of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2803) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 779-C.S., passed 1-17-12)
§ 155.378 VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any structure or sign erected, moved, altered, enlarged, or maintained
and any use of a site contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and
is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City Attorney
shall immediately institute necessary legal proceedings for the abatement,
removal, and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, shall take such
other steps as may be necessary to accomplish these ends, and shall apply to a
court of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will remove or abate
the structure, sign, or use and restrain or enjoin the person, firm,
corporation, or organization from erecting, moving, altering, or enlarging the
structure or sign or using the site contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not
exclusive.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of the certified local coastal
program adopted pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code Division 20, shall be subject
to the penalties contained therein (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 30820 et seq.).
('63 Code, § 10-5.2804) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66; Am. Ord. 417-C.S.,
passed 12-6-84)
§ 155.379 VOIDABLE CONVEYANCES.
   Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell made contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be voidable at the sole option of the grantee,
buyer, or person contracting to purchase, his heirs, personal representative,
or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy, within one year after the date of
execution of the deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell, but the deed of
conveyance, sale, or contract to sell shall be binding upon any assignee or
transferee of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, other than
those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to
sell or his assignee, heir, or advisee.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2805) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.380 EFFECTIVE DATE OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall be in force and effect on and
after October 16, 1966 as to all property in the city except that property
described in Ordinance No. 2931, adopted by majority vote of the electors of
the city at the general municipal election on June 10, 1963, and effective June
21, 1963, entitled “An Ordinance to Amend Ordinance 2575 (Comprehensive) to
Reclassify from R-1 Single-Family Residential to C-2 Central Commercial Zone of
an Area Bounded Generally by Henderson, Ocean, Harris, and Spring Streets,” as
to which property these regulations shall be in force and effect on and after
June 21, 1968.
   (B)   The effective time period for all procedures under this chapter prior
to October 16, 1966, shall remain in force.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2806) (Ord. 80-C.S., passed 10-16-66)
§ 155.381 NOTIFICATION OF LITIGATION CONCERNING COASTAL ZONE DEVELOPMENT AND
ATTORNEY GENERAL INTERVENTION.
   The provisions of Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 30800 et seq. shall apply to
development in the city coastal zone and in any case where no appeal has been
filed from the decision of the city on a development permit in the coastal zone
(including decisions on nonappealable developments) or, where an appeal has
been filed, but the Commission has determined not to hear the appeal, and when
litigation has subsequently been commenced against the city concerning its
decision, the city and plaintiff or petitioner shall promptly forward a copy of
the complaint or petition to the Executive Director of the California Coastal
Commission. At the request of the local government, and with the concurrence of
the California Coastal Commission, the Executive Director shall request the
Attorney General to intervene in such litigation on behalf of the California
Coastal Commission. Administrative remedies pertaining to coastal development
permits are not deemed to have been exhausted unless all appeal procedures
provided by the California Coastal Act (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 30000 et seq.)
and these regulations have been exhausted.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2807) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
CHAPTER 156: COASTAL ZONING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Objectives and purposes
   
156.003   Nature of coastal zoning regulations
   
156.004   Interpretation
   
156.005   Application; developers to comply; exceptions
   
156.006   Definitions
   
156.007   Incorporation by reference
   
156.008   Districts
   
156.009   District boundaries
   
156.010   Conformity required
   
156.011   Establishment of districts by map
   
156.012   Division of land use and zoning map
   
156.013   Drainage requirements; purposes
   
156.014   Designation of drainage control area
   
156.015   Required conditions
   
156.016   Drainage control plan to be approved
   
156.017   Drainage control plan to be submitted
   
156.018   Referral to and action of Director of Public Works
   
156.019   Action of City Council
   
156.020   Status of approved drainage control plan
   
156.021   Drainage control, minimum floor elevation, and site grading
Requirements and Regulations
   
156.030   Basic requirements for all districts
   
156.031   Extensions over property lines and easements
   
156.032   Site area and dimensions; requirements and exceptions; nonconforming
sites
   
156.033   Front yards; requirements and exceptions
   
156.034   Side and rear yards; requirements and exceptions
   
156.035   Traffic sight obstructions
   
156.036   Projections into yards
   
156.037   Height limits
   
156.038   Accessory structures
   
156.039   Usable open space
   
156.040   Screening and landscaping
   
156.041   Emergency Shelters
Coastal Zone Development Standards
   
156.050   Application
   
156.051   Public access standards
   
156.052   Environmental resource standards
   
156.053   Natural hazards standards
   
156.054   Visual resources standards
   
156.055   Public works standards
   
156.056   Development standards
Specific Districts
   
156.065   WC — Conservation Water District
   
156.066   WD — Development Water District
   
156.067   NR — Natural Resources District
   
156.068   AC — Coastal Agricultural District
   
156.069   RS — One-Family Residential Districts
   
156.070   RM — Multi-Family Residential Districts
   
156.071   OR — Office and Multi-Family Residential Districts
   
156.072   CW — Waterfront Commercial Districts
   
156.073   CN — Neighborhood Commercial Districts
   
156.074   CS — Service Commercial District
   
156.075   CP — Planned Shopping Center Commercial Districts
   
156.076   MC — Coastal Dependent Industrial Districts
   
156.077   ML — Limited Industrial Districts
   
156.078   MG — General Industrial Districts
   
156.079   P — Public Districts
   
156.080   PF/M — Public Facility/Marina
   
156.081   PD — Planned Unit Development Combining Districts
   
156.082   AR — Architectural Review Combining District
   
156.083   Q - Qualified Combining District
Coastal Development Permit Procedures
   
156.095   Purposes
   
156.096   Applicability; permit required
   
156.097   Exemptions; notice of exempt development
   
156.098   Categorical exclusions; notice of excluded development
   
156.099   Application requirements; fees
   
156.100   Action on coastal development permit
   
156.101   Public hearing on developments; notice
   
156.102   Notice of local government action where hearing continued
   
156.103   Public hearing notice; coastal zone procedures
   
156.104   Notice of developments not appealable to the Coastal Commission that
do not require a public hearing; permitted uses
   
156.105   Reserved
   
156.106   Determination of applicable notice and hearing procedures
   
156.107   Required findings
   
156.108   Appeals
   
156.109   Finality of city action
   
156.110   Final city action; notice
   
156.111   Failure to act; notice
   
156.112   Local government action; effective date
   
156.113   Exhaustion of local appeals
   
156.114   Emergency coastal development permit
   
156.115   Amendments to coastal development permits
   
156.116   Lapse of coastal development permit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the Zoning Regulations of
the City for the Coastal Zone.”
('63 Code, § 10-5.2901) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.002 OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSES.
   The purposes of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect, maintain, and where feasible, enhance and restore the overall
quality of the coastal zone environment and its natural and human-created
resources.
   (B)   Assure orderly, balanced utilization and conservation of coastal zone
resources, taking into account the social and economic needs of the people of
this city, the region, state, and nation.
   (C)   Maximize public access to and along the Humboldt Bay shoreline, and
maximize public recreational opportunities in the coastal zone, consistent with
sound resource conservation principles and constitutionally protected rights of
private property owners.
   (D)   Assure priority for coastal-dependent and coastal-related development
over other developments on the shoreline.
   (E)   Provide a definite plan for development so as to guide the future
growth of the city within the coastal zone.
   (F)   Protect the social and economic character and stability of
residential, commercial, agricultural and industrial areas within the city.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2902) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.003 NATURE OF COASTAL ZONING REGULATIONS.
   This chapter shall consist of two land use and zoning maps. Map 1 depicts
that part of the city's coastal zone west and south from the easternmost point
of Daby Island to the southerly city limits. Map 2 depicts that part of the
city's coastal zone east, southeast, and northeast from Daby Island to the
northeasterly city limits at Indianola. The zoning maps designate specific
districts and establish a set of regulations to control the uses of land and
water within the city's coastal zone; the density of population; the bulk,
locations, and uses of structures; the areas and dimensions of sites; the
appearance of certain uses, structures, and signs; the provision of usable open
space, including public access, screening, and landscaping; off-street parking
and loading facilities; and the location of signs. The zoning maps shall be
maintained in the Department of Community Development and be available for
public inspection and use at the public counter of the Department during normal
business hours.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2903) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.004 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements. No provision of this chapter
is intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any provision
of this code; provided, however, where the provisions of this chapter impose a
greater restriction on the use of land or structures, or the height or bulk of
structures, or require greater open spaces about structures, or greater areas
or dimensions of sites, or impose a greater restriction on the location, size,
illumination, or subject matter of signs than is imposed or required by other
provisions of this code, the provisions of this chapter shall control. If any
conflict occurs between one or more provisions of this chapter, such conflict
shall be resolved in a manner which on balance is the most protective of
significant coastal resources. If any provision of this chapter conflicts with
any provision of any regulation contained in any previously adopted ordinance
of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to abrogate, annul,
impair, or interfere with any deed restriction, covenant, easement, or other
agreement between parties; provided, however, where the provisions of this
chapter impose a greater restriction on the use of land or structures, or the
height or bulk of structures, or require greater open spaces about structures,
or greater areas or dimensions of sites than is imposed or required by deed
restriction, covenant, easement, or other agreement, the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2904) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.005 APPLICATION; DEVELOPERS TO COMPLY; EXCEPTIONS.
   Any person (including the city, any utility, any federal, state, local
government, or special district or any agency thereof) wishing to perform or
undertake any development within the coastal zone of the city shall comply with
the provisions of this chapter, with the following exceptions:
   (A)   Land, the use of which is by law subject solely to the discretion of
or which is held in trust by the federal government, its officers or agents, 16
USC 1451, Federal Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972, as amended.
   (B)   New or expanded thermal electric generating plants and electric
transmission lines connecting such plants to existing electric transmission
systems under the exclusive jurisdiction of the California Energy Resources
Conservation and Development Commission (Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 25500 and
30264).
   (C)   New or expanded LNG (liquefied natural gas) terminal facilities under
the exclusive jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission (Cal.
Pub. Res. Code § 30262(b)).
   (D)   Any development proposed or undertaken on any tidelands, submerged
lands, or on public trust lands, whether filled or unfilled (Cal. Pub. Res.
Code § 30519).
   (E)   Any development proposed or undertaken within any state university or
college (Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 30519).
('63 Code, § 10-5.2905) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign having more than one-half its area devoted to
directing attention to a business, profession, commodity, or service that is
not the primary business, profession, commodity, or service sold, manufactured,
conducted, or offered on the site on which the sign is located.
   AGGRIEVED PERSON. Any person who, in person or through a representative,
appeared at a public hearing of the approving authority in connection with the
decision or action appealed, or who, by other appropriate means prior to a
hearing, informed the local government of the nature of his or her concerns or
who for good cause was unable to do either.
   ALLEY. A public way permanently reserved primarily for vehicular service
access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
   ALLOWABLE USE. Any use allowed by right which does not require a public
hearing or any discretionary or nondiscretionary permit from the approving
authority.
   ALTER. To make a change in the supporting members of a structure, such as
bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, which change will prolong the life
of the structure.
   APPEALABLE DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following:
      (1)   Developments approved by the city between the sea and the first
public road paralleling the sea, or within 300 feet of the inland extent of any
beach or of the mean high tide line of the sea where there is no beach,
whichever is the greater distance, as generally indicated on the official
appeals zone maps approved by the Coastal Commission.
      (2)   Developments approved by the city not included within subsection
(1) of this definition, but located on tidelands, submerged lands, public trust
lands, or within 100 feet of any wetland, estuary, or stream, or within 300
feet of the top of the seaward face of any coastal bluff, as generally
indicated on the official appeals zone maps approved by the Coastal Commission.
      (3)   Any development which constitutes a major public works project or a
major energy facility.
   APPELLANT. Any person who may file an appeal, which includes an applicant,
any aggrieved person, or any two members of the Coastal Commission.
   APPLICANT. The person, partnership, corporation, or state or local
governmental agency applying for a coastal development permit.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The city official, Planning Commission, or Council that
approves a coastal development permit.
   BLOCK. The properties abutting on one side of a street and lying between the
two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or nearest intersecting or
intercepting street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided land, watercourse,
or city boundary.
   BOUTIQUE. A shop that specializes in selling sophisticated or fashionable
clothing and accessories, or unique or harder to find items. A BOUTIQUE is
smaller and more intimate than a STORE.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. For
the purposes of this section, BUILDING shall mean manufactured homes and
mobilehomes as hereinafter defined.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. The Chief Building Official of the city.
   CATEGORICALLY EXCLUDED DEVELOPMENT. A development (upon request of the city,
public agency or other person) which the Coastal Commission has determined
pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 30610(e) to have no potential for significant
adverse environmental effect's and therefore has issued an exclusion from the
coastal development permit requirements in accordance with the applicable
regulations.
   CHARITABLE INSTITUTION. A non-profit institution devoted to the housing,
training, or care of children, or of aged, indigent, handicapped, or
underprivileged persons, but not including lodging houses, or dormitories
providing temporary quarters for transient unemployed persons, organizations
devoted to collecting or salvaging new or used materials, or organizations
devoted principally to distributing food, clothing or supplies on a charitable
basis.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the city.
   CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney of the city.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the city.
   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION and COMMISSION. The duly appointed City Planning
Commission.
   COASTAL COMMISSION. The California Coastal Commission.
   COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A letter or certificate issued by the city in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, after the applicant has
submitted all necessary supplementary documentation required to satisfy the
conditions precedent in the notice to issue a coastal development permit.
   COMMERCIAL USES INCIDENTAL TO THE PRIMARY COASTAL DEPENDENT INDUSTRIAL USE.
Those certain commercial uses allowed within the Core Coastal-Dependent
Industrial Area which are minor in significance, subordinate to, and directly
related to the primary coastal-dependent industrial uses for which the area is
designated. COMMERCIAL USES INCIDENTAL TO THE PRIMARY COASTAL DEPENDENT
INDUSTRIAL USE include, but are not limited to, retail sales and services of
goods produced or functional work provided at the site, such as fish markets or
seafood restaurants at commercial fish processing facilities, and facility tour
areas.
   COURT. An unoccupied open space on the same site with a building, which
space is bounded on three or more sides by exterior building walls.
   DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines of
a site measured along a line midway between the side property lines.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the city.
   DISTRICT. A portion of the city within which the use of land and structures
and the location, height and bulk of structures are governed by this chapter.
   DRIVE-IN. An establishment serving food or beverages to customers who remain
in or leave and return to their cars for consumption and including
establishments with drive-up or drive-through window services.
   DELICATESSEN STORE. An establishment which primarily retails cooked meats,
foods and condiments for consumption off the premises, and which does not offer
the range of meats, foods and goods carried by food stores or supermarkets, but
which may have accessory seating for not more than 12 persons within an
enclosed structure, and on-site consumption of food outside the enclosed
structure is not permitted.
   DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE and COMMITTEE. The duly appointed Design Review
Committee established by §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title.
   DEVELOPMENT. On land, in or under water, the placement or erection of any
solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or
of any gaseous, liquid, solid, or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging,
mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the density or intensity of
use of land, including but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the
Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Cal. Gov't Code § 66410), and any other
division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is
brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency
for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of
access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the
size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or
municipal utility; and the removal or harvesting of major vegetation other than
for agricultural purposes, kelp harvesting, and timber operations which are in
accordance with a timber harvesting plan submitted pursuant to the provisions
of the Z'berg-Nejedly Forest Practice Act of 1973 (commencing with Section
4511). As used in this section, “structure” includes, but is not limited to,
any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and
electrical power transmission and distribution line.
   DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. The Director of Community Development of
the city.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works of the city.
   DRIVEWAY. A private road, the use of which is limited to persons residing or
working on the site and their invitees, licensees, and business visitors, and
which provides access to off-street parking or loading facilities.
   DWELLING. A one-family dwelling or multi-family dwelling other than an
automobile trailer, hotel, motel, labor camp, camp car, tent, railroad car, or
temporary structure.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms and a single kitchen designed for occupancy
by one family for living and sleeping purposes.
   EMERGENCY. A sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to
prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property, or essential
public services.
   EMERGENCY SHELTER. A facility providing housing, supervision and needed
support services to homeless persons on a day to day basis, with a duration of
residency not to exceed six months. Emergency shelters are intended to provide
interim, temporary housing to residents for whom other housing options are not
readily available or affordable, and are not intended to provide long term
housing needs. Standards are included in §
156.041 of this chapter to ensure that this intent is met.
(Ord. 631-C.S., passed 9-7-99)
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, or a group of not more than five persons, not including servants, who
need not be related, living as a single housekeeping unit.
   FLOOR AREA, BASIC. The total amount of gross floor area a building contains
expressed as a percentage of the total area of the lot.
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A residence wherein the owner or proprietor is certified
and supervised by the Department of Mental Hygiene of the state to furnish food
and lodging in a family atmosphere plus varying amounts of custodial care to
one or more persons, not exceeding six persons, who have been “gravely
disabled” as defined in Cal. Welf. and Inst. Code § 5008(h).
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the several
floors of a building and its accessory buildings on the same site excluding:
basement or cellar areas used only for storage; space used for off-street
parking or loading; steps, patios, decks, terraces, porches, and exterior
balconies, if not enclosed on more than three sides. Unless excepted above,
floor area includes, but is not limited to, elevator shafts and stairwells
measured at each floor (but not mechanical shafts, penthouses, enclosed
porches, interior balconies, and mezzanines).
   FRONTAGE. The property line of a site abutting on a street, other than the
side line of a corner lot. FRONTAGE shall be measured as the shortest distance
between the points at which the side property lines intersect the street
property line.
   GARAGE or CARPORT. An accessory structure, or a portion of a main structure,
having a permanent roof and designed for the storage of motor vehicles.
   GARAGE, REPAIR. A structure or part thereof where motor vehicles or parts
thereof are repaired or painted.
   GARAGE, PARKING. A structure or part thereof used for the storage, parking,
or servicing of motor vehicles, but not for the repair thereof.
   GARDEN SHOP. A shop that specializes in selling hand gardening tools, garden
décor, small plants, and seeds. A GARDEN SHOP does not contain a plant nursery,
large outdoor product displays, or large bags or quantities of mulch, compost,
fertilizer, or soil.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room meeting the requirements of
Chapter 150 of this title for sleeping, living, cooking, or, dining purposes,
excluding such enclosed spaces as closets, pantries, bath or toilet rooms,
service rooms, connecting corridors, laundries, unfinished attics, foyers,
storage spaces, cellars, utility rooms, and similar spaces.
   HOME OCCUPATION. The conduct of an art or profession, the offering of a
service, the conduct of a business, or the handcraft manufacture or products in
a dwelling in accordance with the provisions of §
155.215 of this title.
   HOTEL. See MOTEL.
   INDIRECT ILLUMINATION. Illumination of a sign by means of light cast upon it
from a concealed source outside the sign itself.
   INTERSECTION, STREET. The area common to two or more intersecting streets.
   JUNK YARD. A site or portion of a site on which waste, discarded, or
salvaged materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, cleaned, packed,
disassembled, or handled, including used furniture and household equipment
yards, house wrecking yards, used lumber yards, and the like, except a site on
which such uses are conducted within a completely enclosed structure and except
SCRAP METAL YARDS as defined in this section. An establishment for the sale,
purchase, or storage of used cars or salvaged machinery in operable condition
and the processing of used or salvaged materials as part of a manufacturing
operation shall not be deemed a junk yard. A MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING YARD, as
defined in this section, shall be deemed a junk yard.
   HALFWAY HOUSE. A residence wherein food, lodging, and a certain amount of
custodial and counseling care as provided to one or more persons who have
recently been released from either a state penal institution or from a federal
penal institution.
   KENNEL. Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where
four or more dogs or cats four months of age or older are kept.
   LIVING ROOM. The principal room designed for general living purposes in a
dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall have a living room.
   LOCAL COASTAL PROGRAM. The city's land use plan, zoning ordinance, zoning
maps, and other implementing actions certified by the Coastal Commission as
meeting the requirements of the California Coastal Act of 1976.
   LODGING HOUSE. A dwelling in which lodging or lodging and meals are provided
for compensation for more than three but not more than 15 persons other than
members of the resident family, excepting a NURSING HOME as defined in this
section.
   LOT. See SITE.
   LOT, CORNER. A site bounded by two or more adjacent street lines which have
an angle of intersection of not more than 135°.
   LOT, CORRIDOR. A site with access to a street by means of a corridor having
not less than 20 feet of frontage and a width less than the required site width
but at no point less than 20 feet. The length of a corridor shall be measured
from the frontage line to the nearest point of intersection with that property
line parallel most nearly parallel to the frontage line. The area of an access
corridor shall not be included in determining the site area of a corridor lot.
   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE. An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets. For the purpose of determining front yard
requirements, both frontages shall be deemed front lot lines.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT, KEY. The first interior lot to the rear of a reversed corner lot.
   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot, the side line of which is substantially
a continuation of the front property line of the first lot to its rear.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. A line separating an interior lot from a street, or a line
separating either the narrower or the wider street frontage of a corner lot
from a street at the option of the owner.
   LOT LINE, REAR. A lot line, not a front lot line, which is parallel or
approximately parallel to the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45°
of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line
shall be deemed the rear lot line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body
feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling
with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required
utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical
systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure
which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size
requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a
certification and complies with the standards established under this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME includes a mobile home subject to 42 USC § 5401 et seq. 
(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18007)
   MOBILEHOME. A structure that meets the requirements of the definition of a
MANUFACTURED HOME. MOBILEHOME does not include a commercial coach, as defined
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18001.8, factory-built housing, as defined Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 19971, or a recreational vehicle, as defined in Cal.
Health & Safety Code § 18010.
(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18008)
   MOBILEHOME PARK. Any area or tract of land where two or more lots or spaces
are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate manufactured
homes or mobilehomes used for human habitation.
   MODULAR HOME. Factory-built housing certified as meeting the local or State
Building Code as applicable to modular housing. Once certified by the state,
modular homes shall be subject to the same standards as site-built homes.
   MOTEL or HOTEL. A structure or portion thereof or a group of attached or
detached structures, containing completely furnished individual guest rooms or
suites, containing on a transient basis for compensation, and in which more
than 60% of the individual guest rooms or suites are without kitchens or
cooking facilities.
   MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING YARD. A site or portion of a site on which the
dismantling or wrecking of used vehicles, whether self-propelled or not, or the
storage, sale, or dumping of dismantled or wrecked vehicles or their parts is
conducted. The presence outside a fully enclosed structure of three or more
used motor vehicles which are not capable of operating under their own power
shall constitute prima facie evidence of a MOTOR VEHICLE WRECKING YARD. A MOTOR
VEHICLE WRECKING YARD shall be deemed a junk yard.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A structure, containing more than one dwelling unit,
designed for occupancy or occupied by more than one family.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character which was lawfully erected or displayed, but which does not conform
with standards for location, size, or illumination for the district in which it
is located by reason of the adoption or amendment of this chapter, or by reason
of annexation of territory to the city.
   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE. A structure which was lawfully erected, but which
does not conform with the standards for yard spaces, height of structures, or
distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in
which the structure is located by reason of the adoption or amendment of this
chapter, or by reason of annexation of territory to the city.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use of a structure or land which was lawfully
established and maintained, but which does not conform with the use regulations
or required conditions for the district in which it is located by reason of the
adoption or amendment of this chapter, or by reason of annexation of territory
to the city.
   NOTICE TO ISSUE COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A letter or certificate issued
by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, approving a
development subject to fulfillment of conditions prior to issuance of a coastal
development permit, but if such conditions are fulfilled, as being in
conformance with and adequate to carry out the Local Coastal Program.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. A school for five or more pre-elementary school age
children, or the use of a site or portion of a site for a group day-care
program for five children or more other than those resident on the site,
including a day nursery, play group, or after-school group.
   NURSING HOME. A structure operated as a lodging house in which nursing,
dietary, and other personal services are rendered to convalescents, invalids,
or aged persons, not including persons suffering from contagious or mental
diseases, alcoholism, or drug addition, and in which surgery is not performed
and primary treatments, such as customarily are given in hospitals or
sanitariums, are not provided. A convalescent home or a rest home shall be
deemed a NURSING HOME.
   OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES. Site or portion of a site devoted to the
loading or unloading of motor vehicles or trailers, including loading berths,
aisles, access drives, and landscaped areas.
   OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES. A site or portion of a site devoted to the
off-street parking of motor vehicles, including parking spaces, aisles, access
drives, and landscaped areas.
   OIL AND GAS PIPELINE. Any public or private facility for transmitting
hydrocarbons.
   ONE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for and/or occupied as a residence
by one family or individual. ONE-FAMILY DWELLING shall include manufactured
homes when placed on permanent foundation, converted to real property, and
taxed as a site-built dwelling as provided by law.
   ORIEL WINDOW. A window which projects from the main line of an enclosing
wall of a building and is carried on brackets or corbels.
   OTHER PERMITS AND APPROVALS. Permits and approvals, other than a coastal
development permit, required to be issued by the approving authority before a
development may proceed.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING STRUCTURE. A structure of any kind or character, erected
or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any advertising sign
may be placed.
   PATIO, COVERED. An attached or detached structure not exceeding 14 feet in
height and enclosed on not more than three sides except for posts necessary for
roof support.
   PERMITTED USE. Any use allowed by right which does not require a public
hearing, but does require a discretionary or non-discretionary permit (such as,
building permit) to be issued by the approving authority.
   PRE-EXISTING. Prior to the adoption of this chapter.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. An organization which provides an essential commodity or
basic service to the public, such as water, energy, transportation, or
telecommunications. Utilities may be publicly or privately owned.
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land on which railroad tracks, switching
equipment, signals and other facilities normally associated with and owned by a
railroad are located. Areas of railroad rights-of-way may be used solely for
the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, and other operative devices and
facilities related to and necessary for the operation of a railroad, and for
public accessways at or above grade to and along the shoreline.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle with or without motive power designed for
human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy meeting the criteria
of Cal. Health and Safety Code Division 13, Part 2.11, § 18215.5. A
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall include a motorhome, travel trailer, truck camper or
camping trailer.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK.  
   (1)   Any area or tract of land or a separate designated section within a
mobilehome park, where one or more lots are rented or leased or held out for
rent, or lease to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents used for
travel or recreational purposes on a transient basis.
   (2)   Notwithstanding division (1) above, an area or tract of land zoned for
agricultural purposes where two or more lots are rented or leased, or held out
for rent or lease, to owners or users of recreational vehicles or tents for the
purpose of housing 12 or fewer agricultural employees, shall not be deemed a
recreational vehicle park.
(Cal. Health & Safety Code § 18215)
   SATELLITE TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. Government and private facilities that
transmit a variety of data through satellites, including photos of the earth,
messages to and from public safety officials, and a variety of other
information.
   SCRAP METAL YARD. A site or portion of a site used for storage, sorting,
collecting, or baling of previously semi-prepared scrap metal, provided that no
burning shall be permitted.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the City Planning Commission and Design Review
Committee.
   SERVICE STATION. A place where gasoline or any other motor fuel, lubricating
oil, or grease for the operation of motor vehicles is offered for sale to the
public and deliveries are made directly into the vehicle, including the sale of
accessories, performance of minor repairs and lubrication, and the washing of
automobiles where no chain conveyor or blower is used.
   SHOP. A small, usually independent retail location that offers specialized
services or products. The size of the SHOP is determined relative to other
similar visitor-serving and retail businesses in the Waterfront Commercial zone
district.
   SIGN. Any lettering or symbol made of cloth, metal, paint, paper, wood, or
other material of any kind whatsoever placed for advertising, identification,
or other purposes on the ground or on any bush, tree, rock, wall, post, fence
building, structure, vehicle, or on any place whatsoever. The term “placed”
shall include constructing, erecting, posting, painting, printing, tacking,
nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing, or making
visible in any manner whatsoever beyond the boundaries of a site.
   SIGN AREA. The area of a sign having an integral part of a building, awning,
canopy, or marquee as its background shall be the area within the shortest line
drawn to include all letters, designs, and tubing which are a part of the sign.
The area of all other signs shall be the largest cross-sectional area of the
sign measured to a line encompassing all portions of the sign, including
background and tubing, but excluding supporting posts without attached
lighting. In computing the area of a sign having more than one face, all faces
of the sign shall be included.
   SIGN, SUBDIVISION. Any sign located either on or off a subdivision tract,
which sign indicates the direction to or advertises the location, existence, or
sale of a subdivision or any part thereof.
   SINGLE OWNERSHIP. Holding record title, possession under a contract to
purchase, or possession under a lease by a person, firm, corporation, or
partnership, individually, jointly, in common, or in any other manner whereby
the property is or will be under unitary or unified control.
   SITE or LOT. A parcel of land or a portion thereof, considered as a unit,
devoted to or intended for a use or occupied by a structure or a group of
structures that are united by a common interest or use. A SITE or LOT shall
have frontage on a street.
   SITE AREA. The total horizontal area included within the property lines of a
site, exclusive of the area of access corridors, streets, portions of the site
within future street plan lines, and portions of the site within which a square
having a minimum dimension of 35 feet cannot be inscribed.
   SPA. A commercial establishment offering a variety of services to improve
health and beauty and provide relaxation through personal care treatments such
as baths, saunas, massage, facials and the like.
   STATIONERY SHOP. A shop that sells paper and other materials needed for
writing. A STATIONERY SHOP is not an office supply store.
   STORE. A large, often corporate-owned or mainstream retail establishment. A
STORE is larger and less intimate than a SHOP or a BOUTIQUE.
   STREET. A thoroughfare right-of-way, dedicated as such or acquired for
public use as such, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of
access to abutting land.
   STRUCTURE. In the coastal zone, includes, but is not limited to any
building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line,
electrical power transmission and distribution line, and fences and walls
exceeding six feet in height. Between the first public road and the sea,
however, all fences and walls shall constitute a STRUCTURE for purposes of this
definition.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A subordinate structure, the use of which is
appropriate, subordinate, and customarily incidental to that of the main
structure or the main use of the land and which is located on the same site
with the main structure or use.
   STRUCTURE, MAIN. A structure housing the principal use of a site or
functioning as the principal use.
   SWIMMING POOL. A pool, pond, lake, or open tank capable of containing water
to a depth greater than 1½ feet at any point.
   THEATER, SMALL. A theater, playhouse, or music hall that has seating space
for less than 300 patrons.
   TOY SHOP. A small shop that specializes in selling toys and games.
   TRANSMISSION LINES. Electric power lines bringing power to a receiving
substation or a distribution substation.
   USE. The purpose for which a site or structure is arranged, designed,
intended, constructed, erected, moved, altered, or enlarged or for which either
a site or a structure is or may be occupied or maintained.
   USE, ACCESSORY. A use which is appropriate, subordinate, and customarily
incidental to the main use of the site and which is located on the same site as
the main use.
   USABLE OPEN SPACE. Open space meeting the requirements of §
155.035 of this title.
   VARIETY SHOP. A shop that sells a wide variety of inexpensive items for
personal or household use.
   WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side property lines of a site
measured at right angles to the depth at a point midway between the front and
rear property lines.
   WIRED TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. Telecommunications services such as wired
(land line) telephone, digital subscriber line (DSL), internet and cable TV and
internet services where TV, voice, internet, data, and other content are routed
over a network of wires and cables and that do not require an antenna for
transmission or reception.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. Public, commercial and private
electromagnetic and photoelectric transmission, broadcast, repeater and
receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network,
and wireless communications. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY includes the
towers and other support structures, commercial satellite dishes, antennas,
equipment buildings necessary for the specific facility, and facilities co-
located on utility poles. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY includes
“satellite telecommunication facility.” WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY
does not include “wired telecommunication facility,” or private personal
wireless facilities that do not require a license from the Federal
Communications Commission, including direct-to-home satellite TV.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY PERMIT. An administrative permit issued
by the Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission.
   YARD. Open space on the same site as a structure located between a structure
and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by structures from the
ground upward or from the level of the structure requiring the yard upward
except as otherwise provided in this chapter, including a front yard, side
yard, or rear yard.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of a site, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and a
line parallel thereto on the site.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across a full width of a site, the depth of
which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear property line and a
line parallel thereto on the site.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the main building and the adjacent side line of
the lot and extending entirely from the front yard to the rear yard.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2906) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S.,
passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 518-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-
26-90; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 6-20-91; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95;
Am. Ord. 663-C.S., passed 11-19-02; Am. Ord. 722-C.S., passed 3-18-08; Am. Ord.
757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 810-C.S., passed 5-19-15)
§ 156.007 INCORPORATION BY REFERENCE.
   Wherever this chapter refers to another chapter, section, or division of the
city zoning ordinance, such chapter, section, or division shall be deemed
incorporated herein by reference; provided, however, that such chapter,
section, or division shall be superseded in relevant part by any amendment
hereto in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29400) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.008 DISTRICTS.
   The districts established by the coastal zoning regulations, in conformance
with the LCP Land Use Plan shall be as follows:
   WC      Conservation Water Districts
   WD      Development Water Districts
   NR      Natural Resources Districts
   AC      Coastal Agricultural Districts
   R      Residential Districts
         RS-6,000 One-Family Residential Districts, 6,000 square feet minimum
site area, provided 4,000 square feet have a natural grade of less than 20%
   RM      Multi-Family Residential Districts, 6,000 square feet minimum site
area per four dwelling units, plus 1,000 square feet per additional dwelling
unit
   OR      Office and Multi-Family Residential District 6,000 square feet
minimum site area per four dwelling units, plus 1,000 square feet per
additional dwelling unit
   C      Commercial Districts
         CN Neighborhood Commercial Districts
         CP Planned Shopping Center Commercial
         CW Waterfront Commercial Districts
         CS Service Commercial Districts
   M      Industrial Districts
         ML Limited Industrial Districts
         MG General Industrial Districts
         MC Coastal Dependent Industrial Districts
   P      Public Works Districts
   PF/M      Public Facility/Marina District
   PD      Planned Unit Development Combining Districts
   AR      Architectural Review Combining Districts
('63 Code, § 10-5.2907) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.009 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Wherever any uncertainty exists as to the boundary of a district as shown on
the zoning map, other than the coastal zone boundary established by the
legislature, the following regulations shall control:
   (A)   Where a boundary line is indicated as following a street or alley, it
shall be construed as following the right-of-way line thereof.
   (B)   Where a boundary line is indicated as following a watercourse, it
shall be construed as following the top edge of the nearest bank, or if there
is no identifiable bank, the furthest landward edge of riparian vegetation.
   (C)   Where a boundary line follows, or coincides approximately with a lot
line or a property ownership line, it shall be construed as following the lot
line or property ownership line.
   (D)   Where a boundary line is not dimensioned and is not indicated as
following a street or alley and does not follow or coincide approximately with
a lot line or property ownership line, the boundary line shall be determined by
the use of the scale designated on the zoning map.
   (E)   Where further uncertainty exists, the Planning Commission, upon
written application or on its own motion, shall determine the location of the
boundary in question, giving due consideration to the location indicated on the
zoning map and the objectives of this chapter and the purposes set forth in the
district regulations.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2908) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.010 CONFORMITY REQUIRED.
   (A)   No site or structure shall be used or designated for use for any
purpose or any manner other than in conformity with the regulations for the
district in which the site or structure is located.
   (B)   No structure shall be erected and no existing structure or use shall
be moved, altered, or enlarged, except in conformity with the regulations for
the district in which the structure or use is located.
   (C)   No yard space provided in compliance with the regulations for the
district in which it is located shall be deemed to provide a yard space for any
other structure, and no yard or usable open space on one site shall be deemed
to provide a yard space or usable open space for a structure on any other site.
   (D)   No yard, court, or usable open space shall be used, encroached upon,
or reduced in any manner except in conformity with the regulations for the
district in which the yard, court, or open space is located.
   (E)   No site held in one ownership as of January 1, 1984, or at any time
thereafter, shall be reduced in any manner below the minimum area, frontage,
width, or depth prescribed for the district in which the site is located.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2909) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.011 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS BY MAP.
   The location and boundaries of the several districts are as shown on the
“Land Use and Zoning Map of the City of Eureka,” attached hereto by reference,
made a part hereof, adopted herewith, and published as part of this code. The
original of said map shall be filed in the office of the Department of
Community Development. Said map and all notations, references, and other
information shown thereon are hereby made a part of this chapter. An informed
copy of the land use and zoning map shall be available to the public for
inspection and review during normal business hours at the public counter of the
Department of Community Development.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2910) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.012 DIVISION OF LAND USE AND ZONING MAP.
   The land use and zoning map may be, for convenience, divided into parts, and
each such part may, for purposes of more readily identifying areas within such
land use and zoning map, be subdivided into units, and each such parts and
units may be separately employed for the purpose of amending the land use and
zoning map or for any official reference to the land use and zoning map.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2911) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.013 DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS; PURPOSES.
   Where lands determined by the Director of Public Works lack adequate
drainage facilities, a drainage control plan shall be required to achieve the
following purposes:
   (A)   To protect persons and property from the hazards created by
development in areas lacking adequate drainage facilities;
   (B)   To protect the city from costs that may be incurred when unsuitable
development occurs in areas containing inadequate drainage;
   (C)   To ensure that new development shall in no way contribute to the
inundation of surrounding lands; and,
   (D)   To prevent premature urban developments of certain lands not
appropriate for urban uses until the installation of adequate drainage works
makes orderly development possible.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2912) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
§ 156.014 DESIGNATION OF DRAINAGE CONTROL AREA.
   The Director of Public Works shall conduct such investigations as are
necessary to determine those areas which for reasons of inadequate drainage are
temporarily, not appropriate for urban development and shall prepare for
Planning Commission approval of a map and report thereon which may recommend
such standards, conditions, regulations, and plans for improvements as are
necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter, consistent with all
applicable provisions of this Local Coastal Program.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2913) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 156.015 REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   No diking, filling, or dredging shall be permitted in the coastal zone,
unless determined to be consistent with the provisions of all applicable
Coastal Zone Development Standards, §§
156.050 through
156.056 of this chapter, and all applicable policies of the land use plan of
this Local Coastal Program.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2914) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.016 DRAINAGE CONTROL PLAN TO BE APPROVED.
   No zoning permit for any site in an area designated for drainage control as
prescribed in this chapter shall be issued until the drainage control plan
required by §
156.017 of this chapter has been approved by the Director of Public Works.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2915) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.017 DRAINAGE CONTROL PLAN TO BE SUBMITTED.
   The owner of the site or his/her authorized agent shall submit a drainage
control plan prepared by a duly licensed engineer to the Director of Community
Development at the time of applying for a zoning permit, which plan shall
include the following information, plans and drawings:
   (A)   A topographic map delineating the drainage area contributing to the
idea under consideration;
   (B)   A calculation of the flow from the drainage area;
   (C)   A plan of the area to be improved and indicating the proposed finish
grade elevation, size, location of proposed drainage structures, and the
relationship, if any, of the proposed drainage control plan to wetlands that
presently receive runoff water from the area proposed to be affected;
   (D)   The Director of Public Works may require additional information, if
necessary, to determine whether the purposes of the section are being carried
out or may authorize the omission of any or all the information required by
this section if it is not necessary, unless one or more wetlands may be
affected by the drainage control plan, in which case the Director of Public
Works shall make or authorize no such exceptions.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2916) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 156.018 REFERRAL TO AND ACTION OF DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   Referral to Director of Public Works. The Director of Community
Development shall submit all applications for developments on sites in areas
designated for drainage control to the Director of Public Works for
investigation, report, and recommendation.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2917)
   (B)   Action of Director of Public Works. Within 21 days after the date the
drainage control plans meeting all other requirements of this chapter are
submitted for review, the Director of Public Works shall approve the plans or
shall submit a written report to the Planning Commission recommending
conditional approval, modification, or disapproval.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2918)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord.
589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 156.019 ACTION OF CITY COUNCIL.
   Within 30 days after the Director of Public Works has recommended
conditional approval, modification, or disapproval of the drainage control
plans, the City Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
plans, or shall request the applicant to revise the plans.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2919) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 156.020 STATUS OF APPROVED DRAINAGE CONTROL PLAN.
   The approved drainage control plan(s) shall govern the drainage improvements
on the site, and, if subsequently divided into two or more parcels consistent
with all applicable policies of this chapter and the land use plan of this
Local Coastal Program, the approved plans shall govern the drainage
improvements of each of the separate parcels.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2919.1) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.021 DRAINAGE CONTROL, MINIMUM FLOOR ELEVATION, AND SITE GRADING.
   (A)   The ground floor level of all buildings, building enlargements, or
extensions of structures shall be at a minimum elevation of 12½ feet based on
city datum. In addition, the site shall be graded to drain to the adjacent
design finish grade of streets or alleyways.
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to general areas
protected by dikes, if approved by the Building Official and Director of Public
Works or to areas where the existing ground elevation exceeds 12½ feet based
upon city datum. This section shall not be construed to be applicable to dikes
for individual properties.
      (2)   In areas where a setback from property lines is not required and is
not proposed, the ground floor level of all buildings, building enlargements or
extensions of structures may be reduced upon documentation that flooding to the
building and adjacent property as a result of the development will not occur as
prepared by a registered civil engineer and approved by the Building Official
and Director of Public Works. In no event, however will the ground floor level
be less than an elevation of 11 feet based on city datum.
      (3)   Exceptions may be granted upon documentation of adequate measures
to preclude flooding to the subject property and adjacent properties.
Documentation shall be provided by the Building Official and Director of Public
Works.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not repeal by implication any of
the requirements of § 153.10 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2919.3) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95)
REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 156.030 BASIC REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL DISTRICTS.
   The zoning schedule contained in § 155.025 of this title shall prescribe
basic site, yard, bulk, useable open space, and screening and landscaping
regulations that shall apply in the districts as indicated in the schedule.
These basic requirements are defined and supplemented by additional
requirements and exceptions prescribed in subsequent sections of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2919.2) (Ord. 512-C.S., passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.031 EXTENSIONS OVER PROPERTY LINES AND EASEMENTS.
   Except as provided in §
150.029(D), §§ 155.156 through 155.161, and 155.032 of this title, no use or
structure shall extend beyond the property lines of its site. However, this
section shall not be construed to prohibit the location of such public access
structures as are defined in §
156.006 and that may require an extension over property or easements to be able
to function consistent with the policies of the land use plan of this Local
Coastal Program.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2920) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 786-C.S.,
passed 8-21-12)
§ 156.032 SITE AREA AND DIMENSIONS; REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS; NONCONFORMING
SITES.
   (A)   Site area and dimensions; requirements and exceptions.
      (1)   Required front, side, and rear yards shall be measured as the
minimum horizontal distance from the property line of the site or street right-
of-way line to a line parallel thereto on the site; provided, however where a
precise street plan has been adopted by the Council, site area and required
yards shall be measured from the plan line, and no provision of this chapter
shall be construed to permit a structure or use to extend beyond such line; and
provided further, where a site abuts on a street having only a portion of its
required width dedicated or reserved for street purposes, site area and
required yards shall be measured from a line drawn on the boundary of the
additional width required for street purposes abutting the site.
      (2)   No site shall have less than 20 feet of frontage, and no portion of
a site within which a square having a minimum dimension of 35 feet cannot be
inscribed shall be counted in determining the site area.
      (3)   On an irregular site, required yards shall be measured in the
manner prescribed by the Director of Community Development.
      (4)   On a corridor access lot having a width that exceeds its depth, the
longer dimension may be considered the depth for purposes of measuring front,
side, and rear yards.
      (5)   On the site of more than one dwelling unit, the area of all
vehicular accessways exceeding 100 feet in length shall be deducted from the
total site area, and the number of dwelling units permitted shall be determined
by dividing the remainder by the site area required per dwelling unit.
      (6)   If after dividing the area of a site in an RS, RM, OR, CS, CN, or
CW District by the site area required per dwelling unit, a remainder equal to
or greater than 90%, of the area required for an additional dwelling unit is
obtained, one additional dwelling unit may be located on the site provided all
other applicable yard, open space, bulk, and parking regulations are met.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2921)
   (B)   Nonconforming sites. A site having an area, frontage, width, or depth
less than the minimum prescribed for the district in which the site is located,
which is shown on a duly approved and recorded subdivision map, or for which a
deed or valid contract of sale was of record prior to October 16, 1966, and
which had a legal area, frontage, width, and depth at the time the subdivision
map, deed, or contract of sale was recorded, may be used for a permitted use or
a conditional use in the district in which it is located but shall be subject
to all other regulations for the district.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2921.1)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord.
589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
§ 156.033 FRONT YARDS; REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to front yards:
   (A)   The minimum front yard for a garage, carport, or off-street parking
space required to serve a dwelling unit in an R District shall be 20 feet,
except that if the garage, carport, or off-street parking space is entered
parallel to the street from which it has access, the minimum front yard shall
be the same as the front yard otherwise required on the site.
   (B)   On a site in an R District where the difference in natural grade
between the midpoint of the front lot line or the existing or proposed street
pavement at a point opposite the midpoint of the front lot line, and the
midpoint of the rear line if the normally required front yard exceeds 20% the
required front yard for a garage, carport, required off-street parking space,
or main structure shall be five feet.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2922) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S.,
passed 3-8-90)
§ 156.034 SIDE AND REAR YARDS; REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to side and rear yards:
   (A)   The side yard setback on the street side of a corner lot in an R
District shall be not less than 10 feet.
   (B)   On a reversed corner lot, the minimum rear yard may be not less than
the side yard prescribed in said zoning schedule, provided that the side yard
adjoining the street shall be not less than the required front yard on the
adjoining key lot.
   (C)   Where the side or rear lot line of the site of a use other than a
residential use in a district other than an R or HM District adjoins an R
District, the minimum side or rear yard shall be 10 feet greater than the
minimum yard prescribed in said zoning schedule.
   (D)   On the street side of a corner lot the minimum side yard for a garage,
carport, or off-street parking space required to serve a dwelling unit in an R
District shall be 20 feet, except that if the garage, carport, or off-street
parking space is entered parallel to the street from which it has access, the
minimum side yard shall be the same as the side yard otherwise required on the
site.
   (E)   In an R or OR District, where the length of a wall or walls of a
structure or structures adjoining an interior side yard exceeds 60 feet, the
width of the adjacent side yard shall be increased one foot for every five by
which such wall or walls exceeds 60 feet, provided that no such side yard need
exceed 20 feet.
   (F)   In an RM or OR District on the site of a residential use other than a
single-family dwelling, the minimum interior side yard shall be 10 feet in
width whenever the residential dwelling is designed with a living room window
or main entrance adjoining said interior side yard.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2923) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S.,
passed 3-8-90)
§ 156.035 TRAFFIC SIGHT OBSTRUCTIONS.
   The height of obstructions at corners of intersecting streets and at alleys
and driveways shall be regulated by §§
71.55 through
71.59 of this code.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2925) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.036 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   (A)   Architectural projections. Architectural projections, including eaves,
awnings, louvers, and similar shading devices, sills, belt courses, cornices,
and similar features, and flues and chimneys may project not more than four
feet into a required front yard, rear yard, or side yard on the street side of
a corner lot, and not more than two feet into any other required yard, provided
that no required interior side yard or rear yard shall be reduced to less than
three feet.
   (B)   Oriel windows. Oriel windows may project not more than three feet into
a required front yard, rear yard, or side yard on the street side of a corner
lot, or over a street right-of-way where no yard is required, provided that the
aggregate width of oriel windows shall not exceed 50% of the length of the wall
in which they are located and the width of any individual oriel window shall
not exceed 10 feet, and provided that no portion of an oriel window or its
supporting structure shall be less than eight feet above the grade of the
ground.
   (C)   Porches and steps not over six feet above-ground. Unroofed porches,
steps, decks, and terraces may project not more than eight feet into a required
front yard or side yard on the street side of a corner lot, or to a point not
closer than three feet to an interior side or rear property line, provided that
the height, including railings, shall not exceed six feet above the grade of
the ground at the property line.
   (D)   Balconies over six feet above-ground. Balconies, decks, terraces, and
other similar unroofed structures at a height, including railings, more than
six feet above the level at which a yard must be provided may project not more
than eight feet into a required front yard or rear yard and five feet into any
other yard, provided that they shall not reduce any yard to less than five feet
except on the street side of a corner lot. Such structures shall be
cantilevered or supported only by necessary columns. A balcony or deck
projecting from a higher story may extend over a lower balcony or deck but
shall not in such case be deemed a roof for the lower balcony or deck.
   (E)   Open stairways. Open unenclosed fire escapes and fireproof outside
stairways may project into any required yard not more than four feet, provided
that no yard shall be reduced to less than three feet.
   (F)   Covered patios. Covered patios attached to a main structure may
project not more than eight feet into a required rear yard and five feet into a
required side yard within 35 feet of the rear lot line, provided that the
required side yard shall not be reduced to less than five feet. A covered patio
not attached to a main structure shall be deemed an accessory structure.
   (G)   Underground structures. Covered underground structures may project
without limit into any required yard provided that they shall not have a height
of more than 2½ feet and their surfaces shall be landscaped.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2926) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.037 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Measurement. The height of a structure shall be measured vertically
from the average elevation of the natural grade of the ground covered by the
structure to the highest point of the structure or to the coping of a flat
roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or the mean height between eaves and
ridges for a hip, gable or gambrel roof. The height of a fence or a wall used
as a fence shall be measured from the higher finished grade adjoining the fence
or wall.
   (B)   Exceptions. Towers, spires, cupolas, chimneys, penthouses, water
tanks, flagpoles, monuments, scenery lofts, transmission towers for wired
telecommunications, fire towers, and similar structures and necessary
mechanical appurtenances covering not more than 10% of the ground area covered
by the structure may be erected to a height of not more than 100 feet or not
more than 25 feet above the height limit prescribed by the regulations for the
district in which the site is located, whichever is less. The height of
wireless telecommunication facilities shall be regulated by
Chapter 159.
   (C)   Airport zoning regulations. All structures shall be subject to the
height limitations imposed by
Chapter 151 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2927) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S.,
passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 156.038 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   In an R District, accessory structures may be located in a required
rear yard or a required interior side yard within 35 feet of the rear lot line,
provided that the distances to lot lines shall not be less than prescribed in
the zoning schedule set forth in §
155.025 of this title and provided that in the aggregate no more than 500
square feet or 10% of the area of the required rear yards, whichever is
greater, shall be covered by structures, except as provided in division (D) of
this section. Accessory structures located in required side or rear yards shall
not be closer to a main structure or another accessory structure than the
distances prescribed in the City Building Code and as provided in division (D)
of this section.
   (B)   An accessory structure located not closer to a property line than the
distance required for a main structure on the same site may join the main
structure.
   (C)   On a reversed corner lot, an accessory structure shall not be located
closer to the rear lot line than the required side yard on the adjoining key
lot and not closer to the side property line adjoining the street than the
required front yard on the adjoining key lot.
   (D)   On a site with a required rear yard adjoining an alley, accessory
structures shall be not less than 15 feet from the center line of the alley,
and accessory structures containing no habitable rooms may adjoin a main
structure. In an RM or OR District, accessory structures containing no
habitable rooms may cover not more than 60% of a required rear yard adjoining
an alley.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2928) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S.,
passed 3-8-90)
§ 156.039 USABLE OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   Group or private usable open space shall be provided for each dwelling
unit in the RM, OR, CN, CS, and CW Districts as prescribed in the zoning
schedule set forth in §
155.025 of this title. Each square foot of private usable open space shall be
considered equivalent of two square feet of group usable open space and may be
so substituted. All required usable open space shall be planted area, or shall
have a dust free surface, or shall be water surface, provided that not less
than 10% of the required group usable open space at ground level shall be
landscaped with trees and other plant materials suitable for ornamentation. No
required usable open space shall be located in a parking area, driveway,
service area, or required front yard or have a slope greater than 10%.
   (B)   Group usable open space shall have a minimum area of 300 square feet,
and a square inscribed within it shall have a minimum dimension of 15 feet.
Required space may be located on the roof of an attached garage or carport, but
not more than 20% of the required space shall be located on the roof of a
building containing habitable rooms.
   (C)   Private usable open space located at ground level shall have a minimum
area of 150 square feet, and a square inscribed within it shall have a minimum
dimension of 10 square feet, and a square inscribed within it shall have a
minimum dimension of five feet. Private usable open space shall be adjacent to,
and not more than four feet above or below, the floor level of the dwelling
unit served. Not more than 50% of ground level space may be covered by an
overhang, balcony, or patio roof. Aboveground level space shall have at least
one exterior side open above the railing height.
   (D)   Usable open space shall be permanently maintained by the owner in a
neat and orderly condition.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2929) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S.,
passed 3-8-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.040 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Screening of parking and loading facilities adjoining or opposite an R
District. In any district, any proposed open parking facility for more than
five cars or a loading area on a site adjoining or directly opposite across a
street or alley from an R District shall be screened, except for necessary
drives and walks, and provided that where an alley is used for maneuvering, no
screening shall be required. Screening shall be six feet in height, except that
screening to protect properties across a street or alley may be not less than
four feet in height.
   (B)   Screening of uses adjoining RS Districts. In any district where the
site of a proposed use other than a one-family dwelling or a duplex adjoins an
RS District, screening six feet in height shall be located adjoining the
property line. Where the site of a use other than a dwelling adjoins an RS
District, an area 10 feet in depth adjoining the property line shall be
landscaped with plant materials, including a buffer of trees.
   (C)   Screening of open uses. In a C or M District directly opposite across
a street or alley from an R District and in a CS or M District adjoining or
directly opposite across a street or alley from an OR, CN, or CW District,
screening of a height specified by the Director of Community Development shall
screen a proposed use not conducted within a completely enclosed structure,
other than a parking facility, a service station, or a drive-in, unless the
Director of Community Development determines that topographic or other
conditions make screening unnecessary or ineffective for the protection of the
opposite district or unless the Planning Commission finds that the
characteristics of the proposed use make screening unnecessary or ineffective
for protection of the opposite district from adverse impact.
   (D)   Landscaping of parking facilities. In an OR, ML, RM, and all C
Districts, not less than 4% of the interior of a proposed parking area shall be
landscaped with trees and other plant materials suitable for ornamentation.
Landscaped areas shall be distributed throughout the proposed parking area.
Incentives described in §
156.040(K) of this title are provided to encourage interior landscaping beyond
the required 4%. These requirements shall apply to all proposed parking
facilities with 5 or more spaces, and to existing parking lots when land use
changes occur due to zoning reclassification or other discretionary land use
permit. These requirements shall not apply to ministerial projects associated
with existing parking lots. In addition, a perimeter landscaped area not less
than four feet in depth shall be located at the property lines adjoining the
street frontages of the site except for necessary drives and walks. At least
one 15 gallon tree shall be planted for every 5 required off-street parking
spaces. Trees may be planted within the perimeter and/or interior landscaping
areas.
   (E)   Landscaping of trailer parks. Where a proposed trailer park adjoins a
street, an area 20 feet in depth, except for necessary drives and walks, shall
be landscaped with materials suitable for ensuring privacy and ornamenting the
site.
   (F)   Landscaping in OR Districts. In an OR District, a portion of the site
visible from a street and comprising not less than 3% of the site area or gross
floor area, whichever is greater, shall be landscaped with plant materials
suitable for ornamenting the site. The landscaped area provided for an
expansion of a use in an OR District shall be in addition to landscaped area
existing prior to the expansion unless the pre-existing area exceeds the
required minimum, in which instance it shall be counted in calculating the
total area required. Landscaping required by §
156.040(D) of this title shall be counted in calculating the total area
required.
   (G)   Screening and landscaping materials and maintenance. Screening shall
consist of a solid wall or fence, vine-covered fence, or compact evergreen
hedge. Hedge materials used as screening shall be not less than three feet in
height when planted, and shall not be permitted to exceed the maximum specified
height by more than 1½ feet. Where buffers of trees are required, they shall
have a mature height of not more than 40 feet and shall be planted not more
than 20 feet apart. All screening and landscaping shall be permanently
maintained in a neat and orderly condition by the owner. Plant materials shall
be watered, weeded, pruned and replaced as necessary to screen or ornament the
site.
   (H)   Landscaping and vegetative ground coverage. Vegetative matter shall
cover 75% of the landscaped area required by this title. Limited use of
materials such as crushed rock, pebbles and stone is acceptable; however, the
use of such materials shall not exceed 25% of the total amount of the
landscaped area.
   (I)   Trees near overhead power lines. All trees reaching a height of
greater than 20 feet at maturity shall not be planted within 10 feet (measured
horizontally) of overhead power lines.
   (J)   ISA Standards for professional landscapers. All professional
landscapers shall comply with the ISA (International Society of Arboriculture)
pruning and trimming standards. Where pruning to ISA standards is impractical,
the work shall be performed to minimize tree damage and visualize impact, or
the tree shall be removed. Copies of the ISA standards shall be readily
available at the Community Development Department.
   (K)   Incentives and density bonuses. For projects in Commercial and
Residential Multiple Family Districts which provide at least 51% interior
landscaping in parking facilities, and install greater than the minimum plant
and tree quantities, and provide protection for existing trees on lots during
construction activities (as applicable), the following incentives shall apply:
      (1)   Commercial Districts. For Commercial parking lots with at least 30
required parking spaces, the required parking may be reduced by 1 space. One
additional parking space may be reduced for each subsequent 10 required spaces.
      (2)   Residential Multiple Family (RM) District. To compensate
Residential Multiple Family property owners for providing additional
landscaping, a maximum density bonus of 10% will be allowed for parking lots
which provide at least 5% interior landscaping and install greater than the
minimum plant and/or tree quantities.
      (3)   For any Commercial or Residential Multiple Family project which
requires a parking variance to meet the incentives, the applicable variance fee
shall be waived.
   (L)   Proposed Landscape Site Plan Requirements. When landscaping is
required pursuant to this title, Landscape Site Plans shall be submitted to the
Design Review Committee for approval. Landscape Site Plans shall be prepared by
applicants, and shall not require the services of a licensed landscape
architect. Each required Landscape Site Plan shall contain the following:
      (1)   All existing structures and trees.
      (2)   All proposed trees and plants, drawn to scale, showing estimated
size at maturity. All proposed tree removals should also be indicated.
      (3)   The total square footage of all landscaped areas (existing and
proposed).
      (4)   A legend showing common names of all proposed trees and plants, and
their gallon sizes as planted.
      (5)   Location of all utilities corridors and easements below and above
ground.
   (M)    Site obstruction regulations. All fencing, landscaping, shrubs and
trees shall meet height and distance visibility requirements of the City of
Eureka Site Obstructions Regulations. These standards provide sight visibility
guidelines for street corners, driveway openings and alley intersections, and
address the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and vehicles.
   (N)   General requirements. The following general requirements should be
considered when incorporating landscaping into development projects:
      (1)   All landscaping required pursuant to this title should consider the
aesthetic qualities of existing terrain and landscaping to assure compatibility
with existing trees and significant plant material, and to conserve top soil.
      (2)   All proposed planting material should be selected for suitability
to the climate of Eureka.
      (3)   All vegetative matter should be planted and maintained in
accordance with the Eureka Street Tree Management Plan and Design Guidelines
Manual (available at the Community Development Department).
('63 Code, § 10-5.2930) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 589-C.S.,
passed 2-21-95; Am. Ord. 627-C.S., passed 9-1-98)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.041 EMERGENCY SHELTERS.
   (A)   Purpose and Intent. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, this section is added to achieve the following
purposes:
      (1)   To provide for the placement of emergency shelters within the city;
      (2)   To address the special needs and characteristics of emergency
shelters;
      (3)   To insure housing provided by emergency shelters will meet
building, health, safety and access standards;
      (4)   To provide sufficient open space, parking and circulation to meet
the needs of the emergency shelter;
      (5)   To provide compatibility with other uses allowed within the zoning
districts in which emergency shelters are located; and
      (6)   To provide a safe environment for emergency shelter residents.
   (B)   Shelter Permit Required. In accordance with the provisions of this
section, a shelter permit application shall be approved by the City Council,
and obtained prior to occupation of any qualified site by an emergency shelter,
and prior to approval of either a building permit or a change of occupancy
permit, if required.
   (C)   Shelter Permit Application Requirements.
      (1)   Application forms. Applications for shelter permits shall be filed
with the Community Development Director, and shall be on forms supplied by the
Department for shelter permits. Applications shall include the following
information:
         (a)   Name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized
agent of the owner of the property on which the emergency shelter is proposed
to be located;
         (c)   Address and assessor's parcel number of the property; and
         (d)   Statement indicating the precise manner of compliance with each
of the applicable provisions of the section and chapter.
      (2)   Maps. The application shall be accompanied by the following plans
and drawings:
         (a)   A scaled site plan showing the existing and projected uses on
the site, and including the existing uses on parcels surrounding the site for
at least 300 feet;
         (b)   An accurate, scaled set of elevations and floor plans for the
building which show how the building will meet required building standards; and
         (c)   Information detailing how the emergency shelter will meet the
required site standards.
      (3)   Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a Conditional Use
Permit fee established by resolution of the council to cover the cost of
handling the application as prescribed in this section.
   (D)   Investigations and Reports. The Community Development Director shall
make an investigation of the application, and shall prepare a report thereon
which shall be submitted to the City Council.
   (E)   City Council Public Meeting. The City Council shall hold at least one
public meeting. Unless otherwise directed by the Council, the City Clerk shall
set the time and place of the meeting. Notice of the public meeting shall be
given as prescribed in this chapter, when applicable, and shall also be given
to the applicant.
   (F)   City Council Public Meeting Procedure. At the public meeting, the City
Council shall review the application and the report provided by the Community
Development Director regarding the application. Within 15 days of the close of
the public meeting, the Council shall make a specific finding as to whether the
emergency shelter will meet the standards outlined in §§
155.040 (N) and (O) of this chapter.
   (G)   Action of the City Council. The City Council shall act within 15 days
after the close of the public meeting. The City Council must approve the
shelter permit if a finding is made that the shelter meets the standards listed
in §
155.040 of this chapter. The City Council must deny the shelter permit if a
finding is made that the shelter does not meet the standards listed in §
155.040 of this chapter. Within five days of the final action of the City
Council, the City Clerk shall provide a written notice of the action to the
applicant.
   (H)   Effective Date of Shelter Permits. A shelter permit will become
effective ten days following the date on which the City Council approved the
permit.
   (I)   Lapse of Shelter Permits. A shelter permit shall lapse and become void
one year from the date on which the shelter permit becomes effective unless,
prior to the expiration of one year, a building permit is issued and
construction commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site
which was the subject of the shelter permit application, or a certificate of
occupancy is issued for the structure which was the subject of the shelter
permit application, or the site is occupied if neither a building permit or
change of occupancy was required.
   (J)   Renewal of Lapsed Shelter Permits. A lapsed shelter permit may be
renewed for an additional one year, provided that prior to the expiration of
one year from the date when the shelter permit or the renewal becomes
effective, an application for the renewal is filed with the Community
Development Department. The City Council may grant or deny an application for
the renewal of the lapsed shelter permit. Divisions 155.040 (B) through (G) of
this chapter shall apply to an application for the renewal of a lapsed shelter
permit.
   (K)   Modification of Shelter Permit. All standards contained in §
155.040 of this chapter shall apply to an application for modification,
expansion or other change to an approved shelter permit.
   (L)   Suspension and Revocation. Upon a violation of any applicable
provision of this section, or of the conditions of the shelter permit, the
shelter permit shall be suspended automatically. The City Council shall hold a
public hearing within 45 days of such suspension, and if not satisfied that the
regulation, general provision or condition is being complied with, may revoke
the shelter permit or take such action as may be necessary to ensure compliance
with the regulation, general provision or condition.
   (M)   Compliance with Development Standards. All emergency shelters located
within the city shall comply with the development standards contained within
this section. The application of the development standards shall occur at the
time of issuance of a shelter permit approved by the City Council.
   (N)   Site Development Standards.
      (1)   Parcels selected for the placement of emergency shelters shall meet
minimum parcel sizes for the zoning district in which they are located. Parcels
must be available for use without the issuance of a variance.
      (2)   Buildings used as emergency shelter sites shall meet all
handicapped access, health, safety, building and fire standards. Non-conforming
buildings shall not be used for emergency shelters. Prior to occupancy, a
Change of Occupancy permit, which indicates the building has met the required
building standards, must be approved by the City Building Official. The
Building Official shall determine the number of residents allowed to occupy the
building. The Building Official shall also make the determination of ccupant
loading using the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the city.
      (3)   Buildings used as emergency shelter sites shall provide housing
accommodations and needed support services to homeless persons on a day to day
basis, with a duration of residency not to exceed six months. Emergency
shelters are intended to provide interim, temporary housing to residents for
whom other housing options are not readily available or affordable, and are not
intended to provide long term housing needs.
      (4)   A minimum of one parking space for every eight residents, plus an
additional one parking space for each two employees on a shift at the site,
shall be provided on-site. All parking provided shall meet the standards for
access, parking, loading, and landscaping provided in this chapter.
      (5)   Exterior security lighting shall be provided at all access points
to the building and within all parking areas. Lighting shall be placed so as to
light the interior of the parking areas, and shall be placed so as to not
create glare or impact adjoining parcels.
      (6)   Signs placed on-site shall meet all requirements of this chapter.
Sign standards shall be applied according to the zoning district in which the
shelter site is located.
      (7)   No emergency shelter shall be placed within 1000 feet of any school
or other emergency shelter.
      (8)   Any preparation, storage, or serving of food on the premises shall
comply with the requirements for such use as required by the Humboldt County
Public Health Department.
      (9)   Child-care provided on-site shall meet the standards required by
the State of California for day care facilities.
      (10)   Open Space shall be provided on-site at a ratio of five square
feet per resident. The number of residents shall be as determined by the City
Building Official. The parking provided for the site, or any paved area, shall
not count as required open space. Open space provided shall meet all other
standards as required for other residential uses as described in §
155.035 of this chapter.
      (11)   Storage areas, including garbage and recycling areas located
exterior to the building, shall be screened with a six foot opaque barrier
acceptable to the city.
      (12)   Emergency shelters shall be located within 1000 feet of a bus line
with pedestrian access available to the bus stop.
   (O)   Shelter Operation.
      (1)   Shelter operators shall either be a government agency, or a private
for non-profit, or a non-profit organization which can demonstrate the ability
to meet the standards required for shelter operation.
      (2)   Methods of demonstrating this ability shall include but not be
limited to demonstrating past experience in operating the type of shelter
proposed, oversight by another organization with past experience in operating
the same type of shelter proposed, or the ability to obtain or otherwise meet
the State requirements for operators of facilities for mentally disordered,
handicapped persons, alcoholism or drug abuse facilities or for health/
community care facilities.
      (3)   A minimum of one paid employee for every 30 shelter residents must
be on-site during the hours of operation of the shelter.
      (4)   Shelter operators shall provide a program which details the
supervision of shelter residents. The program shall include a means by which
the surrounding neighborhood will be kept free from garbage, unattended or
inoperable vehicles or other surplus items left by shelter residents. All such
items left on-site at the shelter shall be screened as approved by the city.
      (5)   Shelter operators shall insure that the County Mental Health and
Public Health Departments shall have access to the shelter site to provide
direct services to the shelter residents.
      (6)   Support services which maintain separate offices at the shelter
site shall meet the parking standards for their particular use as required by
this chapter. Support services which share office space with shelter office
space will be counted with that space for the purpose of determining parking
requirements.
      (7)   Shelter operators shall provide a program acceptable to the Eureka
Police Department which addresses the need for the coordination of police
services to the site and the surrounding neighborhood. The program submitted
shall address the need for private security personnel supplied by the shelter
operators.
      (8)   Shelter operations shall comply with the ambient noise levels
established at the shelter site.
   (P)   Emergency Shelter in Permitted Zones. Emergency shelters shall be
allowed within the Service Commercial Zoning District (CS), the Light
Industrial Zoning District (ML), and the General Industrial Zoning District
(MG) with the issuance of a shelter permit as prescribed in this section.
Emergency shelters located outside of the Coastal Zone shall comply with
Chapter 155.
(Ord. 631-C.S., passed 9-7-99)
COASTAL ZONE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 156.050 APPLICATION.
   The following development standards shall apply to all development proposed
within the coastal zone.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2940) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.051 PUBLIC ACCESS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Access protection and enhancement. The city, through the non-profit
organization created by Implementing Action 3 of Chapter 3 of the Local Coastal
Program Land Use Plan, shall protect and enhance the public's right of access
to and along the shoreline by:
      (1)   Utilizing the non-profit organization to accept offers of
dedication that will increase opportunities for public access and recreation
consistent with the Local Coastal Program and the availability of necessary
non-profit organization staff and funding to improve and maintain accessways
and assume liability for them;
      (2)   Actively seeking other public, community non-profit, or private
agencies to accept offers of dedications and having them assume liability and
maintenance responsibilities; and
      (3)   Allowing only such development as will not interfere with the
public's right of access to the sea, where such right was acquired through use
or legislative authorization, including, but not limited to, the use of dry
sand and rocky coastal beaches or shoreline to the first line of terrestrial
vegetation.
   (B)   Vertical access easement. For new development between the first public
road and the sea, a vertical access easement to the mean high tide line shall
be granted unless:
      (1)   Another more suitable public access corridor is available or
proposed by the Local Coastal Program within 500 feet of the site;
      (2)   Access at the site would be inconsistent with other Local Coastal
Program policies, including existing, expanded, or new coastal dependent
industry, agricultural operations, or the protection of fragile coastal
resources; or,
      (3)   Access at the site is inconsistent with public safety or military
security needs. Consistent with Coastal Act Section 30212(b), the term “new
development” does not include replacement of any structure pursuant to Section
30610(g); the demolition and reconstruction of any single-family residence,
provided it is sited in the same location and does not exceed the former
structure by more than 10% in floor area, height, or bulk; improvements to any
structure which do not change its intensity of use, nor increase its height,
bulk, or floor area by more than 10%, do not block or impede public access, and
which do not result in a seaward encroachment by the structure; and any repair
or maintenance activity for which the Coastal Commission has determined,
pursuant to Coastal Act Section 30610, that a coastal development permit will
be required unless the Commission determines or has determined that such
activity will have an adverse impact on lateral public access along the beach.
   (C)   Lateral access easement. For new development between the first public
road and the sea, a lateral access easement along the shoreline shall be
required unless:
      (1)   Lateral access at the site would be inconsistent with other Local
Coastal Program policies, including existing, expanded, or new coastal
dependent industry, agricultural operations, or the protection of fragile
natural resources; or,
      (2)   Access is inconsistent with public safety or military security
needs. The term “new development” shall be defined for purposes of this section
in the same manner as it is defined in Local Coastal Program Policy 3.2 of the
Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan.
   (D)   Access standards.
      (1)   The access standards and recommendations contained in the State
Coastal Conservancy/Coastal Commission “Report on Coastal Access” (Revised,
August, 1980) shall constitute the criteria for improvement, maintenance, and
management of accessways and supporting facilities proposed in the Local
Coastal Program.
      (2)   Measures for guaranteeing public access.
         (a)   Legal instruments required. Prior to issuance of a coastal
development permit where a public accessway is required in this Local Coastal
Program, each applicant shall record one of the following legal documents as
specified in the conditions of approval:
            1.   Irrevocable offer of dedication. The applicant shall submit a
preliminary title report and record an irrevocable offer to dedicate the access
easement or the fee interest in the accessway, as described in the permit
conditions, free of prior liens or encumbrances, except for tax liens. This
offer can be accepted within 21 years by the nonprofit agency set forth in
Implementation Action 3 of Chapter 3 of the Land Use Plan, or another
appropriate agency. Until this offer is accepted or until the landowner allows,
the public has no right to use the accessway.
            2.   Outright grant of fee interest or easement. If the project if
important in and of itself for public access needs, the size and scope of the
proposed development is such that an out-right interest is appropriate, or
there is an accepting agency available to accept the easement, as in
subdivision map approvals, a grant of an easement or fee interest can be
required prior to issuance of the permit. Until such a grant is accepted by the
nonprofit agency set forth in Implementation Action 3 of Chapter 3 of the Land
Use Plan, any other public agency or private nonprofit organization which
agrees to accept the grant, or until the land-owner allows, the public has no
right to use the accessway.
         (b)   Required information. As a condition of the issuance of a
permit, title information and all necessary subordination agreements shall be
required. Title insurance may also be required when extensive easements are
being granted. The amount of the title insurance shall be estimated on the
basis of what it would cost to acquire an equivalent area for recreational use
elsewhere in the vicinity.
         (c)   Procedures.
            1.   Copies of the documents to be recorded by the applicant, (for
example, title report and permit) shall be forwarded to the City Attorney for
review prior to recordation.
            2.   The City Attorney and the accepting agency may make minor
revisions to the documents, such as corrections in the legal description and
minor revisions to the location and use of the accessways in order to open them
for public use and to assure that the public right of access along dry sandy
beaches, blufftop parcels, or vertical accessways is protected and capable of
being implemented.
   (E)   Public access support facilities. As indicated in the policies of
Chapter 3 of the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan and the Local Coastal
Program access maps in Chapter 15 of the Land Use Plan, public access support
facilities shall be distributed throughout the city coastal zone. Off-street
parking shall be provided in the waterfront area; however, it shall not be
located immediately adjacent to the shoreline, unless there is no feasible
alternative.
   (F)   Access for handicapped. Public access to the waterfront, including
support facilities, shall, to the maximum extent feasible, provide for access
by handicapped persons.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2941) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.052 ENVIRONMENTAL RESOURCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Mitigation. Channelizations or other substantial alterations that
could significantly disrupt the habitat values of rivers and streams shall
incorporate the best mitigation measures feasible, and be limited to necessary
water supply projects, flood control projects where no other method for
protecting existing structures in the flood plain is feasible and where such
protection is necessary for public safety or to protect existing development,
or developments where the primary function is the improvement of fish and
wildlife habitat.
   (B)   Permitted shoreline construction. Revetments, breakwaters, groins,
harbor channels, seawalls, cliff retaining walls, and other such construction
that alters natural shoreline processes shall be permitted when required to
serve coastal-dependent uses or to protect existing structures or public
beaches in danger from erosion and when designed to eliminate or mitigate
adverse impacts on local shoreline sand supply. Existing marine structures
causing water stagnation contributing to pollution problems and fish kills
should be phased out or upgraded where feasible.
   (C)   Environmentally sensitive habitat areas.
      (1)   Environmentally sensitive habitat areas within the city's coastal
zone shall include:
         (a)   Rivers, creeks, sloughs, gulches and associated riparian
habitats, including Eureka Slough, Fay Slough, Cut-Off Slough, Freshwater
Slough, Cooper Slough, Second Sloughs, Third Slough, and Elk River.
         (b)   Wetlands and estuaries, including that portion of Humboldt Bay
within the city's jurisdiction, riparian areas, and vegetated dunes.
         (c)   Indian Island, Daby Island, and Woodley Island wildlife area.
         (d)   Other habitat areas, such as rookeries, and rare or endangered
species on state or federal lists.
         (e)   Grazed or farmed wetlands.
      (2)   These areas are generally portrayed on the resources maps, where
they are designated as wetlands or other natural resources.
   (D)   Protection of environmentally sensitive habitat areas. Environmentally
sensitive habitat areas shall be protected against any significant disruption
of habitat values, and only uses dependent on such resources, including
restoration and enhancement projects, shall be allowed within such areas.
Development in areas adjacent to environmentally sensitive habitat areas shall
be sited and designed to prevent impacts which would significantly degrade such
areas, and shall be compatible with the continuance of such habitat areas.
   (E)   Development in or near natural resource areas. Prior to the approval
of a development permit, all developments on lots or parcels shown on the land
use plan and/or resource maps with a natural resource designation or within 250
feet of such designation, or development affecting an environmentally sensitive
habitat area, shall be found to be in conformity with the applicable habitat
protection policies of the Local Coastal Program. All development plans and
grading plans shall show the precise location of the habitat(s) potentially
affected by the proposed project and the manner in which they will be
protected, enhanced, or restored. Projects which could adversely impact an
environmentally sensitive habitat area may be subject to a site inspection by a
qualified biologist to be selected jointly by the city and the applicant. Where
mitigation, restoration, or enhancement activities are required to be performed
pursuant to other applicable portions of this Local Coastal Program, they shall
be required to be performed on city-owned lands on the Elk River Spit or on
other available and suitable mitigation, restoration, or enhancement sites.
   (F)   Diking, filling, or dredging. The diking, filling or dredging of open
coastal waters, wetlands, or estuaries shall be permitted only where all of the
following exist:
      (1)   The diking, filling or dredging is for a permitted use in that
resource area as provided in Land Use Plan Policies 5.12 through 5.16;
      (2)   There is no feasible, less environmentally damaging alternative;
      (3)   Feasible mitigation measures have been provided to minimize adverse
environmental effects, consistent with Land Use Plan Policy 5.10; and,
      (4)   The functional capacity of the resources area is maintained or
enhanced, consistent with Land Use Plan Policy 5.10.
   (G)   Dredging and spoils disposal. Dredging and spoils disposal shall be
carried out to avoid significant disruption to marine and wildlife habitats and
water circulation. Dredge spoils suitable for beach replenishment should be
transported for such purposes to appropriate beaches or into suitable longshore
current systems.
   (H)   Wetland or estuary development.
      (1)   Diking, filling or dredging of a wetland or estuary shall maintain
or enhance its functional capacity.
      (2)   Functional capacity, the ability of the wetland or estuary to be
self-sustaining and to maintain natural species diversity. In order to
establish that the functional capacity is being maintained, all of the
following must be demonstrated:
         (a)   That presently occurring plant and animal populations in the
ecosystem will not be altered in a manner that would impair the long-term
stability of the ecosystem, such as, natural species diversity, abundance and
composition are essentially unchanged as a result of the project;
         (b)   That a species that is rare or endangered will not be
significantly adversely affected;
         (c)   That a species or habitat essential to the natural biological
functioning of the wetland or estuary will not be significantly adversely
affected;
         (d)   That consumptive (such as, fishing, aquaculture and hunting) or
nonconsumptive (such as, water quality and research opportunity) values of the
wetland or estuaries ecosystem will not be significantly reduced.
   (I)   Conditions.
      (1)   Dredging, when consistent with these provisions and where necessary
for the maintenance of the tidal flow and continued viability of the wetland
habitat or for flood control purposes, shall be subject to the following
conditions:
         (a)   Dredging shall be prohibited in breeding and nursery areas and
during periods of fish migration and spawning.
         (b)   Dredging shall be limited to the smallest area feasible.
         (c)   Designs for dredging and excavation projects shall include
protective measures such as silt curtains, weirs, and the like, to protect
water quality in adjacent areas during construction by preventing the discharge
of refuse, petroleum spills, and unnecessary dispersal of silt materials.
      (2)   Diking or filling of a wetland shall at a minimum, require the
following mitigation, restoration, or enhancement measures:
         (a)   A detailed restoration or enhancement plan shall be required for
each specific restoration or enhancement site prior to commencement of any
development that is permitted as part of such a restoration or enhancement
project. The restoration or enhancement plans shall include provisions for
purchase, if required, and restoration or enhancement, as determined in
consultation with the Department of Fish and Game, Coastal Commission, and
Coastal Conservancy, of an equivalent area of equal or greater productivity,
and dedication of the land to a public agency or other method which permanently
restricts the use of the site to habitat and open space purposes. The
restoration or enhancement site shall be purchased or otherwise made available
prior to any diking or filling activity.
         (b)   Equivalent areas shall be opened to tidal action or other
sources of surface water shall be provided. This provision applies to diked or
filled areas which themselves are not environmentally sensitive habitat areas,
but would become so if they were opened to tidal action or provided with other
sources of surface water. All of the provisions for restoration, purchase (if
necessary), and dedication contained in subsection (a) of this division, shall
apply to any program or activity performed pursuant to this section.
         (c)   Mitigation or restoration activities shall, to the maximum
extent feasible, be of the same type as the wetland to be filled (such as,
freshwater marsh for freshwater marsh, saltwater marsh for saltwater marsh, and
the like).
         (d)   An applicant who is required to participate in a restoration or
mitigation program may avail himself or herself of restoration or enhancement
sites on city-owned lands on the Elk River Spit, consistent with all other
applicable policies of Land Use Plan Chapter 5 and this chapter, and at a cost
not to exceed $0.25 for each square foot of affected marsh or other wetland.
         (e)   For permissible wetland restoration projects identified in Land
Use Plan Policy 5.12(b), any coastal development permit issued for one or a
combination of projects shall be part of one or more wetland restoration
programs consistent with all other applicable provisions of this Local Coastal
Program. Such wetlands restoration or enhancement program(s) shall be prepared
and implemented in consultation with the Department of Fish and Game, Coastal
Commission, and Coastal Conservancy. Preparation of the program(s) shall occur
prior to commencement of any development governed by this subdivision; however,
implementation of the program(s) may occur concurrently with or subsequently to
any approved development. If an in-lieu fee is required to be paid by the
applicant, it shall not exceed $0.25 for each square foot of affected marsh of
other wetland, except as provided in permit CP-10-80. For the area south of
Hilfiker Lane identified in LUP Policy 5.12(b), the restoration program may, at
any one time, include one or more of the affected properties, provided that
when an application for development pursuant to this subdivision is made, the
affected property shall participate in the wetlands restoration program.
   (J)   Permitted development and uses in non-farmed wetlands and estuaries.
Permitted development or uses within nonfarmed wetlands and estuaries shall be
limited to the following:
      (1)   Port facilities.
      (2)   Energy facility.
      (3)   Coastal development industrial facilities including commercial
fishing facilities.
      (4)   Maintenance of existing or restoration of previously dredged depths
in navigation channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and
boat launching ramps.
      (5)   Incidental public service purposes which temporarily impact the
resources of the area, such as burying cables and pipes, inspection of piers,
and maintenance of existing intake and outfall lines.
      (6)   Restoration projects.
      (7)   Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource-dependent
activities.
      (8)   New or expanded boating facilities in estuaries.
      (9)   Placement of structural pilings for public recreational piers that
provide public access and recreational opportunities.
   (K)   Permitted uses in open coastal waters. Permitted uses within open
coastal waters shall be limited to the following:
      (1)   Port facilities.
      (2)   Energy facilities.
      (3)   Coastal-dependent industrial facilities, including commercial
fishing facilities.
      (4)   Maintenance of existing or restoration of previously dredged depths
in navigation channels, turning basins, vessel berthing and mooring areas, and
boat launching ramps.
      (5)   Incidental public service purposes which temporarily impact the
resources of the area, such as burying cables and pipes, inspection of piers,
and maintenance of existing intake and outfall lines.
      (6)   Restoration projects.
      (7)   Nature study, aquaculture, or similar resource-dependent
activities.
      (8)   New or expanded boating facilities.
      (9)   Sand or gravel mineral extraction in portions of open coastal
waters that are not environmentally sensitive habitat areas.
      (10)    Placement of structural pilings for public recreational piers
that provide public access and recreational opportunities.
   (L)   Permitted uses involving alterations of streams and rivers. Permitted
uses that involve substantial alterations of streams and rivers shall
incorporate the best mitigation measures feasible and shall be limited to the
following:
      (1)   Necessary water supply projects.
      (2)   Flood control projects where no other method of protecting existing
structures in the floodplain is feasible and where such protection is necessary
for public safety or to protect existing development.
      (3)   Development where the primary function is the improvement of fish
and wildlife habitat.
   (M)    Permitted uses and development in grazed or farmed wetlands.
Permitted uses and development in grazed or farmed wetlands shall be limited to
the following:
      (1)   Agricultural operations limited to apiaries, field and truck crops,
livestock raising, greenhouses (provided they are not located on slab
foundations and crops are grown in the existing soils on site), and orchards.
      (2)   Farm-related structures (including barns, sheds, and farmer-
occupied housing) necessary for the performance of agricultural operations.
Such structures may be located on an existing farmed wetland parcel only if no
alternative upland location is available for such purpose and the structures
are sited and designed to minimize adverse environmental effects on the farmed
wetland. No more than one permanent residential structure per parcel shall be
allowed.
      (3)   Restoration projects.
      (4)   Nature study, aquaculture, and similar resource dependent
activities.
      (5)   Incidental public service purposes which may temporarily impact the
resources of the area, such as burying cable and pipes.
   (N)   Fill for repair and maintenance. New fill for repair and maintenance
purposes may be permitted on lands adjacent to the northern waterfront provided
that is consistent with other LUP policies and where:
      (1)   The fill will be placed in previously filled areas which have been
subject to erosion;
      (2)   The fill will be placed beyond the existing bulkhead line;
      (3)   The fill is necessary to protect existing development from erosion;
      (4)   The fill will not interfere with commercial fishing activities and
facilities; and
      (5)   Placement of the fill is consistent with the public access policies
of the Local Coastal Program in that public access will not be adversely
affected, or public access has been provided.
   (O)   Buffers. A buffer shall be established for permitted development
adjacent to all environmentally sensitive areas. The width of a buffer shall be
100 feet, unless the applicant for the development demonstrates on the basis of
information, the type and size of the proposed development, and/or proposed
mitigation (such as planting of vegetation) that will achieve the purposes of
the buffer, that a smaller buffer will protect the resources of the habitat
area. For a wetland, the buffer should be measured from the landward edge of
the wetland. For a stream or river, the buffer should be measured landward from
the landward edge of riparian vegetation or from the top edge of the bank (such
as, in channelized streams). Maps and supplemental information submitted as
part of the application should be used to specifically determine these
boundaries.
   (P)   Barriers. To protect wetlands against physical intrusion, wetland
buffer areas shall incorporate attractively designed and strategically located
barriers and informational signs.
   (Q)   Uses adjacent to gulches. All coastal zone land use activities
adjacent to gulches shall be carried out in a manner which avoids vegetative
removal below the break in slope, (usually those areas with a slope of 20% or
greater) and which does not alter natural landforms and drainage patterns.
   (R)   Disagreement over boundary.
      (1)   Where there is a disagreement over the boundary, location, or
current status of an environmentally sensitive area identified in Local Coastal
Program, Policy 5.5 or which is designated on the resources maps, the applicant
shall be required to provide the city with:
         (a)   A base map delineating topographic lines, adjacent roads,
location of dikes, levees, or flood control channels and tide gates, as
applicable;
         (b)   A vegetation map, including species that may indicate the
existence or non-existence of the sensitive environmental habitat area;
         (c)   A soils map delineating hydric and non-hydric soils; and,
         (d)   A census of animal species that may indicate the existence or
non-existence of the sensitive environmental habitat area.
      (2)   The city shall transmit the information provided by the applicant
to the Department of Fish and Game for review and comment. Any comments and
recommendations provided by the Department shall be immediately sent to the
applicant for his or her response. The city shall make its decision concerning
the boundary, location, or current status of the environmentally sensitive
habitat area in question based on the substantial evidence in the record and
shall adopt findings to support its actions.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2942) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.053 NATURAL HAZARDS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Development. Development in the city's coastal zone shall:
      (1)   Minimize risks to life and property in areas of high geologic and
flood hazard;
      (2)   Assure stability and structural integrity;
      (3)   Neither create nor contribute significantly to erosion, geologic
instability, or destruction of the site or surrounding area.
   (B)   High density development in flood hazard areas. High density
residential and other high occupancy development, including new hospitals,
schools, residential development with a gross density of eight units per acre
or more, office buildings 10,000 square feet in size or larger, or visitor-
serving structural developments 5,000 square feet in size or larger, shall not
be located in flood hazard areas, as designated on the Federal Emergency
Management Agency Flood Insurance Rate Maps, dated June 1, 1982, unless they
are constructed with a finished foundation that extends above the 100-year
flood level and meet all applicable drainage requirement of the Local Coastal
Program. Other development in flood hazard areas shall incorporate mitigation
measures that minimize the potential for flood damage, including development
siting and use of flood proofing techniques and materials, consistent with
other land use plan policies.
   (C)   Elk River, Humboldt Bay, Eureka Slough. Development on or near the
shoreline of Elk River, Humboldt Bay, and Eureka Slough shall neither
contribute significantly to, nor be subject to, high risk of damage from
shoreline erosion over the life span of the development. The city shall
establish a benefit assessment district for all property adjoining and
protected from flooding by the Jacobs Avenue dike. A repair and maintenance
program shall be developed and implemented, consistent with Policy 5.8 and
Policy 5.14.
   (D)   Development in areas of liquefaction. For all high density residential
and other high occupancy development, as defined in Policy 7.2, located in
areas of significant liquefaction potential, the city shall, at the time of
project application, require a geology and soils report which conforms to the
following requirements:
      (1)   The report shall be prepared by a registered geologist,
professional civil engineer with expertise in soil mechanics or foundation
engineering, or by a certified engineering geologist, and shall consider,
describe, and analyze the following:
         (a)   Geologic conditions, including soil, sediment, and rock types
and characteristics in addition to structural features, such as bedding, joint
and faults;
         (b)   Evidence of past or potential liquefaction conditions, and the
implications of such conditions for the proposed development;
         (c)   Potential effects of seismic forces resulting from a maximum
credible earthquake;
         (d)   Any other factors that might affect the development.
      (2)   The report shall also detail mitigation measures for any potential
impacts and outline alternative solutions. The report shall express a
professional opinion as to whether the project can be designed so that it will
neither be subject to nor contribute to significant geologic instability
throughout the life-span of the project. The report shall use a currently
acceptable engineering stability analysis method and describe the degree of
uncertainty of analytical results due to assumptions and unknowns.
   (E)   Cliffs, bluff tops, gulch faces. Alteration of cliffs, bluff tops, and
gulch faces or bases by excavation or other means shall be prohibited except to
protect existing structures. Permitted development shall not require the
construction of protective devices that would substantially alter natural
landforms.
   (F)   Shoreline erosion areas. For all development proposed within areas
subject to significant shoreline erosion, the city shall, prior to project
approval, require a geology and soils report which conforms to the following
requirements:
      (1)   The report shall be prepared by a registered geologist,
professional civil engineer with expertise in soil mechanics of foundation
engineering, or by a certified engineering geologist, and shall consider,
describe and analyze the following:
         (a)   Site topography, extending the surveying work beyond the site as
needed to depict unusual conditions that might affect the site;
         (b)   Historic, current and foreseeable shoreline erosion, including
investigation of recorded land surveys and tax assessment records in addition
to the use of historic maps and photographs where available and possible
changes in shore configuration and sand transport;
         (c)   Geologic conditions, including soil, sediment and rock types and
characteristics in addition to structural features, such as bedding, joint and
faults;
         (d)   Impact of construction activity on the stability of the site and
adjacent area;
         (e)   Potential for erosion of site and mitigating measures to be used
to ensure minimized erosion problems during and after construction;
         (f)   Effects of marine erosion on shoreline areas;
         (g)   Potential effects of seismic forces resulting from a maximum
credible earthquake; and,
         (h)   Any other factors that might affect slope stability.
      (2)   The report shall evaluate the off-site impacts of development and
the additional impacts that might occur due to the proposed development. The
report shall also detail mitigation measures for any potential impacts and
outline alternative solutions. The report shall express a professional opinion
as to whether the project can be designed so that it will neither be subject to
nor contribute to significant geologic instability throughout the lifespan of
the project. The report shall use a currently acceptable engineering stability
analysis method and describe the degree of uncertainty of analytical results
due to assumptions and unknowns.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2943) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.054 VISUAL RESOURCES STANDARDS.
   (A)   Scenic coastal areas.
      (1)   The following shall be considered scenic coastal areas of public
importance:
         (a)   Woodley Island, Daby Island, Indian Island;
         (b)   Eureka Slough Wildlife refuge, Second Slough, and Third Street
Slough, including adjacent wetland and riparian areas;
         (c)   The lands northerly of Jacobs Avenue, including Murray Field and
lands northeast of Murray Field.
      (2)   New off-site advertising signs or billboards (such as those signs
or billboards that stand apart from other structures on the site and that
advertise uses, merchandise, or other commodities which are available solely in
locations other than the site on which the sign or billboard stands) shall be
prohibited in these scenic coastal areas.
   (B)   Conditions of development near scenic areas. Permitted development
within scenic coastal areas, where otherwise consistent with the policies of
this Local Coastal Program, or except where designated within a MG District,
shall:
      (1)   Minimize the alteration of natural landforms;
      (2)   Be visually compatible with the character of the surrounding area;
      (3)   Be sited and designed to protect views to and along the ocean and
scenic coastal areas;
      (4)   Wherever feasible, restore and enhance visual quality in visually
degraded areas.
   (C)   Views. Views from scenic vista points shall be protected by insuring
that adjacent permitted development does not obstruct views to and along the
scenic coastal areas.
   (D)   Scenic routes. Scenic routes in the coastal zone shall be as depicted
on the map “Eureka Scenic Routes” contained in the Scenic Route Element of the
Eureka General Plan. Along such routes the city shall:
      (1)   Ensure that the scenic route rights-of-way are maintained in an
attractive manner.
      (2)   Incorporate bicycle lanes and pedestrian walkways along scenic
routes, whenever possible.
      (3)   Establish a public information system which will guide and direct
visitors to various scenic areas in the community.
      (4)   Provide street furniture and other accessory amenities which serve
to enhance the use of scenic routes.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2944) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.055 PUBLIC WORKS STANDARDS.
   (A)   Special districts. The formation or expansion of special districts
shall be permitted where assessment for, and provision of services consistent
with LUP Policies 12.3 and 12.4.
   (B)   New or expanded facilities. New or expanded public works facilities
shall be designed and limited to accommodate needs generated by permitted uses
and development consistent with the provisions of the Local Coastal Program.
   (C)   Water system capacity priority. Development shall not be permitted
which would leave insufficient water system capacity for priority uses. Those
uses which shall not be precluded by other development and their order or
priority are:
      (1)   Coastal-dependent uses;
      (2)   Essential public services;
      (3)   Basic industries vital to the economic health of the region, state
or nation;
      (4)   Public recreation;
      (5)   Commercial recreation; and,
      (6)   Visitor-serving uses.
   (D)   Extension of services beyond urban limit. There shall be no extension
of urban services (sewer and water) beyond the urban limit line as designated
in the Local Coastal Program, except that the water system intertie line in the
southwestern part of the city shall be permitted to extend outside the urban
limit line, provided no connections for private users shall be allowed outside
the urban limit line. No assessments, “readiness to serve” fees, or other costs
or encumbrances, including bonded indebtedness, for urban services shall be
assessed against lands outside the urban limit line, except for those lands
already provided with urban services, services to existing residential use on
the Lieber parcel, or those lands for which assessments or other costs or
encumbrances have been levied prior to July 1, 1984.
   (E)   Hilfiker Lane Road. Any maintenance or alteration of the freshwater
pond which serves as a water source for the cemetery and which is located north
of Hilfiker Lane between Broadway and the Northwestern Pacific Railroad right-
of-way shall protect the marsh vegetation at the perimeter of the pond as it
existed on July 4, 1984. However, the pond shall be designated and considered
as a public works facility rather than a natural resource (or environmentally
sensitive habitat) area.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2945) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.056 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Urban limit area development preferred. The development of vacant land
within the city urban limit area, consistent with all applicable policies of
this Local Coastal Program, shall be the preferred economical and environmental
means of residential, commercial, or industrial growth in the city.
   (B)   Urban limit area. The urban limit area of the city shall be as shown
in Chapter 15 on the “Land Use and Zoning” maps 1 and 2.
   (C)   Extension of urban limit.
      (1)   Extensions of the urban limit line shall be allowed if approved by
the Coastal Commission and if:
         (a)   Sufficient public services capacity is available to serve any
development proposed for the area that is to be included in the extended urban
limit area, while assuring that capacity is available for priority uses
consistent with Local Coastal Program Policy 10.4.
         (b)   The extension, or any development proposed for the area that is
to be included in the extended urban limit area, will not have a significant
adverse effect on prime agricultural land, timberland, or environmentally
sensitive habitat areas.
      (2)   All extensions of the urban limit line within the coastal zone
shall constitute an amendment to this Local Coastal Program and shall not
become final unless approved by the Coastal Commission.
   (D)   Extension of services beyond urban limit. There shall be no extension
of urban sewer and water services beyond the urban limit line as defined in
Policy 12.2, except that the water system intertie line in the southwestern
part shall be permitted to extend outside the urban limit line, provided that
no connections for private users shall be allowed outside said urban limit
line. No assessments, “readiness to serve” fees, or other costs or
encumbrances, including bonded indebtedness, for urban services shall be
assessed against lands outside the urban limit line, except for those lands
already provided with urban services, services to existing residential use on
the Lieber parcel, or those lands for which assessments or other costs or
encumbrances have been levied prior to July 1, 1984.
   (E)   Precedence of natural resources. Development type and density shall be
that specified by the land use categories and designations in the land use plan
map. However, natural resource designations and policies shall take precedence
in all cases, except as otherwise provided in this Local Coastal Program,
consistent with applicable policies of the Coastal Act. Where a parcel is
located partly within and partly without an environmentally sensitive habitat
area, development shall be located and designed to avoid significant adverse
effects on the environmental resources.
   (F)   Regional commercial. Regional commercial facilities shall be located
in the Planned Commercial District or in the Core Area. Development proposed
for the Planned Commercial District west of Broadway shall include an on-site
wetlands restoration and management program, consistent with LUP Policies 5.16
and 5.17 and the objectives of Policy 5.20.
   (G)   Highway service commercial. Highway service commercial development
shall be prohibited along Highway 101 south of the urban limit line as shown on
the Land Use Map in Chapter 15, and between the Service Commercial Districts
east of Murray Field and Indianola Road.
   (H)   Land divisions. Land divisions shall not result in the creation of a
parcel or parcels totally within an environmentally sensitive habitat area or
flood hazard area as defined in the Local Coastal Program. No land divisions,
except for agricultural leases, shall be permitted on lands designated for
coastal agriculture use.
   (I)   Archaeological areas.
      (1)   When development is proposed within a known archaeological area,
project design shall avoid or minimize impacts to the resource.
      (2)   When development in archaeological sites cannot be avoided,
adequate mitigation measures shall be required. Mitigation shall be designed in
accord with Guidelines of State Office of Historic Preservation and the State
Native American Heritage Commission. When, in the course of grading,
excavation, or any other development activity, evidence of archaeological
artifacts is discovered, all work which could damage or destroy such resources
shall cease and the City Planning Director shall be notified immediately of the
discovery.
      (3)   The Director of Community Development shall notify the State
Historic Preservation Officer and the Sonoma State University Cultural
Resources Facility of the find. At the request of the State Historic
Preservation Officer, development of the site may be halted until an
archaeological survey can be made and appropriate and feasible mitigation
measures are developed.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2946) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 589-C.S., passed 2-21-95)
Penalty, see § 150.999
SPECIFIC DISTRICTS
§ 156.065 WC — CONSERVATION WATER DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. In addition to the objective prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the WC District is included in the zoning regulations
to achieve the following purpose: To protect, enhance and restore valuable
fish, wildlife and sensitive habitat areas, and to provide for limited resource
dependent uses and public recreation in estuarine waters.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2950)
   (B)   Required conditions. All permitted and conditional uses shall meet the
requirements of the resource protection standards in §§
156.050 through
156.056 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2951)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted: Management for
fish and wildlife habitat, and nature study.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2952)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Aquaculture, mariculture, noriculture, and similar resource-
dependent activities;
      (2)   Passive recreation;
      (3)   Public access facilities consistent with resource protection;
      (4)   Resource restoration and enhancement;
      (5)   Restoration and maintenance dredging of previously dredged
navigation channels;
      (6)   Boat launch ramps;
      (7)   Oil and gas pipelines;
      (8)   Incidental public works projects, including but not limited to,
burying cables and pipes.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2953)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.066 WD — DEVELOPMENT WATER DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002, the WD District is included in the zoning regulations to achieve the
following purpose: To provide for port and harbor related uses of the estuarine
waters of Humboldt Bay, consistent with resource protection policies, as
provided by all applicable policies in the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2955)
   (B)   Required conditions. All permitted and conditional uses shall meet the
requirements of the resources protection standards in §§
156.050 through
156.056 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2956)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the WD
District:
      (1)   Maintenance dredging of turning basins, berthing and mooring areas,
and boat launch ramps;
      (2)   Maintenance of intake and outfall lines;
      (3)   Restoration and maintenance dredging of previously dredged
navigation channels.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2957)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   OCS service facilities;
      (2)   Oil and gas pipelines;
      (3)   Incidental public works projects, including but not limited to,
burying cables and pipes, or inspection of piers and maintenance of intake and
outfall lines;
      (4)   Nature study and other educational uses;
      (5)   Piers, docks and wharves;
      (6)   Port, energy and coastal-development industrial facilities;
      (7)   Public access facilities;
      (8)   Resource restoration or enhancement;
      (9)   Active recreation, including hunting and fishing;
      (10)    Aquaculture and similar resource-dependent activities;
      (11)    Boating and marina facilities;
      (12)    Commercial fishing facilities;
      (13)    Dredging of new or deepened channels.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2958)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.067 NR — NATURAL RESOURCES DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the NR District is included in the zoning regulations
to achieve the following purpose: To protect, enhance, and restore
environmentally sensitive habitat areas, and to allow resource dependent uses
consistent with the continuance of such habitat areas.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2960)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All permitted and conditional uses shall meet the requirements of
the resource protection standards in §§
156.050 through
156.056 of this chapter.
      (2)   No sign, advertising sign or structure, or billboard shall be
permitted.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2961)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following use shall be permitted: Management for
fish and wildlife habitat.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2962)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in
accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Aquaculture;
      (2)   Educational/scientific study (by permit from management agency);
      (3)   Restoration and enhancement for fish and wildlife habitat values;
      (4)   Pedestrian access consistent with all applicable policies of the
land use plan.
      (5)   Oil and gas pipelines.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2963)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.068 AC — COASTAL AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the AC Coastal Agriculture District is included in the
zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To protect agricultural lands, including farmed or grazed wetlands,
for long-term productive agricultural and wildlife habitat uses;
      (2)   To ensure adequate separation between dwellings and facilities for
housing animals.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2970)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located
in the vicinity by reason of odor, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse,
water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or
traffic or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion, provided that permitted
agricultural pursuits conducted in accord with good practice shall not be
deemed a nuisance.
      (3)   Animal keeping shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 91 of this code.
      (4)   Dwellings and farm-related structures may be located on an existing
farmed wetland parcel only when no upland location is available for such
purpose.
      (5)   Structures, including non-slab foundation greenhouses that utilize
the underlying soil for agricultural practices, located on a grazed or farmed
wetland parcel shall be sited and designed in a manner which will minimize any
adverse environmental effects to the farmed or grazed wetland, including
through a minimization of fill. To the extent required by federal law and
regulations, dwellings that are otherwise permitted in the coastal agricultural
district shall also comply with all flood zone regulations adopted by the city.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2971)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site with a
permitted use, including barns, stables, coops, tank houses, storage tanks,
windmills, silos, other farm outbuildings, private garages and carports,
bunkhouse, or accessory living quarters with a kitchen for each dwelling on the
site, storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses, and the storage of petroleum
products for the use of persons residing or working on the site;
      (2)   Apiaries;
      (3)   Field and truck crops;
      (4)   Livestock raising;
      (5)   Greenhouses, which are not located on slab foundations and where
crops are grown in the existing soil on the site;
      (6)   One-family dwelling and farm employee housing for persons employed
on the premises. Not more than one dwelling unit, other than farm employee
housing, shall be located on each parcel. Manufactured homes shall meet the
criteria prescribed in §§
155.230 through
155.232 of this title;
      (7)   Orchards;
      (8)   Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural produce grown on the
site;
      (9)   Timber harvest.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2972)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted upon the
granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Aquaculture and similar resource-dependent activities;
      (2)   Coastal-dependent oil and gas wells;
      (3)   Oil and gas pipelines;
      (4)   Incidental public service purposes;
      (5)   Wetland restoration and enhancement projects;
('63 Code, § 10-5.2973)
      (6)   Wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159; and
      (7)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, mixed light, not more than
10,000 square feet of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title, except that no space shall be required to be located in
a garage or carport.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2974)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
156.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2975)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2976)
   (H)   Architectural review. Conditional uses shall be subject to
architectural review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2977)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 518-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord.
526-C.S., passed 6-20-91; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 768-
C.S., passed 5-3-11; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 847-C.S.,
passed 9-20-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.069 RS — ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the RS-6,000 and RS-12,000 Residential Districts are
included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To reserve appropriately located areas for family living at
reasonable population densities consistent with sound standards of public
health and safety;
      (2)   To ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each
dwelling;
      (3)   To protect one-family dwellings from the lack of privacy associated
with multi-family dwellings;
      (4)   To provide space for semi-public facilities needed to complement
urban residential areas and for institutions that require a residential
environment;
      (5)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the land around them;
      (6)   To preserve the natural beauty of hillsides and avoid slide and
drainage problems by encouraging retention of natural vegetation and
discouraging mass grading;
      (7)   To provide necessary space for the off-street parking of
automobiles and, where appropriate, for the off-street loading of trucks;
      (8)   To protect residential properties from the hazards, noise, and
congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic;
      (9)   To protect residential properties from noise, illumination,
unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, and other
objectionable influences;
      (10)    To protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, and other hazards; and,
      (11)    To reserve appropriately sized lots for family living at
reasonable population densities in areas with limited public service (RS-
12,000).
('63 Code, § 10-5.2980)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located
in the vicinity by reason of odor, insect nuisance, fumes, dust, smoke,
cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination,
glare unsightliness, or traffic or to involve any hazard of fire or explosion.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2981)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   One-family dwellings in which not more than three paying guests may
be lodged or boarded. Manufactured home shall meet the criteria prescribed in
§§
155.230 through
155.232 of this title.
      (2)   Raising of fruit and nut trees, vegetables, and horticultural
specialties;
      (3)   Home occupations conducted in accord with the regulations
prescribed in §
155.215 of this title;
      (4)   Temporary subdivision sales offices conducted in accord with the
regulations prescribed in §
155.217 of this title;
      (5)   Accessory structures located on the same site with a permitted use,
including private garages and carports, one guest house or accessory living
quarters without a kitchen, storehouses, garden structures, greenhouses,
recreation rooms, and hobby areas within an enclosed structure;
      (6)   Swimming pools used solely by persons resident on the site and
their guests, provided that no swimming pool or accessory mechanical equipment
shall be located in a required front yard or less than five feet from a
property line;
      (7)   Keeping horses, rabbits, poultry, and bees in accord with the
provisions of
Chapter 91 of this code; and,
      (8)   Vacation dwelling units as provided in §§
155.500 through
155.508 of this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.2982)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
upon the granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Secondary dwelling units as provided in §§
155.200 through
155.203 of the title;
      (2)   Charitable institutions;
      (3)   Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses, parsonages, and
other religious institutions;
      (4)   Commercial nursery growing grounds;
      (5)   Golf courses;
      (6)   Nursery schools;
      (7)   Nursing homes for not more than three patients;
      (8)   Parking facilities improved as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title, on a site having a side property line which adjoins an
OR, C, or M District, or is opposite and separated therefrom only by an alley,
or on a site that has a rear property line adjoining an OR, C, or M District
and has access therefrom, provided that the site of the parking facility shall
not extend more than 150 feet from the boundary of the OR, C, or M District;
      (9)   Private recreation parks and swim clubs;
      (10)    Private schools and colleges, not including art, craft, music,
dancing, business, professional, or trade schools and colleges;
      (11)    Public utility and public service pumping stations, power
stations, equipment buildings and installations, drainageways and structures,
storage tanks, and transmission line found by the Planning Commission to be
necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (12)    Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (13)   Bed and breakfast inns in which not more than 15 paying transient
guests may be lodged or boarded, provided that the site of such inn shall not
be less than one acre in area;
      (14)   Timber harvest of less than three acres; and
('63 Code, § 10-5.2983)
      (15)   Wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159 .
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2984)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2985)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2986)
   (H)   Architectural review. Conditional uses shall be subject to
architectural review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2987)
   (I)   Density standards.
      (1)   RS-6,000. In an RS-6,000 District, the site of a one-family
dwelling shall contain at least 6,000 square feet, including at least 4,000
square feet with a natural slope of less than 20%; provided, however, the
portion of the site having a slope of less than 20% may be reduced by 500
square feet for each 3,000 square feet of additional site area, except that
each site shall contain at least 2,500 square feet with a natural slope less
than 20%. The maximum gross density in the RS-6,000 District shall be seven
units per acre.
      (2)   RS-12,000. In an RS-12,000 District, the site of a one-family
dwelling shall contain at least 12,000 square feet, including at least 5,000
square feet with a natural slope of less than 25%; provided, however, the
portion of the site having a slope of less than 25% may be reduced by 500
square feet for each 3,000 square feet of additional site area, except that
each site shall contain at least 3,000 square feet with a natural slope less
than 25%. The maximum gross density in the RS-12,000 District shall be 3.7
units per acre.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2988)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 518-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord.
519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 6-20-91; Am. Ord. 757-C.S.,
passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 840-C.S., passed
7-5-16)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.070 RM — MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
155.002 of this title, the RM Multi-Family Residential Districts are included
in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To reserve appropriately located areas for family living in a
variety of types of dwellings at a reasonable range of population densities
consistent with sound standards of public health and safety;
      (2)   To preserve as many as possible of the desirable characteristics of
the one-family residential district while permitting higher population
densities;
      (3)   To ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each
dwelling unit;
      (4)   To provide space for semi-public facilities needed to complement
urban residential areas and space for institutions that require a residential
environment;
      (5)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the land around them;
      (6)   To provide necessary space for the off-street parking of
automobiles and, where appropriate, for the off-street loading of trucks;
      (7)   To protect residential properties from the hazards, noise, and
congestion created by commercial and industrial traffic;
      (8)   To protect residential properties from noise, illumination,
unsightliness, odors, dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat, glare, and other
objectionable influences; and,
      (9)   To protect residential properties from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, and other hazards.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2990)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the RM-2,500
and RM-1,000 Districts:
      (1)   Any use permitted under §
155.052(C) of this title, in RS-6,000 One-Family Residential Districts;
      (2)   Combinations of attached or detached dwelling units, including
duplexes, multi-family dwellings, dwelling groups, row houses, and townhouses;
      (3)   Lodging houses in which not more than 15 paying guests may be
lodged or boarded;
      (4)   Nursing homes for not more than three patients; and,
      (5)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
permitted use.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2991)
   (C)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in
the RM-2,500 and RM-1,000 Districts upon the granting of a use permit in
accordance with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Charitable institutions;
      (2)   Churches, convents, monasteries, parish houses, parsonages, and
other religious institutions;
      (3)   Commercial nursery growing grounds;
      (4)   Golf courses;
      (5)   Nursery schools;
      (6)   Nursing homes, not including nursing homes for mental, drug addict,
or liquor addict cases;
      (7)   Parking facilities improved as set forth in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title on a site having a side property line which adjoins on
OR, NM, C, or M District, or is opposite and separated therefrom only by an
alley, or on a site that has a rear property line adjoining an OR, NM, C, or M
District and has access therefrom; provided, however, the site of the parking
facility shall not extend more than 1,500 feet from the boundary of the OR, HM,
C, or M District;
      (8)   Private recreation parks and swim clubs;
      (9)   Private schools and colleges, not including art, craft, music,
dancing, business, professional, or trade schools and colleges;
      (10)    Private noncommercial clubs and lodges, not including employment
offices;
      (11)    Public utility and public service pumping stations, power
stations, equipment buildings and installations, drainage ways and structures,
storage tanks, and transmission lines found by the Planning Commission to be
necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (12)    Mobile home parks in an RM-1,000 District in accordance with the
provisions of §§
155.230 through
155.232 of this title;
      (13)   Timber harvest of less than three acres;
('63 Code, § 10-5.2992)
      (14)   Wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159 .
   (C)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as set forth in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2993)
   (D)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as set forth in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2994)
   (E)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as set forth in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2995)
   (F)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses, except
one-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings containing not more than six
dwelling units, and dwelling groups containing not more than six units, shall
be subject to site plan review as set forth in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. All conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.2996)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 518-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord.
526-C.S., passed 6-20-91; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 786-
C.S., passed 8-21-12)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.071 OR — OFFICE AND MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives set forth in §
155.002 of this title, the OR Office and Multi-Family Residential District is
included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To provide opportunities for offices of a semi-commercial character
to locate outside commercial districts;
      (2)   To provide space for semi-public facilities and institutions which
appropriately may be located in office and multi-family dwelling districts;
      (3)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern offices,
including the off-street parking of automobiles and, where appropriate, the
off-street loading of trucks;
      (4)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them;
      (5)   To protect offices and multi-family dwellings from noise,
disturbance, traffic hazards, safety hazards, and other objectionable
influences incidental to certain commercial uses; and
      (6)   To protect offices and multi-family dwellings from fire, explosion,
noxious fumes, and other hazards.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29100)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   All professional pursuits and businesses shall be conducted
entirely within a completely enclosed structure except for off-street parking
and loading areas.
      (3)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located
in the vicinity by reason of odor, insect nuisance, fumes, dust, smoke,
cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination,
glare, unsightliness, or truck traffic or to involve any hazard of fire or
explosion.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29101)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted under §
155.053(C) of this title in RM Districts, provided that there shall be not less
than 1,000 square feet of site area per dwelling unit, and provided that units
not located above a permitted nonresidential use shall be subject to the
requirements of usable open space per dwelling unit of the RM-1,000 District.
Yards at and above the first level occupied by dwelling units shall be as
required in the RM District;
      (2)   Administrative, business, and professional offices;
      (3)   Any other use which is determined by the Planning Commission, as
provided in §§
155.265 through
155.270 of this title, to be similar to be used listed in subsection (2) of
this division;
      (4)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (5)   Parking facilities, including fee parking facilities improved in
conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking
facilities in §
155.118 of this title;
      (6)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
permitted use; and
      (7)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, located separate from a
distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29102)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
upon the granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Nursing homes, not including nursing homes for mental, drug addict,
or liquor addict cases;
      (2)   Private schools and colleges, including music and dance studios not
less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (3)   Public utility and public service pumping stations, power stations,
equipment buildings and installations, drainageways and structures, storage
tanks, and transmission lines found by the Planning Commission and to be
necessary for the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (4)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (5)   Family care homes and halfway houses;
      (6)   Charitable institutions;
      (7)   Churches and other religious institutions;
      (8)   Nursery schools;
      (9)   Private noncommercial clubs and lodges;
      (9.1)   Medical cannabis testing facilities, where no cultivation,
processing, or distribution of medical cannabis occurs, subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (10)    Mortuaries;
      (11)    Motels and hotels; and,
      (12)    Retail and service establishments that are compatible with and
complementary to other permitted uses, including only:
         (a)   Art and artists' supply stores;
         (b)   Art galleries and stores selling objects of art;
         (c)   Banks and savings and loan offices;
         (d)   Bail bonding establishments;
         (e)   Bars not less than 150 feet from an R District;
         (f)   Barber shops and beauty shops;
         (g)   Book stores and rental shops;
         (h)   Candy stores;
         (i)   Finance companies;
         (j)   Florists;
         (k)   Gift shops;
         (l)   Interior decorating shops;
         (m)   Prescription pharmacies provided at least 80% of the interior
display area of a pharmacy shall be used for the sale of prescription or trade
drugs and provided liquor shall not be sold;
         (n)   Restaurants and soda fountains, not including drive-in
establishments, not less than 150 feet from an R District;
         (o)   Telegraph offices; and,
         (p)   Travel agencies.
      (13)   Timber harvest of less than three acres;
('63 Code, § 10-5.29103)
      (14)   Wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159 .
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29104)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29105)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29106)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses, except
one-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings containing not more than six
units, and dwelling groups containing not more than six units, shall be subject
to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. All conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29107)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 512-C.S., passed 3-8-90; Am. Ord. 518-
C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 786-C.S.,
passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 847-C.S., passed 9-
20-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.072 CW — WATERFRONT COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
155.002 of this title, the CW Waterfront Commercial Districts are included in
the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To encourage, protect and maintain coastal-dependent and coastal-
related uses;
      (2)   To encourage development of recreational and visitor-serving uses;
      (3)   To provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices,
service establishments, amusement establishments, and wholesale businesses
offering commodities and services required by residents of the city and its
surrounding market area;
      (4)   To provide opportunities for retail stores, offices, service
establishments, amusement establishments, and wholesale businesses to
concentrate for the convenience of the public and in mutually beneficial
relationships to each other;
      (5)   To provide space for community facilities and institutions that
appropriately may be located in commercial areas;
      (6)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial
development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas;
      (7)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them;
      (8)   To protect commercial properties from noise, odor, dust, dirt,
smoke, vibration, heat, glare, heavy truck traffic, and other objectionable
influences incidental to industrial uses;
      (9)   To protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, and other hazards;
      (10)    To encourage upgrading of the use of strategically located sites
between the central business district and Humboldt Bay by creating an
environment suitable for establishments catering to tourists; and
      (11)    To protect and maintain certain industrial uses that require
waterfront locations.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29110)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   In a CW District all businesses, services, and processes shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-
street parking and loading areas, exhibits of goods sold, manufactured, or
processed on the premises, outdoor dining areas, and utility substations and
equipment installations.
      (3)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity by reason of odor, insect
nuisance, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes,
noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or heavy truck traffic or
to involve any hazard of fire or explosion.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the CW
Waterfront Commercial District, provided that when recreation and visitor-
serving facilities are integrated with coastal-dependent uses (noted below with
an asterisk), the recreation and visitor- serving areas shall be secondary to
and compatible with the coastal- dependent uses:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures located on the same site as a
permitted use;
      (2)   Boat launching;
      (3)   Coastal dependent and coastal-related uses;
      (4)   Commercial fishing facilities;
      (5)   Docks, piers and wharfs;
      (6)   Hotels and motels;
      (7)   Ice vending stations;
      (8)   Marine and boat sales, services and repairs;
      (9)   Offices related to or dependent upon coastal-dependent or coastal-
related uses;
      (10)   Public and commercial recreation;
      (11)   Recreational boating facilities;
      (12)   Visitor-serving facilities and other establishments that offer
retail sales and services to visitors, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Antique shops;
         (b)   Art and artists' supply stores;
         (c)   Art galleries;
         (d)   Bakeries baking for retail sale on the premises only;
         (e)   Bars and taverns;
         (f)   Bicycle shops;
         (g)   Book stores and newsstands;
         (h)   Candy stores/shops;
         (i)   Clothing shops, boutique;
         (j)   Dairy products manufacturing for retail sales on the premises
only;
         (k)   Day or destination spas;
         (l)   Florists;
         (m)   Garden shops;
         (n)   Gift shops;
         (o)   Jewelry stores;
         (p)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
         (q)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
         (r)   Music, record, and CD stores;
         (s)   Picture framing shops;
         (t)   Restaurants (but not including drive-in establishments);
         (u)   Shoe shops, boutique;
         (v)   Sporting goods stores that primarily include rental and sales of
equipment, gear, clothing, and other goods, for coastal-dependent or -related
recreation activities;
         (w)   Stamp and coin stores;
         (x)   Stationery shops;
         (y)   Theaters, small;
         (z)   Toy shops; and
         (aa)   Variety shops.
      (13)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
issued pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses.  
      (1)   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the CW
Waterfront Commercial District upon the granting of a use permit in accord with
the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title. The applicant shall demonstrate and the city shall find
that granting of a use permit will not diminish recreational or visitor-serving
opportunities.
         (a)   Administrative, business, and professional offices, except
medical and dental offices;
         (b)   Arts and crafts schools and colleges;
         (c)   Bakeries;
         (d)   Banks;
         (e)   Barber shops and beauty shops;
         (f)   Bus depot;
         (g)   Bus depots, provided all buses shall not be stored on the site
and no repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on the site;
         (h)   Business, professional, and trade schools and colleges;
         (i)   Charitable institutions;
         (j)   Christmas tree sales lots;
         (k)   Churches, parsonages, parish houses and other religious
institutions;
         (l)   Cigar stores;
         (m)   Cleaning, coin-operated;
         (n)   Clothing and costume rental establishments;
         (o)   Clothing stores;
         (p)   Conference center;
         (q)   Dance halls;
         (r)   Department stores;
         (s)   Finance companies;
         (t)   Food stores and supermarkets;
         (u)   Furniture stores;
         (v)   Gunsmiths;
         (w)   Gymnasiums;
         (x)   Hardware stores;
         (y)   Health clubs, neighborhood;
         (z)   Ice storage houses;
         (aa)   Interior decorating shops;
         (bb)   Laundries, self-service type;
         (cc)   Liquor stores;
         (dd)   Locksmiths;
         (ee)   Massage and physical culture studios;
         (ff)   Medical and dental offices;
         (gg)   Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;
         (hh)   Meeting halls;
         (ii)   Messengers’ offices;
         (jj)   Music and dance studios;
         (kk)   Musical instrument repair shops;
         (ll)   Office and business machine stores;
         (mm)   Offices and office buildings;
         (nn)   Oil and gas pipelines;
         (oo)   Optician and optometrical shops;
         (pp)   Parking facilities, including fee parking facilities;
         (qq)   Passenger railroad stations;
         (rr)   Pet and bird stores;
         (ss)   Photographic supply stores and studios;
         (tt)   Post offices;
         (uu)   Prescription pharmacies and dental and optical laboratories;
         (vv)   Pressing establishments;
         (ww)   Printing shops, including lithographing and engraving;
         (xx)   Public utility service pumping stations, power stations,
equipment buildings and installations, drainageways and structures, storage
tanks, and transmission lines found by the Planning Commission to be necessary
for the public health, safety or welfare;
          (yy)   Radio and television broadcasting studios; towers and other
support structures, commercial satellite dishes, antennas and equipment
buildings necessary for the specific facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
         (zz)   Realtors and real estate offices;
         (aaa)   Recreational vehicle parks;
         (bbb)   Residential uses permitted in the RM Districts shall be
permitted in a CW District, provided the residential units are located above
the ground floor of commercial structures and the minimum size of such dwelling
units shall not be less than what is required in the Building and Housing Code;
         (ccc)   Saving and loan offices;
         (ddd)   Scientific instrument shops;
         (eee)   Skating rinks;
         (fff)   Skating rinks within buildings;
         (ggg)   Sporting goods stores;
         (hhh)   Sports arenas within buildings;
         (iii)   Stationery stores;
         (jjj)   Stenographic services;
         (kkk)   Telegraph offices; towers and other support structures,
commercial satellite dishes, antennas, and equipment buildings necessary for
the specific facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
         (lll)   Television and radio sales and repair stores;
         (mmm)   Theaters and auditoriums within buildings;
         (nnn)   Toy stores;
         (ooo)   Variety stores;
         (ppp)   Warehouses;
         (qqq)   Watch and clock repair shops;
         (rrr)   Wholesale establishments without stocks;
         (sss)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet
of an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159; and
         (ttt)   Medical cannabis testing facilities located above the ground
floor of commercial structures, and where no cultivation, processing, or
distribution of medical cannabis occurs, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
      (2)   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in the CW
Waterfront Commercial District upon the granting of a minor use permit in
accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title. The applicant shall demonstrate and the city shall find
that granting of a minor use permit will not diminish recreational or visitor-
serving opportunities.
         (a)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, located separate
from a distribution facility and located above the ground floor of commercial
structures, and subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
      (3)   Any other use which is determined by the Planning Commission to be
similar to the listed conditional uses and which conform to the policies of the
land use plan. In making such a determination, in addition to the findings
prescribed in §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title, the Planning Commission must find:
         (a)   That consideration of all determinable characteristics of the
use that is subject to the application indicates that the use has the same
essential characteristics as a permitted or conditional use;
         (b)   That the use conforms to the purposes of the CW Waterfront
Commercial District;
         (c)   That the use will not create significantly more vehicular
traffic or congestion than associated with permitted or conditional uses; or
         (d)   That the proposed use will not negatively affect recreation or
visitor-serving facilities and coastal-dependent uses.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29113)
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29114)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29115)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29116)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses shall be
subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29117)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 663-C.S., passed 11-19-02; Am. Ord.
757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 810-
C.S., passed 5-19-15; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 847-C.S.,
passed 9-20-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.073 CN — NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the CN Neighborhood Commercial Districts are included
in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices,
service establishments, amusement establishments, and wholesale businesses
offering commodities and services required by residents of the city and its
surrounding market area;
      (2)   To provide opportunities for retail stores, offices, service
establishments, amusement establishments, and wholesale businesses to
concentrate for the convenience of the public and in a mutually beneficial
relationship to each other;
      (3)   To provide space for community facilities and institutions that
appropriately may be located in commercial areas;
      (4)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial
development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas;
      (5)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them;
      (6)   To protect commercial properties from noise, odor, dust, dirt,
smoke, vibration, heat, glare, heavy truck traffic, and other objectionable
influences incidental to industrial uses;
      (7)   To protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes and other hazards;
      (8)   To provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices
and personal service establishments patronized primarily by residents of the
immediate area; and
      (9)   To permit the development of neighborhood shopping centers of
limited size and in locations shown on the Eureka Area General Plan according
to standards that minimize adverse impact on adjoining residential uses.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29120)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   In a CN District, all businesses, services, and processes shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed structure, except for off-
street parking and loading areas, exhibits of goods sold, manufactured, or
processed on the premises, gasoline service stations, outdoor dining areas,
nurseries, garden shops, Christmas tree sales lots, bus depots, and utility
substations and equipment installations.
      (3)   In a CN District, all products produced on the site of any of the
permitted uses shall be sold primarily at retail on the site where produced.
      (4)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located
in the vicinity of by reason of odor, insect nuisance, fumes, dust, smoke,
cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination,
glare, unsightliness, or heavy truck traffic or to involve any hazard of fire
or explosion.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29121)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures, not including warehouses, located on
the same site as a permitted use;
      (2)   Administrative, business, and professional offices, except medical
and dental offices;
      (3)   Art galleries;
      (4)   Arts and artists' supply stores;
      (5)   Arts and crafts schools and colleges;
      (6)   Bakeries, including baking for sale on the premises only;
      (7)   Banks;
      (8)   Banquet rooms not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (9)   Barber shops and beauty shops;
      (10)    Bars not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (11)    Bicycle shops;
      (12)    Book stores and rental libraries;
      (13)    Candy stores;
      (14)    Christmas tree sales lots;
      (15)    Cigar stores;
      (16)    Cleaning and dyeing;
      (17)    Cleaning and dyeing, including the use of one synthetic dry
cleaning machine using nonexplosive solvents and having a capacity of not more
than 40 pounds per cycle only;
      (18)    Cleaning, coin operated;
      (19)    Clothing and costume rental establishments;
      (20)    Clothing stores;
      (21)    Computer and communications equipment stores;
      (22)    Dairy products manufacturing for retail sales on the premises
only;
      (23)    Delicatessen stores;
      (24)    Drugstores;
      (25)    Dry goods stores;
      (26)    Electrical appliance sales and repair stores, provided repair
services shall be incidental to retail sales;
      (27)    Finance companies;
      (28)    Florists;
      (29)    Food lockers;
      (30)    Food stores and supermarkets;
      (31)    Fur shops;
      (32)    Furniture stores;
      (33)    Garden shops;
      (34)    Gift shops;
      (35)    Hardware stores;
      (35.1)   Health clubs, neighborhood
      (36)    Hobby shops;
      (37)    Household appliance stores;
      (38)    Ice vending stations;
      (39)    Interior decorating shops;
      (40)    Jewelry stores;
      (41)    Laundries, self-service type;
      (42)    Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (43)    Liquor stores;
      (44)    Locksmiths;
      (45)    Medical and dental offices;
      (46)    Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;
      (47)    Meeting halls not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (48)    Mens' furnishing stores;
      (49)    Messengers' offices;
      (50)    Millinery shops;
      (51)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (52)   Music and dance studios not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (53)   Music stores;
      (54)   Musical instrument repair shops;
      (55)   Newsstands;
      (56)   Nurseries and garden supply stores provided all equipment,
supplies and merchandise other than plants shall be kept within a completely
enclosed building, and fertilizer of any type shall be stored and sold in
packaged form only;
      (57)   Office and business machine stores;
      (58)   Offices and office buildings;
      (59)   Optician and optometrical shops;
      (60)   Paint, glass, and wallpaper shops;
      (61)   Parking facilities, including fee parking facilities;
      (62)   Pet and bird stores;
      (63)   Pet and bird stores not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (64)   Phonograph record stores;
      (65)   Photographic supply stores and studios;
      (66)   Picture framing’ shops;
      (67)   Post offices;
      (68)   Prescription pharmacies and dental and optical laboratories;
      (69)   Pressing establishments;
      (70)   Private clubs and lodges not less than 150 feet from an R
District;
      (71)   Realtors and real estate offices;
      (72)   Residential uses permitted under permitted uses in RM Districts
shall be permitted in a CN District provided the minimum size of such dwelling
units shall be not less than as set forth in the Building Code and Housing Code
of the city;
      (73)   Restaurants and soda fountains, not including drive-in
establishments, 150 feet or more from an R District;
      (74)   Saving and loan offices;
      (75)   Scientific instrument shops;
      (76)   Self-service laundries and self-service dry cleaning
establishments;
      (77)   Shoe repair shops;
      (78)   Shoe stores;
      (79)   Sporting goods stores;
      (80)   Stamp and coin stores;
      (81)   Stationery stores;
      (82)   Stenographic services;
      (83)   Tailor and dressmaking shops;
      (84)   Taxicab stands;
      (85)   Telegraph offices; towers and other support structures, commercial
satellite dishes, antennas, and equipment buildings necessary for the specific
facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
      (86)   Television and radio sales and repair stores;
      (87)   Ticket agencies;
      (88)   Toy stores;
      (89)   Travel agencies and bureaus;
      (90)   Umbrella repair shops;
      (91)   Video sales and rental stores;
      (92)   Watch and clock repair shops;
      (93)   Wholesale establishments without stocks;
      (94)   Women’s apparel accessory stores; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29122)
      (95)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
issued pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
upon the granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (2)   Ambulance service;
      (3)   Blueprint and photostat shops;
      (4)   Business, professional and trade schools and colleges;
      (5)   Charitable institutions;
      (6)   Churches, parsonages, parish houses, monasteries, convents, and
other religious institutions;
      (6.1)   Medical cannabis dispensing facilities subject to the provisions
of
Chapter 158;
      (7)   Oil and gas pipelines;
      (8)   Parking facilities, including required off-street parking
facilities, located on a site separated from the use which the facilities
serve;
      (9)   Public utility and public service pumping stations, power stations,
equipment buildings and installations, drainage ways and structures, storage
tanks, and transmission lines found by the Planning Commission to be necessary
for the public health, safety or welfare;
      (10)    Restaurants and soda fountains, not including drive-in
establishments, 150 feet or more from an R District;
      (11)    Service stations, not including automobile, truck, and trailer
rentals as accessory uses, provided all operations, except the sale of gasoline
and oil and the washing of cars, shall be conducted within a building enclosed
on at least three sides;
('63 Code, § 10-5.29123)
      (12)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of
an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159 .
   (D.1)   Minor conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be
permitted upon the granting of a minor use permit in accord with the provisions
of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, located separate from a
distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29124)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29125)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29126)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses shall be
subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29127)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 663-C.S., passed 11-19-02; Am. Ord.
757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-
C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 847-C.S., passed 9-20-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.074 CS — SERVICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
155.002 of this title, the CS Service Commercial Districts are included in the
zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To provide appropriately located areas for retail stores, offices,
service establishments, amusement establishments, and wholesale businesses
offering commodities and services required by residents of the city and its
surrounding market area;
      (2)   To provide opportunities for retail stores, offices, service
establishments, amusement establishments, and wholesale businesses to
concentrate for the convenience of the public and in a mutually beneficial
relationship to each other;
      (3)   To provide space for community facilities and institutions that
appropriately may be located in commercial areas;
      (4)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern commercial
development, including off-street parking and truck loading areas;
      (5)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them;
      (6)   To protect commercial properties from fire, explosion, noxious
fumes, and other hazards;
      (7)   To provide appropriately located areas for commercial uses having
features that are incompatible with the purposes of the other commercial
districts;
      (8)   To permit additional development in mixed commercial areas
containing both retail stores and commercial services; and
      (9)   To allow a wider choice of location for certain industrial uses
that do not have an adverse impact on commercial services.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29130)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   All uses shall comply with the policies established by the land use
plan;
      (3)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity or injurious to property located
in the vicinity by reason of odor, insect, nuisance, fumes, dust, smoke,
cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes, noise, vibration, illumination,
glare, unsightliness, or heavy truck traffic, or to involve any hazard of fire
or explosion.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29131)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures located on the same site as a
permitted use;
      (2)   Accessory uses and structures located on the same site as
conditional use;
      (3)   Addressograph services;
      (4)   Administrative, business, and professional offices, except medical
and dental offices;
      (5)   Art and artists’ supply stores;
      (6)   Art galleries and stores selling objects of art;
      (7)   Arts and crafts schools and colleges;
      (8)   Auction rooms;
      (9)   Auction establishments, including outdoor displays;
      (10)   Ambulance services;
      (11)   [Reserved]
      (12)   [Reserved]
      (13)   [Reserved]
      (14)   [Reserved]
      (15)   [Reserved]
      (16)   Automobile rental agencies;
      (17)   Automobile repairing, overhauling, rebuilding, and painting;
      (18)   Automobile (new car) sales and services, including used car sales
incidental to new car sales;
      (19)   Automobile (used car) sales;
      (20)   Automobile supply stores;
      (21)   Automobile upholstery and top shops;
      (22)   Automobile washing, including the use of mechanical conveyors,
blowers, and steam cleaners;
      (23)   Bail bonds;
      (24)   Bakeries;
      (25)   Bakeries, including baking for sale on the premises only;
      (26)   Banks;
      (27)   Banquet rooms;
      (28)   Barber shops and beauty shops;
      (29)   Bars;
      (30)   Beverage distributors;
      (31)   Bicycle shops;
      (32)   Blacksmith shops not less than 300 feet from an R or OR District;
      (33)   Blueprint and photostat shops;
      (34)   Boat sales, services, and repairs;
      (35)   Book stores and rental libraries;
      (36)   Bookbinding;
      (37)   Bottling works;
      (38)   Bowling alleys;
      (39)   Building materials’ yards and other than gravel, rock, or cement
yards not less than 300 feet from an R or OR District;
      (40)   Bus depots, provided buses shall not be stored on the site and no
repair work or servicing of vehicles shall be conducted on the site;
      (41)   Business, professional, and trade schools and colleges;
      (42)   Cabinet shops;
      (43)   Candy shops;
      (44)   Carpenter shops;
      (45)   Carpet and rug cleaning and dyeing;
      (46)   Catering establishments;
      (47)   Christmas tree sales lots;
      (48)   Cigar stores;
      (49)   Cleaning and dyeing;
      (50)   Cleaning and dyeing, including the use of one synthetic dry
cleaning machine using nonexplosive solvents and having a capacity of not more
than 40 pounds per cycle only;
      (51)   Cleaning, coin-operated;
      (52)   Clothing and costume rental establishments;
      (53)   Clothing stores;
      (54)   Cold storage plants;
      (55)   Columbariums and crematories not less than 300 feet from an R or
OR District;
      (56)   Contractors’ equipment rental or storage yards not less than 300
feet from an R or OR District;
      (57)   Dairy products plants;
      (58)   Dairy products manufacturing for retail sales on the premises
only;
      (59)   Dance halls;
      (60)   Delicatessen stores;
      (61)   Department stores;
      (62)   Diaper supply services;
      (63)   Drugstores;
      (64)   Dry goods stores;
      (65)   Electrical appliance sales and repair stores, provided repair
services shall be incidental to retail stores;
      (66)   Electrical repair shops;
      (67)   Employment agencies;
      (67.1)   Emergency shelters pursuant to the requirements and regulations
contained in §
156.041 of this chapter.
      (68)   Feed and fuel stores;
      (69)   Finance companies;
      (70)   Florists;
      (71)   Food lockers;
      (72)   Food stores and supermarkets;
      (73)   Freight forwarding terminals;
      (74)   Frozen food distributors;
      (75)   Fur shops;
      (76)   Furniture stores;
      (77)   Garden shops;
      (78)   Gift shops;
      (79)   Glass replacement and repair shops;
      (80)   Golf driving ranges;
      (81)   Gunsmiths;
      (82)   Gymnasiums;
      (83)   Hardware stores;
      (84)   Heating and ventilating shops;
      (85)   Hobby shops;
      (86)   Hospital equipment;
      (87)   Hotels and motels;
      (88)   Household appliance stores;
      (89)   Household repair shops;
      (90)   Ice storage houses;
      (91)   Ice vending stations;
      (92)   Interior decorating shops;
      (93)   Janitorial services and supplies;
      (94)   Jewelry stores;
      (95)   Laboratories;
      (96)   Laundry plants;
      (97)   Laundries, self-service type;
      (98)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (99)   Linen supply services;
      (100)   Liquor stores;
      (101)   Live storage, killing, or dressing of poultry or rabbits for
retail sale on premises not less than 300 feet from an R or OR District;
      (102)   Locksmiths;
      (103)   Lumberyards, not including planing mills or saw mills, not less
than 300 feet from an R or OR District;
      (104)   Machinery sales and rentals;
      (105)   Massage and physical culture studios;
      (106)   Mattress repair shops;
      (107)   Marine sales, services, and repairs;
      (107.1)   Medical and dental offices;
      (108)   Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;
      (108.1)   Medical cannabis distribution facilities, subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (108.2)   Medical cannabis testing facilities, where no cultivation,
processing, or distribution of medical cannabis occurs, subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (108.3)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, co- located with a
distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (108.4)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, located separate
from a distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (109)   Meeting halls;
      (110)   Mens’ furnishing stores;
      (111)   Millinery shops;
      (112)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (113)   Motorcycle sales and services;
      (114)   Mortuaries;
      (115)   Motels and hotels;
      (116)   Music and dance studios;
      (117)   Music stores;
      (118)   Musical instrument repair shops;
      (119)   Newsstands;
      (120)   Nurseries and garden supply stores;
      (121)   Nurseries and garden supply stores provided all equipment,
supplies, and merchandise other than plants shall be kept within a completely
enclosed building, and fertilizer of any type shall be stored and sold in
packaged form only;
      (122)   Office and business machine stores;
      (123)   Offices and office buildings;
      (124)   Optician and optometrical shops;
      (125)   Packing and crating;
      (126)   Paint, glass, and wallpaper shops;
      (127)   Parcel delivery services, including garage facilities for trucks
but excluding repair shop facilities and repair shop facilities;
      (128)   Parking facilities, including fee parking facilities improved in
conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking
facilities in §
155.118 of this title;
      (129)   Passenger railroad stations;
      (130)   Pet and bird stores;
      (131)   Phonograph record stores;
      (132)   Photographic supply stores and studios;
      (133)   Pickup truck camper, and canopy assembly, sales, and service;
      (134)   Picture framing shops;
      (135)   Plumbing, heating, and ventilating equipment showrooms with
storage for floor samples only;
      (136)   Plumbing shops;
      (137)   Pool halls;
      (138)   Post offices;
      (139)   Prescription pharmacies and dental and optical laboratories;
      (140)   Pressing establishments;
      (141)   Printing, including lithographing and engraving;
      (142)   Printing shops;
      (143)   Private clubs and lodges;
      (144)   Public utility and public service pumping stations, power
stations, equipment buildings and installations, drainageways and structures,
storage tanks, and transmission lines;
      (145)   Radio and television broadcasting studios; towers and other
support structures, commercial satellite dishes, antennas, and equipment
buildings necessary for the specific facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
      (146)   Realtors and real estate offices;
      (147)   Refrigeration equipment;
      (148)   Rental and tools, garden tools, power tools, trailers, and other
similar equipment;
      (149)   Residential uses permitted under permitted uses in RM Districts
shall be permitted in a CS District provided the minimum size of such dwelling
units shall be not less than as set forth in the Building Code and Housing Code
of the city;
      (150)   Riding stables;
      (151)   Saving and loan offices;
      (152)   Safe and vault repairing;
      (153)   Scientific instrument, shops;
      (154)   Secondhand stores and pawn shops;
      (155)   Self-service laundries and self-service drycleaning
establishments;
      (156)   Septic tank and cesspool installation and service;
      (157)   Service stations, including automobile, truck, and trailer
rentals as accessory uses only;
      (158)   Sheet metal shops;
      (159)   Shoe repair shops;
      (160)   Shoe stores;
      (161)   Shooting galleries within buildings;
      (162)   Sign painting shops;
      (163)   Skating rinks;
      (164)   Skating rinks within buildings;
      (165)   Small animal boarding not less than 300 feet from an R or OR
District;
      (166)   Sporting goods stores;
      (167)   Sports arenas within buildings;
      (168)   Stamp and coin stores;
      (169)   Stationery stores;
      (170)   Stenographic services;
      (171)   Stone and monument yards not less than 300 feet from an R or OR
District;
      (172)   Storage buildings for household goods;
      (173)   Storage yards for commercial vehicles;
      (174)   Swimming pool sales and services;
      (175)   Tailor and dressmaking shops;
      (176)   Taxidermist;
      (177)   Taxicab stands;
      (178)   Telegraph offices; towers and other support structures,
commercial satellite dishes, antennas, and equipment buildings necessary for
the specific facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
      (179)   Television and radio sales and repair stores;
      (180)   Theaters and auditoriums within buildings;
      (181)   Ticket agencies;
      (182)   Tire sales and service, not including retreading and recapping,
or mounting of heavy truck tires;
      (183)   Tire sales and service, including retreading and recapping;
      (184)   Tool and cutlery sharpening or grinding;
      (185)   Toy stores;
      (186)   Travel agencies and bureaus;
      (187)   Travelers’ aid societies;
      (188)   Truck and trailer rentals, sales and services;
      (189)   Truck sales;
      (190)   Trucking terminals not less than 150 feet from an R or OR
District;
      (191)   Umbrella repair shops;
      (192)   Variety stores;
      (193)   Vending machine services;
      (194)   Veterinarians’ offices and small animal hospitals, including
short-term boarding of animals and incidental care, such as bathing and
trimming, provided all operations are conducted entirely within a completely
enclosed building which complies with the specifications of soundproof
construction by the Building Inspector;
      (195)   Warehouses except for the storage of fuel or flammable liquids;
      (196)   Watch and clock repair shops;
      (197)   Welding shops not less than 300 feet from an R or OR District;
      (198)   Wholesale establishments;
      (199)   Women’s apparel accessory stores; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29132)
      (200)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to wireless telecommunication facility permit issued
pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
upon the granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§ 155.280
through 155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structure located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (2)   Amusement parks;
      (3)   Automobile and motorcycle racing stadiums and drag strips;
      (4)   Charitable institutions;
      (5)   Churches, parsonages, parish houses, monasteries, convents, and
other religious institutions;
      (6)   Circuses, carnivals, and other transient amusement enterprises;
      (7)   Drive-in theaters;
      (8)   Kennels not less than 300 feet from an R or OR District;
      (9)   Light industrial uses permitted in the ML Limited Industrial
District;
      (9.1)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, indoor, not more than
5,000 square feet of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (9.2)   Medical cannabis dispensing facilities subject to the provisions
of
Chapter 158;
      (9.3)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, non- volatile, more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (10)   Mobile home parks in accordance with the regulations prescribed in
§§
155.230 through
155.232 of this title;
      (11)   Oil and gas pipelines;
      (12)   Pony riding rings;
      (13)   Prefabricated structures sales;
      (14)   Racetracks;
      (15)   Recreational vehicle parks in accordance with the regulations
prescribed in §§
155.230 through
155.232 of this title;
      (16)   Restaurants and soda fountains, including drive-in establishments;
      (17)   Riding stables;
      (18)   Sports areas or stadium;
      (19)   Storage yards for fuel or flammable liquids;
      (20)   Veterinarians’ offices and small animal hospitals, including
operations not conducted within a completely enclosed building, not less than
300 feet from an R or OD District; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29133)
      (21)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of
an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159.
   (D.1)   Minor conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be
permitted upon the granting of a minor use permit in accord with the provisions
of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, non- volatile, 5,000
square feet or less of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29134)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29135)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29136)
   (H)   Site plan review. All permitted uses shall be subject to site plan
review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29137)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 526-C.S., passed 6-20-91; Am. Ord.
631-C.S., passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 663-C.S., passed 11-19-02; Am. Ord. 757-C.S.,
passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 768-C.S., passed 5-3-11; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-
21-12; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 847-C.S., passed 9-20-16)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.075 CP — PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. The purposes of the Planned Shopping Center Commercial
Districts shall be:
      (1)   To provide large sites at appropriate locations for major shopping
centers which provide a wide variety of goods and services drawing trade from
the entire Humboldt Bay area. The principal establishment of a CP Planned
Shopping Center Commercial District shall ordinarily be one or more department
or variety stores;
      (2)   To provide for the development of an organized group of compatible
commercial uses planned and designed as an integral unit consistent with modern
standards for site planning and landscape design; and,
      (3)   To minimize the adverse affect of major commercial facilities on
nearby dwellings and minimize traffic congestion on public highways and
streets. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29140)
   (B)   Conditions. Any shopping center proposed for a Planned Shopping Center
Commercial District that includes one or more wetlands that would individually
or in combination benefit from a comprehensive restoration and enhancement
program, shall be required to prepare and implement such a program consistent
with all applicable policies of the Local Coastal Program Land Use Plan and the
provisions of this chapter. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29141)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in the CP
Planned Shopping Center Commercial District:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures located on the same site as a
permitted use;
      (2)   Administrative, business, and professional offices;
      (3)   Art and artists’ supply stores;
      (4)   Art galleries and stores selling objects of art;
      (5)   Auction rooms;
      (6)   Automobile supply stores;
      (7)   Bakeries, including baking for sale on the premises only;
      (8)   Banks;
      (9)   Banquet rooms;
      (10)   Barber shops and beauty shops;
      (11)   Bars;
      (12)   Bicycle shops;
      (13)   Blueprint and photostat shops;
      (14)   Book stores and rental libraries;
      (15)   Candy stores;
      (16)   Christmas tree sales lots;
      (17)   Cigar stores;
      (18)   Cleaning and dyeing, including the use of one synthetic dry
cleaning machine using nonexplosive solvents and having a capacity of not more
than 40 pounds per cycle only;
      (19)   Cleaning, coin-operated;
      (20)   Clothing and costume rental establishments;
      (21)   Clothing stores;
      (22)   Computer and electronics sales and repair stores, provided repair
services shall be incidental to retail sales;
      (23)   Dairy products manufacturing for retail sales on the premises
only;
      (24)   Delicatessen stores;
      (25)   Department stores;
      (26)   Drugstores;
      (27)   Dry goods stores;
      (28)   Electrical appliance sales and repair stores, provided repair
services shall be incidental to retail sales;
      (29)   Finance companies;
      (30)   Florists;
      (31)   Food lockers;
      (32)   Food stores and supermarkets;
      (33)   Furniture stores;
      (34)   Fur shops;
      (35)   Garden shops;
      (36)   Gift shops;
      (37)   Gunsmiths;
      (38)   Gymnasiums;
      (39)   Hardware stores;
      (40)   Hobby shops;
      (41)   Household appliance stores;
      (42)   Ice vending stations;
      (43)   Interior decorating shops;
      (44)   Jewelry stores;
      (45)   Laundries, self-service type;
      (46)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (47)   Liquor stores;
      (48)   Locksmiths;
      (49)   Massage and physical culture studios;
      (50)   Medical and dental offices;
      (51)   Medical and orthopedic appliance stores;
      (52)   Meeting halls;
      (53)   Mens’ furnishing stores;
      (54)   Messengers’ offices;
      (55)   Millinery shops;
      (56)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (57)   Music stores;
      (58)   Music and dance studios;
      (59)   Musical instrument repair shops;
      (60)   Newsstands;
      (61)   Nurseries and garden supply stores provided all equipment,
supplies, and merchandise other than plants shall be kept within a completely
enclosed building, and fertilizer of any type shall be stored and sold in
package form only;
      (62)   Office and business machine stores;
      (63)   Offices and office buildings;
      (64)   Optician and optometrical shops;
      (65)   Paint, glass, and wallpaper shops;
      (66)   Parking facilities, including fee parking facilities improved in
conformity with the standards prescribed for required off-street parking
facilities in §
155.118 of this title;
      (67)   Pet and bird stores;
      (68)   Phonograph and record stores;
      (69)   Photographic supply stores and studios;
      (70)   Picture framing shops;
      (71)   Piers, docks, and wharves;
      (72)   Plumbing, heating, and ventilating equipment showrooms with
storage for floor samples only;
      (73)   Plumbing shops;
      (74)   Pool halls;
      (75)   Post offices;
      (76)   Pressing establishments;
      (77)   Printing shops;
      (78)   Radio and television broadcasting studios; towers and other
support structures, commercial satellite dishes, antennas, and equipment
buildings necessary for the specific facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
      (79)   Realtors and real estate offices;
      (80)   Rental hand tools, garden tools, power tools, trailers, and other
similar equipment;
      (81)   Restaurants and soda fountains, not including drive-in
establishments, not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (82)   Savings and loan offices;
      (83)   Scientific instrument shops;
      (84)   Self-service laundries and self-service dry cleaning
establishments;
      (85)   Shoe repair shops;
      (86)   Shoe stores;
      (87)   Skating rinks within buildings;
      (88)   Sporting goods stores;
      (89)   Sports arenas within buildings;
      (90)   Stamp and coin stores;
      (91)   Stationery stores;
      (92)   Stenographic services;
      (93)   Tailor and dressmaking shops;
      (94)   Taxidermists;
      (95)   Taxicab stands;
      (96)   Telegraph offices; towers and other support structures, commercial
satellite dishes, antennas, and equipment buildings necessary for the specific
facility are subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
      (97)   Television and radio sales and repair stores;
      (98)   Theaters and auditoriums within buildings;
      (99)   Ticket agencies;
      (100)   Tire sales and service, not including retreading or recapping, or
mounting of heavy truck tires;
      (101)   Toy stores;
      (102)   Travel agencies and bureaus;
      (103)   Travelers’ aid societies;
      (104)   Umbrella repair shops;
      (105)   Variety stores;
      (106)   Watch and clock repair shops;
      (107)   Wholesale establishments without stocks;
      (108)   Women’s apparel accessory stores; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29142)
      (109)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted in
accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures located on the same site as a
conditional use;
      (2)   Charitable institutions;
      (3)   Churches, parsonages, parish houses, monasteries, convents, and
other religious institutions;
      (4)   Circuses, carnivals, and other transient amusement enterprises;
      (5)   Pony riding rings;
      (6)   Public utility and public service pumping stations, power stations,
equipment buildings and installations, drainage ways and structures, storage
tanks, and transmission lines found by the Planning Commission to be necessary
for the public health, safety, or welfare;
      (7)   Restaurants and soda fountains, including drive-in establishments,
not less than 150 feet from an R District;
      (8)   Service stations, not including trailer rentals, provided that all
operations, except the sale of gasoline and oil and the washing of cars, shall
be conducted within a building enclosed on at least three sides;
      (9)   Restaurants and soda fountains, not including drive-in
establishments;
      (10)   Restaurants and soda fountains, including drive-in establishments,
150 feet from an R District;
      (11)   Service stations, including automobile, truck, and trailer rentals
as accessory uses only;
      (12)   Service stations, not including automobile, truck, and trailer
rentals as accessory uses, provided that all operations, except the sale of
gasoline and oil and the washing of cars, shall be conducted within a building
enclosed on at least three sides; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29143)
      (13)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of
an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for any planned shopping center as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29144)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for any planned shopping center as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29145)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as provided in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29146)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses shall be
subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject, in addition, to
architectural review. (‘63 Code, § 10-5.29147)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord.
786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.076 MC — COASTAL DEPENDENT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the MC Coastal Dependent Industrial Districts are
included in the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To reserve and protect parcels adjacent to the sea for coastal-
dependent and coastal-related uses;
      (2)   To provide for coastal-dependent energy and industrial uses;
      (3)   To provide development standards which will ensure that potential
environmental damage will be avoided, minimized, or mitigated;
      (4)   To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by
dwellings and other inharmonious uses;
      (5)   To protect residential and commercial properties and to protect
nuisance-free, nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, insect nuisance,
dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat and cold, glare, truck and rail traffic, and
other objectionable influences, and from fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
radiation, and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses;
      (6)   To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to
concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships to each other;
      (7)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial
developments, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and
landscaping;
      (8)   To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to
protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial
plants on nearby residential and agricultural districts; and,
      (9)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29150)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   In an MC District, no use shall be permitted which emits any air
pollutant detectable by the human senses without the aid of instruments beyond
the boundaries of the MC District or any adjoining MG District;
      (3)   No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which
endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation, or other
property, or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the
site;
      (4)   No use shall be permitted which creates annoying odor in such
quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the M District
when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four volumes of clean
air;
      (5)   No use, except a temporary construction operation, shall be
permitted which creates vibration, changes in temperature, direct or sky
reflected glare, or electrical disturbances detectable by the human senses
without the aid of instruments beyond the boundaries of the site. No use shall
be permitted which creates electrical disturbances that affect the operation of
any equipment beyond the boundaries of the site;
      (6)   In an MC District, no use, except a temporary construction
operation, shall be permitted which creates at any R District boundary, noise
of a maximum sound pressure level greater than the values given in the
following table:
Octave Band (Cycles per Second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
                                (Decibels)
Below 75                        72
75 - 149                        67
150 - 299                       59
300 - 599                       52
600 - 1,199                     46
1,200 - 2,399                   40
2,400 - 4,799                   34
4,800 and above                 32
 
      (7)   No use shall be permitted which emits dangerous radioactivity; and
      (8)   No use shall be permitted which creates insect nuisance beyond the
boundaries of the site.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29151)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted:
      (1)   Boat repair and ship building;
      (2)   Commercial fishing facilities;
      (3)   Docks, piers and wharves;
      (4)   Marine services;
      (5)   Marine oil terminals;
      (6)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (7)   OCS service bases and offshore pipelines;
      (8)   Seafood processing;
      (9)   Water borne carrier import and export facilities; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29152)
      (10)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses.
      (1)   The following conditional uses shall be permitted in accord with
the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this chapter:
         (a)   Access support facilities;
         (b)   Boat launching and berthing facilities;
         (c)   Electrical generating or other facilities which require intake,
outfalls, or pipelines;
         (d)   Fish waste processing plants;
         (e)   Fishing piers;
         (f)   Ice and cold storage facilities;
         (g)   OCS oil and/or gas processing and treatment facilities;
         (h)   Oil and gas pipelines;
         (i)   Onshore petroleum production;
         (j)   Outfalls;
         (k)   Warehouses serving permitted uses;
         (l)   Commercial uses incidental to the primary coastal dependent
industrial use (within the Core Coastal-Dependent Industrial Area); and
         (m)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of
an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159 .
      (2)   Existing developed parcels in existence as of January 1, 1984 of
less than one acre located in a coastal-dependent industrial district shall be
allowed to be developed with coastal-related or general industrial uses if they
are not proposed for consolidation with other parcels to permit a new or
expanded coastal-dependent industrial use and are not adjacent to the
shoreline.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29153)
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29154)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29155)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29156)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses shall be
subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29157)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 722-C.S., passed 3-18-08; Am. Ord.
757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-
C.S., passed 7-19-16)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.077 ML — LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the ML Limited industrial Districts are included in
the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To reserve appropriately located areas for industrial plants and
related activities;
      (2)   To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by
dwellings and other inharmonious uses;
      (3)   To protect residential and commercial properties and to protect
nuisance-free, nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, insect nuisance,
dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat and cold, blare, truck and rail traffic, and
other objectionable influences, and from fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
radiation, and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses;
      (4)   To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to
concentrate in mutually beneficial relationship with each other;
      (5)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial
developments, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and
landscaping;
      (6)   To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to
protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial
plants on nearby residential and agricultural districts;
      (7)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them;
      (8)   To provide locations for industries that can operate in close
proximity to commercial and residential uses with minimum mutual adverse
impacts; and,
      (9)   To protect light industrial and related uses from nuisances
associated with heavy industrial uses.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29160)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   All uses shall comply with the policies established by the land use
plan;
      (3)   In an ML District, no use shall be permitted which emits any air
pollutant detectable by the human senses without the aid of instruments beyond
the boundaries of the site;
      (4)   No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which
endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation, or other
property, or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the
site;
      (5)   In an ML District, no use shall emit visible gray smoke of a shade
equal to or darker than No. 2 on a standard Ringlemann Chart issued by the
United States Bureau of Mines or smoke of an equivalent opacity, except that
smoke of a shade equal to No. 3 on a Ringlemann Chart or smoke of equivalent
opacity may be emitted for four minutes in any 30-minute period;
      (6)   In an ML District, no use, except a temporary construction
operation, shall be permitted which creates, at any point beyond the boundaries
of the site, noise of a maximum sound pressure level greater than the values
given in the following table:
Octave Band (Cycles per Second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
                                (Decibels)
Below 75                        72
75 - 149                        67
150 - 299                       59
300 - 599                       52
600 - 1,199                     46
1,200 - 2,399                   40
2,400 - 4,799                   34
4,800 and above                 32
 
      (7)   No use shall be permitted which creates annoying odor in such
quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the M District
when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four volumes of clean
air;
      (8)   No use, except a temporary construction operation, shall be
permitted which creates vibration, changes in temperature, direct or sky
reflected glare, or electrical disturbances detectable by the human senses
without the aid of instruments beyond the boundaries of the site. No use shall
be permitted which creates electrical disturbances that affect the operation of
any equipment beyond the boundaries of the site;
      (9)   No use shall be permitted which emits dangerous radio-activity;
      (10) No use shall be permitted which creates insect nuisance beyond the
boundaries of the site.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29161)
   (C)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging, and processing
of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:
asbestos, bone, canvas, cellophane, cellulose, cloth, cork, feathers, felt,
fiber, and synthetic fiber, fur, glass, hair, ink, horn, leather, paint (not
employing a boiling process), paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals
or stones, rubber and synthetic rubber, shells, straw, textiles, tobacco, and
wood (not including a planing mill or saw mill);
      (2)   Manufacturing, assembling, compounding, packaging, and processing
cosmetics, drugs, pharmaceuticals, perfumes, perfumed toilet soap (not
including refining or rendering of fats or oils), and toiletries;
      (3)   Manufacture of ceramic products, such as pottery, figurines, and
small glazed tile, utilizing only previously pulverized slag, providing that
kilns are fired only by electricity or gas;
      (4)   Manufacture and maintenance of electric and neon signs, commercial
advertising structures, and light sheet metal products, including heating, and
ventilating ducts and equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like;
      (5)   Manufacture of scientific, medical, dental, and drafting
instruments, orthopedic and medical appliances, optical goods, watches and
clocks, electronics equipment, precision instruments, musical instruments, and
cameras and photographic equipment, except film;
      (6)   Assembly of small electric appliances, such as lighting fixtures,
irons, fans, toasters, and electric toys, but not including refrigerators,
washing machines, dryers, dishwashers, and similar home appliances;
      (7)   Assembly of electrical equipment, such as radio and television
receivers, phonographs, and home motion picture equipment, but not including
electrical machinery;
      (8)   Manufacture and assembly of electrical supplies, such as coils,
condensers, crystal holders, insulation, lamps, switches, and wire and cable
assembly, provided no noxious or offensive fumes or odors are produced;
      (9)    Manufacture of cutlery, hardware, and hand tools, die and pattern
making, metal stamping, and extrusion of small products, such as costume
jewelry, pins and needles, razor blades, bottle caps, buttons, and kitchen
utensils;
      (10)   Manufacturing, canning, and packing of food products, including
fruits and vegetables, but not including meat products, pickles, sauerkraut,
vinegar, or yeast, dehydrating of garlic or onions, or refining or rendering of
fats and oils;
      (11)    Processing, packing, and canning of seafood for human
consumption, not including processing seafood for fish oils;
      (12)    Bakeries;
      (13)    Blacksmith shops;
      (14)    Boat buildings;
      (15)    Bottling works;
      (16)    Building material storage yards;
      (17)    Bus depots;
      (18)    Cold storage plants;
      (19)    Contractors' equipment yards;
      (20)    Dairy products plants;
      (21)    Freight forwarding terminals;
      (22)    Furniture manufacture;
      (23)    Ice manufacture;
      (24)    Janitorial services and supplies;
      (25)    Kennels;
      (26)    Laboratories;
      (27)    Laundry and cleaning plants;
      (28)    Lumber yards, not including planing mills or saw mills;
      (29)    Machine shops not involving the use of drop hammers, automatic
screw machines, or punch presses with a rated capacity of over 20 tons;
      (30)    Mattress manufacture;
      (30.1)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, indoor, not more than
10,000 square feet of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (30.2)   Medical cannabis distribution facilities, subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (30.3)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, non- volatile, more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (30.4)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, non- volatile, 5,000
square feet or less of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (30.5)   Medical cannabis testing facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (30.6)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, co- located with a
distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (30.7)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, located separate
from a distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31)    Metal finishing and plating;
      (32)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (33)   Offices, not including medical or dental offices;
      (34)   Printing, lithographing, and engraving;
      (35)   Public utility and public service pumping stations, equipment
buildings and installations, service yards, power stations, drainage ways and
structures, storage tanks, and transmission lines;
      (36)   Railroad stations;
      (37)   Repair shops, including electrical, glass and automotive;
      (38)   Sheet metal shops;
      (39)   Storage yards for commercial vehicles;
      (40)   Textile, knitting and hosiery mills;
      (41)   Trucking terminals;
      (42)   Veterinarians’ offices and small animal hospitals;
      (43)   Warehouses, except for the storage of fuel or flammable liquids;
      (44)   Welding shops;
      (45)   Woodworking shops and cabinet shops;
      (46)   Pickup truck camper and canopy assembly;
      (47)   Retail sales establishments with single occupant floor areas of
40,000 square feet or larger;
      (48)   Wholesale stores with single occupant floor areas of 40,000 square
feet or larger and public utility building, and uses;
      (49)   Parking lots;
      (50)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
permitted use.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29162)
      (51)   Emergency shelters pursuant to the requirements and regulations
contained in §
156.041 of this chapter; and
      (52)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses.  
      (1)   The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting
of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
         (a)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
conditional use;
         (b)   Motor vehicle wrecking yards and scrap metal yards;
         (c)   Oil and gas pipelines;
         (d)   Recreational vehicle parks in accordance with the regulations
prescribed in §§
155.230 through
155.232 of this title.
         (e)   Storage of fuel and flammable liquids;
         (f)   Storage of logs or wood chips;
         (g)   Gymnastics schools and health clubs;
         (h)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of
an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159;
         (i)   Medical cannabis dispensing facilities, subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 158; and
         (j)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, volatile, 1,500
square feet or less of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
      (2)   The following conditional uses shall be permitted upon the granting
of a minor use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
         (a)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, indoor, with 10,000
square feet or less of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
      (3)   Any of these uses listed as permitted uses in the MG District
provided that, on the basis of the use permit application and evidence
submitted, the Planning Commission makes the following findings:
         (a)   The consideration of all determinable characteristics of the use
that is the subject of the application indicates that the use has the same
essential characteristics as the uses listed as permitted uses in the ML
District with respect to the method of operations, type of process, materials,
equipment, structures, storage, and appearance;
         (b)   That the use will conform with each of the principles and
standards prescribed for uses in the ML District;
         (c)   That the use will not create significantly, more vehicular or
rail traffic than the volumes normally created by the permitted uses of the ML
District.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29163)
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29164)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29165)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29166)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses shall be
subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29167)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 489-C.S., passed 3-12-89; Am. Ord.
526-C.S., passed 6-20-91; Am. Ord. 551-C.S., passed 12-17-92; Am. Ord. 631-
C.S., passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 768-C.S.,
passed 5-3-11; Am. Ord. 786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-
19-16; Am. Ord. 847-C.S., passed 9-20-16)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.078 MG — GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the MG General Industrial Districts are included in
the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To reserve appropriately located areas for industrial plants and
related activities;
      (2)   To protect areas appropriate for industrial uses from intrusion by
dwellings and other inharmonious uses;
      (3)   To protect residential and commercial properties and to protect
nuisance-free, nonhazardous industrial uses from noise, odor, insect nuisance,
dust, dirt, smoke, vibration, heat and cold, glare, truck and rail traffic, and
other objectionable influences and from fire, explosion, noxious fumes,
radiation, and other hazards incidental to certain industrial uses;
      (4)   To provide opportunities for certain types of industrial plants to
concentrate in mutually beneficial relationships with each other;
      (5)   To provide adequate space to meet the needs of modern industrial
developments, including off-street parking and truck loading areas and
landscaping;
      (6)   To provide sufficient open space around industrial structures to
protect them from the hazard of fire and to minimize the impact of industrial
plants on nearby residential and agricultural districts;
      (7)   To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid the overloading of
utilities by preventing the construction of buildings of excessive size in
relation to the amount of land around them;
      (8)   To provide locations where industries that are incompatible with
most other land uses can operate with minimum restriction and with minimum
adverse effect on other uses.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29170)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title.
      (2)   No use shall be permitted which creates any emission which
endangers human health, can cause damage to animals, vegetation, or other
property, or which can cause soiling at any point beyond the boundaries of the
site. In an MG District, no use, except a temporary construction operation,
shall be permitted which creates, at any R District boundary, noise of a
maximum sound pressure level greater than the values given in the following
table:
Octave Band (Cycles per Second) Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level
                                (Decibels)
Below 75                        72
75 - 149                        67
150 - 299                       59
300 - 599                       52
600 - 1,199                     46
1,200 - 2,399                   40
2,400 - 4,799                   34
4,800 and above                 32
 
      (3)   No use shall be permitted which creates annoying odor in such
quantities as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the M District
when diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four volumes of clean
air;
      (4)   No use, except a temporary construction operation, shall be
permitted which creates vibration, changes in temperature, direct or sky
reflected glare, or electrical disturbances detectable by the human senses
without the aid of instruments beyond the boundaries of the site. No use shall
be permitted which creates electrical disturbances that affect the operation of
any equipment beyond the boundaries of the site;
      (5)   No use shall be permitted which emits dangerous radioactivity;
      (6)   No use shall be permitted which creates insect nuisance beyond the
boundaries of the site.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29172)
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following uses, shall be permitted:
      (1)   All uses listed as permitted uses in the ML District;
      (2)   Aircraft and aircraft accessories and parts manufacture;
      (3)   Automobile, trucks, and trailer accessories and parts manufacture;
      (4)   Automobile, truck, and trailer assembly;
      (5)   Bag cleaning;
      (6)   Boiler works;
      (7)   Box factories and cooperages;
      (8)   Breweries and distilleries;
      (9)   Building materials manufacture and assembly, including composition
wallboards, partitions, panels, and prefabricated structures;
      (10)    Business machines manufacture, including accounting machines,
calculators, cardcounting equipment, and typewriters;
      (11)    Can and metal container manufacture;
      (12)    Candle manufacture, not including rendering;
      (13)    Carpet and rug manufacture;
      (14)    Cement products manufacture, including concrete mixing and
batching;
      (15)    Chemical products manufacture provided no hazard of fire or
explosion is created, including adhesives, bleaching products, bluing,
calcimine, dyestuffs (except aniline dyes), essential oils, soda and soda
compounds, and vegetable gelatin, glue, and size;
      (16)    Clay products manufacture, including brick, fire brick, tile, and
pipe;
      (17)    Cork manufacture;
      (18)    Electronics manufacturing;
      (18.1)    Emergency shelters pursuant to the requirements and regualtions
contained in § 156.041 of this chapter.
      (19)    Firearms manufacture;
      (20)    Flour, feed and grain mills;
      (21)    Food products manufacture, including such processes as cooking,
dehydrating, roasting, refining, pasteurization, and extraction involved in the
preparation of such products as casein, cereal, chocolate and cocoa products,
cider and vinegar, coffee, glucose, milk and dairy products, molasses and
syrups, oleomargarine, pickles, rice, sauerkraut, sugar, vegetable oils, and
yeast;
      (22)    Glass and glass products manufacture;
      (23)    Gravel, rock, and cement yards;
      (24)    Hair, felt, and feathers processing;
      (25)    Insecticides, fungicides, disinfectants, and similar industrial
and household chemical compounds manufacture;
      (26)    Jute, hemp, sisal, and oakum products manufacture;
      (27)    Leather and fur furnishing and dyeing, not including tanning and
curing;
      (28)    Machinery manufacture, including heavy electrical, agricultural,
construction, and mining machinery, and light machinery and equipment, such as
air conditioning, commercial motion picture equipment, dishwashers, dryers,
furnaces, heaters, refrigerators, ranges, stoves, ovens, and washing machines;
      (29)    Machine tools manufacture, including metal lathes, metal presses,
metal stamping machines, and woodworking machines;
      (30)    Match manufacture;
      (31)    Meat products processing and packaging, not including
slaughtering and glue and size manufacture;
      (31.1)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, indoor, not more than
5,000 square feet of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31.2)   Medical cannabis distribution facilities subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31.3)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, non- volatile, more
than 5,000 square feet of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31.4)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, non- volatile, 5,000
square feet or less of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31.5)   Medical cannabis testing facilities subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31.6)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, co- located with a
distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (31.7)   Medical cannabis transportation facilities, located separate
from a distribution facility, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (32)    Metal alloys and foil manufacture, including solder, pewter,
brass, bronze, and tin, lead, and gold foil;
      (33)    Metal casting and foundaries, not including magnesium foundaries;
      (34)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (35)   Motor and generator manufacture;
      (36)   Motor testing of internal combustion motors;
      (37)   Painting, enameling, and lacquering shops;
      (38)   Paper products manufacture, including shipping containers, pulp
goods, carbon paper, and coated paper stencils;
      (39)   Paraffin products manufacture;
      (40)   Plastics manufacture;
      (41)   Porcelain products manufacture, including bathroom and kitchen
fixtures and equipment;
      (42)   Railroad equipment stations manufacture, including railroad car
and locomotive manufacture;
      (43)   Railroad freight stations, repair shops, and yards;
      (44)   Rubber products manufacture, including tires and tubes;
      (45)   Sandblasting;
      (46)   Shoe polish manufacture;
      (47)   Starch and dextrine manufacture;
      (48)   Steel products manufacture and assembly, including steel cabinets,
lockers, doors, fencing and furniture;
      (49)   Stone products manufacture and stone processing, including
abrasives, asbestos, stone screening and sand and lime products;
      (50)   Structural steel products manufacture, including bars, girders,
rails and wire rope;
      (51)   Textile bleaching;
      (52)   Wire and cable manufacture;
      (53)   Wood and lumber processing and woodworking, including planing
mills, saw mills, excelsior, plywood, veneer, and wood- preserving treatment;
      (54)   Wood scouring and pulling.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29172)
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
upon the granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Airports and heliports;
      (2)   Asphalt and asphalt products manufacture;
      (3)   Cement, lime, gypsum, and plaster of paris manufacture;
      (4)   Charcoal, lampblack, and fuel briquettes manufacture;
      (5)   Chemical products manufacture, including acetylene, aniline dyes,
ammonia, carbide, caustic, soda, cellulose, chlorine, cleaning and polishing
preparations, creosote, exterminating agents, hydrogen and oxygen, industrial
alcohol, nitrating of cotton or other materials, nitrates of an explosive
nature, potash, pyroxylin, rayon yarn, and carbolic, hydrochloric, picric, and
sulfuric acids;
      (6)   Coal, coke, and tar products manufacture;
      (7)   Drop forges;
      (8)   Dumps and slag piles;
      (9)   Fertilizer manufacture;
      (10)    Film manufacture;
      (11)    Fireworks manufacture and storage;
      (12)    Fish products processing and packaging;
      (13)    Garbage dumps;
      (14)    Gas manufacture or storage;
      (15)    Gas and oil wells;
      (16)    Gelatine, glue, and size manufacture from animal or fish refuse;
      (17)    Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal, and dead animals;
      (18)   Junk yards;
      (19)    Lard manufacture;
      (20)    Linoleum and oil cloth manufacture;
      (21)    Magnesium foundries;
      (22)    Manure, peat, and topsoil processing and storage;
      (22.1)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, mixed light, not more
than 10,000 square feet of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (22.2)   Medical cannabis dispensing facilities subject to the provisions
of
Chapter 158;
      (22.3)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, volatile, more than
1,500 square feet of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (22.4)   Medical cannabis manufacturing facilities, volatile 1,500 square
feet or less of floor area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158;
      (23)    Metal and metal ores reduction, refining, smelting, and alloying;
      (24)    Motor vehicle wrecking yards;
      (25)    Oil and gas pipelines;
      (26)    Paint manufacture, including enamel, lacquer, shellac,
turpentine, and varnish;
      (27)    Paper mills;
      (28)    Petroleum and petroleum products storage;
      (29)    Pulp mills;
      (30)    Rifle ranges;
      (31)    Rolling mills;
      (32)    Rubber manufacture or processing, including natural or synthetic
rubber and gutta-percha;
      (33)    Soap manufacture, including fat rendering;
      (34)    Steam plants;
      (35)    Stockyards and slaughterhouses;
      (36)    Storage of inflammable liquids;
      (37)    Storage of used building materials;
      (38)    Tallow manufacture;
      (40)    Tanneries and curing and storage of rawhides;
      (41)    Wood and bones distillation;
      (42)    Wood pulp and fiber reduction and processing;
      (43)    Storage of logs or wood chips;
      (44)   Accessory structures and uses located on the same site as a
conditional use; and
('63 Code, § 10-5.29173)
      (45)    Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of
an R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159.
   (D.1)   Minor conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be
permitted upon the granting of a minor use permit in accord with the provisions
of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Medical cannabis cultivation facilities, indoor, 10,000 square feet
or less of cultivation area, subject to the provisions of
Chapter 158.
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29174)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29175)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor advertising structure, or display of any
character shall be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29176)
   (H)   Site plan review and architectural review. All permitted uses shall be
subject to site plan review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title. Conditional uses shall be subject to architectural
review.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29177)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 631-C.S., passed 9-7-99; Am. Ord. 757-
C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 768-C.S., passed 5-3-11; Am. Ord. 786-C.S.,
passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16; Am. Ord. 847-C.S., passed 9-
20-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.079 P — PUBLIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, the P Public District is included in the zoning
regulations to provide a procedure for the orderly establishment of public
facilities, expansion of their operations, or changes in the use of lands owned
by governmental agencies. The PF/M Public Facility/Marina District is further
specifically included in the zoning regulations to give full recognition to the
approval, in 1976, of a marina and associated developments on a portion of
Woodley Island and adjacent waters (NCR-76-C-369 and City of Eureka Planning
Commission Permit Resolution 76-25, extended by Resolution 78-39).
('63 Code, § 10-5.29180)
   (B)   Required conditions.
      (1)   All uses shall comply with the regulations prescribed in §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title. Each yard space shall be not less than the yard required
in the district adjoining or directly across a street from each property line,
but the Planning Commission may require larger yards and may establish limits
to height, bulk, and coverage as a condition of a use permit in order to ensure
compatibility with adjoining uses.
      (2)   No use shall be permitted, and no process, equipment, or material
shall be employed which is found by the Planning Commission to be objectionable
to persons residing or working in the vicinity by reason of odor, insect
nuisance, fumes, dust, smoke, cinders, dirt, refuse, water-carried wastes,
noise, vibration, illumination, glare, unsightliness, or truck traffic or to
involve any hazard of fire or explosion.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29181)
   (C)   Permitted uses. Each use and structure existing in a P District as of
the adoption date of these regulations is hereby declared to be a conforming
use and structure.
      (1)   Airports;
      (2)   Animal shelters;
      (3)   Boat harbors and wharves;
      (4)   Cemeteries;
      (5)   Corporation yards;
      (6)   Fire stations;
      (7)   Hospitals;
      (8)   Libraries;
      (9)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (10)   Offices;
      (11)   Police stations;
      (12)   Power stations;
      (13)   Pumping stations;
      (14)   Public recreation facilities, including parks, playgrounds, zoos,
and golf courses;
      (15)   Public buildings and grounds;
      (16)   Public schools, including nursery, elementary, junior high, and
high schools, colleges and universities;
      (17)   Reservoirs;
      (18)   Sewage treatment plants;
      (19)   Storage tanks;
      (20)   Uses which are accessory and incidental to a permitted use; and
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29182)
      (21)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located more than 100 feet
from an R District subject to a wireless telecommunication facility permit
issued pursuant to
Chapter 159.
   (D)   Conditional uses. The following conditional uses shall be permitted
upon the granting of a use permit in accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title:
      (1)   Oil and gas pipelines;
      (2)   Parking facilities located on a site separated from the use which
the facilities serve;
      (3)   Storage or processing of materials or equipment accessory to other
permitted or conditional uses; and
('63 Code, § 10-5.29185)
      (4)   Wireless telecommunication facilities located within 100 feet of an
R District subject to the provisions of
Chapter 159 .
   (E)   Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.115 through
155.124 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29184)
   (F)   Off-street loading. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided
for each use as prescribed in §§
155.135 through
155.141 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29185)
   (G)   Signs. No sign, outdoor structure, or display of any character shall
be permitted except as prescribed in §§
155.155 through
155.169 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29186)
   (H)   Architectural review. All uses shall be subject to architectural
review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29187)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord.
786-C.S., passed 8-21-12; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 156.080 PF/M — PUBLIC FACILITY/MARINA.
   (A)   Purposes. The purposes of this district shall be to encourage,
protect, maintain, and provide commercial fishing facilities and uses related
to the commercial fishing industry, and to provide for all of the specific land
uses granted to the Humboldt Bay Harbor, Recreation, and Conservation District
through coastal development permit NCR-76-C-369 and the underlying the Planning
Commission Permit Resolutions 76-25 and 78-39 (extension).
   (B)   Permitted uses. Consistent with coastal development permit NCR-76-C-
369, permitted uses within that part of Woodley Island and adjacent waters
designated for development shall be limited to:
      (1)   Docks, piers (including recreational fishing piers), and wharves;
      (2)   Boat launching facilities;
      (3)   Commercial fishing facilities and fishing boat berthing facilities;
      (4)   Recreational boating facilities and boat berthing facilities (not
to exceed 30% of the total number of berths permitted by the 1976 coastal
permit);
      (5)   Two restaurants;
      (6)   Offices and shops directly related to marine uses;
      (7)   Ice vending stations;
      (8)   Marine and boat sales, services, and repairs;
      (9)   Mobile vendors as prescribed in §§
155.220 through
155.221;
      (10)   On-site fish sales and processing incidental to permitted
restaurants;
      (11)   Parking; and,
      (12)   Public access facilities.
   (C)   Conditional uses. A third restaurant, on-site incidental fish sales
and processing, and wireless telecommunication facilities subject to the
provisions of
Chapter 159 shall be conditionally permitted, provided such uses do not
displace current or projected demand for permitted uses and necessary support
facilities, including parking. Conditional uses shall be designed and located
so as not to interfere with permitted uses.
   (D)   Parking, loading, signs, and architectural review. Off-street parking
and loading facilities; signs, outdoor advertising structures and other
displays; and architectural treatment shall be regulated as provided,
respectively, in §§
155.115 through
155.188 of this title.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29188) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 757-C.S.,
passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 842-C.S., passed 7-19-16)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.081 PD — PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT COMBINING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in §
156.002 of this chapter, PD Planned Unit Development Combining Districts are
included in the zoning regulations in order to provide locations for well-
planned developments that conform with the Local Coastal Program although the
developments may vary except for application of the standards contained in §§
156.050 through
156.056 of this chapter, from the zoning map and district regulations. The
planned unit development provisions are intended to allow freedom of design in
order to obtain development that will be an asset to the city and enhance
coastal resources by equaling or surpassing the quality required by the
regulations for the district with which a PD District is combined. A site may
be rezoned to a combined district permitting a planned unit development
provided the development complies with all of the regulations prescribed in
this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29190)
   (B)   Combining districts. A Planned Unit Development District may be
combined with an R, OR, C, or M District by a change of district to a Combined
Planned Unit Development District in accord with the provisions of §§
155.350 through
155.362 of this title, provided the findings prescribed in §§
155.350 through
155.362 of this title are made. A Planned Unit Development District shall be
designated by the letters PD following the full R, OR, C, or M District
designation.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29191)
   (C)   Required conditions.
      (1)   Site area. The site shall be at least three acres in area and shall
have a frontage of at least 100 feet on a public street, provided that the
minimum site area requirement shall not apply to a redevelopment project as
defined by the California Community Redevelopment Law. All of the site area
shall be in one ownership at the time of a change of district to a Combined
Planned Unit Development District; the site may include a combination of
separately recorded properties.
      (2)   Site area per dwelling unit. For the purpose of determining the
number of dwelling units permitted in a PD District, all street rights-of-way,
or equivalent private vehicular accessways, and all areas occupied by
landscaping, natural vegetation, or water, and available for the use of all
residents of the PD District, shall be subtracted, and the remaining area shall
be divided by the minimum site area per dwelling unit required in the district
with which the PD District is combined. The maximum number of units that would
be permitted if the site were not in a PD District may be increased by not more
than 10%.
      (3)   Open space. In addition to the usable open space per dwelling unit
required in the RM-2,500 District, a planned unit development containing
dwellings shall include open space occupied by landscaping, natural vegetation,
or water, and available for the use of all residents of the PD District, equal
to not less than 10% of the minimum site area per dwelling unit in the district
with which the PD District is combined times the number of dwelling units in
the PD District. The Planning Commission shall require appropriate location,
development, and provisions for perpetual maintenance of the open space to
serve the needs of residents of a planned unit development.
      (4)   Additional requirements. Additional site development requirements
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Except as provided in this division, a planned unit development
shall meet all of the requirements of §§
155.025 through
155.036 of this title for the district in which it is located.
         (b)   Vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be separated, and
pedestrian access shall be through landscaped areas, not through alley-like
approaches.
         (c)   Buildings shall be placed so as to create a variety of open
areas thereby eliminating a corridor or barracks-like effect.
         (d)   Walks, steps, parking areas, and recreation areas shall be
lighted for safe and convenient night use.
         (e)   Parking areas and drives shall be designed to minimize traffic
hazards and adverse visual impact.
         (f)   Desirable natural features of the site, including trees, shall
be preserved where feasible.
         (g)   Landscaping shall be provided to enhance the appearance of
buildings and grounds, to screen unsightly features, and to control erosion.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29192)
   (D)   Use permits required. No zoning permit shall be issued for any site in
a PD District until a use permit for the entire PD District has been granted in
accord with the provisions of §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29193)
   (E)   Plans required. In lieu of the map required by §
155.281(B)(2) of this title, an application for a use permit for a planned unit
development shall be accompanied by a plan of the entire planned unit
development, drawn to scale, and showing the contours of the site at intervals
of not more than five feet; provisions for drainage of surface waters;
watercourses; railroad and public utility rights-of-way; streets, driveways,
and pedestrianways; lot layout; schools, parks, playgrounds, and other open
spaces; dwelling types; nonresidential uses; locations, elevations, and
schematic floor plans of structures; locations and the design of landscaped
areas. The application shall be accompanied by a tabulation of the area
proposed to be devoted to each land use and a tabulation of the numbers and
floor areas of each of the various dwelling types proposed and the net site
area per dwelling unit. The Director of Planning may require additional
information or drawings if necessary to evaluate the application.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29194)
   (F)   Conditional uses. A planned unit development shall include only uses
permitted, either as permitted uses or conditional uses, in the zoning district
with which the PD District is combined, provided that any use permitted in an
RS or RM District as a permitted use or as a conditional use, or any
combination of such uses, may be included in a planned unit development located
in an R District.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29195)
   (G)   Status of approved plans for planned unit developments. The approved
site plan for a planned unit development shall govern all development on the
site. If approval is granted for subsequent division of the Planned Unit
Development District into two or more parcels, the approved plan shall govern
the development of each of the separate parcels.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29196)
   (H)   Subdivision of planned unit developments. The Planning Commission may
approve the subdivision of a planned unit development into lots or as a
condominium if the Commission finds that adequate provisions are in force to
ensure the perpetual maintenance of all areas and improvements proposed to be
owned in common, or to be maintained in common, and to ensure that additional
development will conform with the approved plan.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29197)
   (I)   Architectural review. All uses shall be subject to architectural
review as prescribed in §§
155.180 through
155.188 of this title.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29198)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.082 AR — ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMBINING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purposes.
      (1)   Site plan review. In order to preserve and enhance the city's site,
to prevent the clearing of property and destruction of trees, shrubs, or other
significant natural vegetation inconsistent with the provisions of this Local
Coastal Program, to prevent excessive grading of hillsides and the creation of
drainage hazards or the diversion of water from identified wetlands, to ensure
that structures are properly related to their sites and to surrounding sites,
structures, and nearby traffic circulation, and that parking areas, walkways,
and landscaping are arranged to accomplish the objectives of this chapter and
Chapter 155 of this title, site plans for certain permitted uses and structures
shall be subject to site plan review by the Design Review Committee. The ugly,
the inharmonious, the monotonous, and the hazardous shall be barred, but
originality and creativity in site planning shall not be suppressed.
      (2)   Architectural review. In order to prevent the erection of
structures or signs that would be inharmonious with their surroundings or would
have an adverse effect on the value of property or improvements in the
vicinity, uses and structures and certain signs in the AR and PD Districts and
conditional uses in all districts shall be subject to architectural review by
the Design Review Committee. The ugly, the inharmonious, the monotonous, and
the hazardous shall be barred, but originality in architecture, site planning,
and landscape and graphic design shall not be suppressed. Review shall include
exterior design, materials, textures, and colors but shall not consider
elements of the design that do not affect exterior appearance. In reviewing
proposals for development in AR Districts that have an established historical
character, the Design Review Committee shall recommend disapproval of drawings
for a structure or a sign that would be inharmonious with surrounding
development, but the Committee shall not require that new structures duplicate
a historic architectural style as a condition of approval.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29200)
   (B)   Design Review Committee.
      (1)   There is hereby created a Design Review Committee which shall
review drawings and report to the Planning Commission when prescribed in this
chapter. The Design Review Committee shall consist of three members: the
Director of Community Development, the Building Official who shall serve ex
officio, and a person qualified by reason of training or experience in
architecture, land development, city planning, real estate, landscape
architecture, or other relevant business or profession, or by reason of sound
judgment, to judge the effects of a proposed development on the community, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with confirmation by the Council for a term
ending on January 1 of each year. If the membership of the Committee does not
include an architect, the Committee shall by unanimous agreement invite an
architect, who may not be a resident of the city, to serve in an advisory
capacity. In the event the Committee is required to review drawings for a
project in which one of its members or its advisors has a business or
professional interest, it shall seek the advice of a disinterested architect.
      (2)   The Design Review Committee shall hold two regular meetings each
month at a time to be designated by the Committee, except that a meeting may be
canceled if no drawings in conformity with the other requirements of this
chapter have been submitted for review. Reports of the Committee shall have the
concurrence of at least two members. The Director of Community Development
shall serve as secretary to the Committee.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29201)
   (C)   Drawings to be approved.
      (1)   No zoning permit for a use or for a structure or enlargement of
existing use or structure that is subject to site plan review as prescribed in
this chapter shall be issued until the drawings required by division (D)(1) of
this section have been approved by the Design Review Committee, the Planning
Commission, or the Council.
      (2)   No zoning permit for a use or for a structure or sign or exterior
alteration, enlargement, or major remodeling of an existing use, structure, or
sign that is subject to architectural review as prescribed in this chapter
shall be issued until the drawings required by division (D)(2) of this section
have been approved by the Design Review Committee, the Planning Commission, or
the Council.
      (3)   No zoning permit for a use or structure in the CP Planned Shopping
Center Commercial District shall be issued until drawings of development plans
for the entire CP District as prescribed in this chapter have been approved in
accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29202)
   (D)   Drawings to be submitted.
      (1)   Site plan review. The owner of the site or his or her authorized
agent shall submit the following drawings to the Director of Community
Development at the time of or prior to applying for a zoning permit:
         (a)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed layout of
structures and other improvements, including, where appropriate, driveways,
pedestrian walks, off-street parking and off-street loading areas, landscaped
areas, fences, and walls. The site plan shall indicate the locations of
entrances and exits and the direction of traffic flow into and out of off-
street parking and off-street loading areas, the location of each parking space
and each loading berth, and areas for turning and maneuvering vehicles;
         (b)   A landscape plan, drawn to scale, showing the locations of
natural resource areas as defined in Policies 5.5 and 5.7 of the LUP, existing
trees proposed to be removed and proposed to be retained on the site, the
location and design of landscaped areas, and the varieties of plant materials
to be planted therein, and other landscape features;
         (c)   Drawings showing the height and bulk of proposed structures and
schematic floor plans showing sufficient detail to permit computation of yard
requirements;
         (d)   Grading plans; and,
         (e)   The Design Review Committee or the Director of Community
Development may require additional information if necessary to determine
whether the purposes of this chapter are being carried out.
      (2)   Architectural review. In addition to the drawings required by
subdivisions (2)(a), (b), and (d) of this division, the owner of the site or
his or her authorized agent shall submit the following drawings to the Director
of Community Development at the time of or prior to applying for a zoning
permit:
         (a)   Architectural drawings or sketches, drawn to scale, showing all
elevations of the proposed structures as they will appear upon completion. All
exterior surfacing materials and colors shall be specified;
         (b)   Scale drawings of all signs subject to architectural review
showing the size, location, material, colors, and illuminations, if any;
         (c)   The Design Review Committee or the Director of Community
Development may require additional information if necessary to determine
whether the purposes of this chapter are being carried out.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29203)
   (E)   Referral to Design Review Committee. The Director of Community
Development shall check all drawings submitted for site plan review or
architectural review. If he or she finds that the plans meet the requirements
of this chapter, subject to site plan review or architectural review, he or she
shall submit the drawings to the Design Review Committee. If the Director of
Community Development determines that a zoning permit could not be issued
without the granting of a use permit, the granting of a variance, or the
enactment of an amendment to this chapter, he or she shall inform the applicant
and shall not submit the drawings to the Design Review Committee.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29204)
   (F)   Action of Design Review Committee.
      (1)   Within 21 days of the date of the drawings meeting all other
requirements of this chapter were submitted for site plan review or
architectural review, the Design Review Committee shall approve the drawings or
shall submit a written report to the Planning Commission recommending
conditional approval, modification, or disapproval. Conditions may include, but
shall not be limited to, the conditions prescribed in §§
155.280 through
155.299 of this title.
      (2)   If the Committee approves the drawings, or if the conditions or
modifications recommended by the Committee are acceptable to the applicant, the
drawings shall be approved in the form recommended by the Committee.
      (3)   Failure of the Committee to act within 21 days of the date of
submission shall be deemed approval of the drawings unless a time extension is
requested by the applicant.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29205)
   (G)   Action of Planning Commission.
      (1)   Within 30 days after the Design Review Committee has recommended
conditional approval, modification, or disapproval of the drawings, the
Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
drawings or shall request the applicant to revise them.
      (2)   Revised drawings shall be reviewed as prescribed for drawings first
submitted.
      (3)   Failure of the Commission to act within 30 days following the
action of the Design Review Committee shall be deemed approval of the drawings
unless a time extension is requested by the applicant and granted by the
Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29206)
   (H)   Appeals to Council.
      (1)   Within 10 days following the date of a decision by the Planning
Commission, the decision may be appealed to the Council by the applicant or any
other aggrieved person. The appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the
Commission and shall be filed with the City Clerk. The appeal shall state
specifically wherein the decision of the Commission is not in accord with the
purposes prescribed in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   Within five days of the filing of an appeal, the secretary shall
transmit to the Council the drawings, the report of the Design Review
Committee, and the minutes of the Commission meeting at which the drawings were
considered.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall notify the applicant of the time when the
appeal will be considered by the Council.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29207)
   (I)   Action of Council.
      (1)   Within 30 days following an appeal of a decision of the Planning
Commission, the Council shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision provided,
if a decision is reversed or modified, the Council shall make a finding that
the decision was not in accord with the purposes prescribed in division (A) of
this section.
      (2)   Failure of the Council to act within 30 days of the date of filing
an appeal shall be deemed approval of the drawings as submitted by the
applicant unless a time extension is requested by the applicant and granted by
the Council.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29208)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 156.083 Q — QUALIFIED COMBINING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purposes. In addition to the objectives prescribed in
§ 156.002 of this chapter, the Q Qualified Combining District is included in
the zoning regulations to achieve the following purposes:
      (1)   To be combined with any zone in situations where sound and orderly
planning indicate that specified principal permitted uses or conditional uses
otherwise allowed under the zone should be restricted. Principal uses may be
made conditional uses, and/or principal or conditional uses may be disallowed.
Uses not otherwise allowed in the zone cannot be added to the zone. The
qualified uses shall be specified in the ordinance applying the Q zone to
specific property.
   (B)   Combining Districts. A Q Qualified Combining District may be combined
with any other district. All regulations for the district combined with the Q
District shall apply except as specified in the Ordinance applying the Q zone
to the specific property.
   (C)   Additional Districts. Additional site development requirements shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   In addition to the requirements prescribed in
§ 155.351, divisions (A) through (C), an application for combining a district
with a Q District shall be accompanied by supporting data and information,
including, but not limited to, draft language of the special qualification to
the base zone, a discussion why the need of the special qualification, and
information supporting a finding that the change is not “spot zoning.”
(Ord. 621-C.S., passed 11-25-97: Am. Ord. 646-C.S., passed 8-21-01)
COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES
§ 156.095 PURPOSES.
   This part establishes the permit procedures for developments located in the
coastal zone as defined in Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 30150. This chapter is based
on the Local Coastal Program Implementation Regulations adopted by the
California Coastal Commission pursuant to Cal. Pub. Res. Code §§ 30333 and
30501, and as such shall constitute the procedural requirements for review of
developments in the coastal zone pursuant to Public Records Code § 30600(d).
('63 Code, § 10-5.29300) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.096 APPLICABILITY; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as provided in §
156.097(B) of this section, any applicant wishing to undertake a development
(defined in §
156.006 of this section) in the coastal zone shall obtain a coastal development
permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any
other permit required by law. Development undertaken pursuant to a coastal
development permit shall conform to the plans, specifications, terms and
conditions approved in granting the permit. The procedures prescribed herein
may be used in conjunction with other procedural requirements of the approving
authority, provided that the minimum requirements as specified herein are
assured.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29302) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.097 EXEMPTIONS; NOTICE OF EXEMPT DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Exemptions. The developments listed below shall be exempt from the
requirements for a coastal development permit. Requirements for any other
permits are unaffected by this section.
      (1)   Improvements to existing one-family dwellings, except as otherwise
specified by Cal. Admin. Code Title 14, § 13250(a) and (b).
      (2)   Improvements to any structure other than a one-family dwelling or a
public works facility, except as otherwise specified by Cal. Admin. Code Title
14, § 13253(a) and (b).
      (3)   Maintenance dredging of existing channels, except as limited by
Cal. Admin. Code Title 14, § 13252.
      (4)   Repair and maintenance activities which do not result in an
addition to or enlargement or expansion of the object of such activities,
except as otherwise specified by Cal. Admin. Code Title 14, § 13252.
      (5)   Activities of public utilities as specified in the Repair,
Maintenance and Utility Hookup Exclusion adopted by the Coastal Commission on
September 5, 1978.
      (6)   The installation, testing, and placement in service or the
replacement of any necessary utility connection between an existing service
facility and any development approved pursuant to this division.
      (7)   The replacement of any structure, other than a public works
facility, destroyed by a disaster. The replacement structure shall conform to
applicable existing zoning requirements, shall be for the same use as the
destroyed structure, shall not exceed either the floor area, height, or bulk of
the destroyed structure by more than 10%, and shall be sited in the same
location on the affected property as the destroyed structure.
      (8)   Any timeshare conversions of existing multiple unit residential
structures. The conversion of a multiple unit residential structure into
condominiums, as defined in Cal. Civ. Code § 783, shall not be considered a
timeshare project or use for the purpose of this section.
      (9)   Occupancy permits.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29303)
   (B)   Notice of exempt development. A permit issued by the city for a
development which is exempt from the coastal development permit requirements,
shall be exempt from the notice and hearing requirements of this chapter. The
city shall maintain a record for all permits issued for exempt developments
which shall be made available to the Coastal Commission or any interested
person upon request. This record may be in the form of any record of permits
issued currently maintained by the city, provided that such record includes the
applicant's name, the location of the project, and brief description of the
project.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29304)
(Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.098 CATEGORICAL EXCLUSIONS; NOTICE OF EXCLUDED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Categorical exclusions. The following categories of development within
specified geographic areas of the coastal zone pursuant to the Categorical
Exclusion Order E-88-2 are exempt from the permit requirements of this chapter:
      (1)   The construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the
size, type or intensity of any development of a principally permitted use or
uses in the areas of the Eureka Coastal Zone that are zoned for residential,
commercial, or industrial development, except for the following:
         (a)   Public works facilities or improvements costing more than
$250,000.
         (b)   The development involves demolition of a structure of
architectural or historic significance.
      (2)   The clearing of land and/or removal of vegetation.
      (3)   Lot line and boundary adjustments as defined in Cal. Gov't Code §
66412(d) (Subdivision Map Act) between two or more existing adjacent parcels,
where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where
a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created.
      (4)   Grading of less than 100 cubic yards.
      (5)   Permits for encroachment into public rights-of-way.
      (6)   (a)   Construction, reconstruction, upgrading, replacement,
rehabilitation, or installation of all public works and public facilities
(including, but not limited to utility extensions, road improvements,
sidewalks, bicycle lanes, street planting, water and sewer systems and the
removal of architectural barriers to handicapped persons) costing $250,000 or
less.
         (b)   The upgrading of streets to current city standards within
existing rights-of-way where no additional right-of-way is being obtained
allowing, however for minor right-of-way acquisitions at intersections.
      (7)   Wall mounted signs, located on-site, less than 24 square feet in
size, nor higher than the vertical wall to which they are attached, located
within the “CW,” “CS,” or “CP” zoning designations of the Eureka Local Coastal
Program, except as follows: Lots or parcels within or visible from scenic
coastal resource areas, as defined in the Eureka Local Coastal Program.
      (8)   Subdivision and parcel maps of five parcels or less.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29304.1)
   (B)   Notice of excluded development. A permit issued by the city for a
development which is exempt from the coastal development permit requirements,
shall be exempt from the notice and hearing requirements of this chapter. The
city shall maintain a record for all permits issued for excluded development
which shall be made available to the Coastal Commission or any interested
person upon request. This record may be in the form of any record of permits
issued currently maintained by the city, provided that such record include the
applicant's name, the location of the project and brief description of the
project.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29304.2)
(Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.099 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Application requirements. Applications for coastal development permits
shall be filed with and on forms provided by the Community Development
Department. Where required by this chapter, applications for coastal
development permits shall be made prior to or concurrently with application for
any other permit or approvals required for the project by this chapter. The
application shall include the following data:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Statement that the applicant is the owner or the authorized agent
of the owner of the property on which the use is proposed to be located;
      (3)   Address or description of the property; and,
      (4)   Detailed project description and project information required in
the supplement to the application.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29304.3)
   (B)   Maps. The application shall be accompanied by the following plans and
drawings:
      (1)   An accurate scale drawing of the site showing all existing and
proposed improvements;
      (2)   An accurate scale drawing of the development floor plan and
building elevations (as applicable); and,
      (3)   Any additional information determined by the Director of Community
Development to be necessary for evaluation of the proposed development.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29304.4)
   (C)   Fees. The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by
resolution of the Council to cover the cost of handling the application as
prescribed in this chapter.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29304.5)
(Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.100 ACTION ON COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Action to approve, condition or deny a coastal development permit
shall be taken only by the Director of Community Development, the Planning
Commission, or the City Council.
   (B)   To the extent possible, action on a coastal development permit should
be taken concurrently with action on other permits or approvals required by
this chapter for the project, in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Where action on other permits or approvals is to be taken by the
Director of Community Development or should the project require no permit or
approval other than a coastal development permit, the Director of Community
Development shall act on the coastal development permit.
      (2)   The Director of Community Development may, at his or her
discretion, refer the coastal development permit to the Planning Commission for
action.
      (3)   Where action on other permits or approvals is to be taken by the
Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall act on the coastal
development permit concurrently with action on the other required permit or
approval.
      (4)   Where action on other permits or approvals is to be taken by the
City Council, the Council shall act on the coastal development permit
concurrently with action on the other required permit or approval.
      (5)   Where action on other permits or approvals is to be taken by more
than one decision-making body, the body with the highest decision making
authority shall act on the coastal development permit.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29304.6) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 818-C.S.,
passed 11-3-15)
§ 156.101 PUBLIC HEARING ON DEVELOPMENTS; NOTICE.
   Except as provided in §
156.104, at least one public hearing shall be held on each application for
development, thereby affording any persons the opportunity to appeal at the
hearing and inform the city of the nature of their concerns regarding the
project. Notice of such hearing shall be provided pursuant to §
156.103 of this chapter. The public hearing may be conducted in accordance with
existing local procedures or in any other manner reasonably calculated to give
interested persons an opportunity to appear and present their viewpoints,
either orally or in writing.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29305) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.102 NOTICE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTION WHERE HEARING CONTINUED.
   If a decision on a development permit is continued by the city to a time
which is neither previously stated in the notice provided pursuant to §
156.103 nor announced at the hearing as being continued to a time certain, the
city shall provide notice of the further hearings (or action on the proposed
development) in the same manner, and within the same time limits as established
in this chapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29306) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 834-C.S.,
passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.103 PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE; COASTAL ZONE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Unless specified otherwise, when a public hearing is required pursuant
to Title XV for development in the coastal zone, notice of the public hearing
shall be provided in the following manner:
      (1)   The notice shall include:
         (a)   A statement that the development is within the coastal zone;
         (b)   The date of filing of the application and the name of the
applicant;
         (c)   The number assigned to the application;
         (d)   The identity of the hearing body or officer;
         (e)   The date, time, and place of the public hearing;
         (f)   A general explanation of the matter to be considered;
         (g)   A general description, in text and/or by diagram, of the
location of the real property, if any, that is the subject of the hearing,
including the Assessor's parcel number(s) and street address(es);
         (h)   The general procedure of the local government concerning the
submission of public comments either in writing or orally prior to the local
decision; and
         (i)   The system for local and Coastal Commission appeals, including
any local fees required.
      (2)   The notice shall be mailed by first class mail or delivered at
least ten days prior to the hearing to:
         (a)   The owner of the subject real property, the owner's duly
authorized agent, and the project applicant, if any;
         (b)   For projects appealable to the Coastal Commission: all owners
and residents of real property within 100 feet of the real property that is the
subject of the hearing;
         (c)   For conditional uses not appealable to the Coastal Commission:
all owners of real property within 300 feet and residents within 100 feet of
the real property that is the subject of the hearing;
         (d)   The Coastal Commission; and
         (e)   Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the
City Clerk or Secretary of the Planning Commission or Historic Preservation
Commission.
         (f)   Owner information shall be as shown on the latest equalized
assessment roll. Instead of using the assessment roll, the city may use records
of the County Assessor or Tax Collector if those records contain more recent
information than the information contained on the assessment roll.
         (g)   The city may charge a fee which is reasonably related to the
costs of providing the notice requested in §
156.103(B)(2)(e) and the city may require each request to be annually renewed.
      (3)   A notice approximately two and a-half by three feet shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on or near the property affected.
   (B)   In addition to the notice required by this section, the city may give
notice of the hearing in any other manner it deems necessary or desirable.
   (C)   Substantial compliance with these provisions to notice shall be
sufficient and a technical failure to comply shall not affect the validity of
any action taken pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. Failure
to post notice shall not invalidate the proceedings.
   (D)   The failure of any person or entity to receive notice given pursuant
to this section shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the
actions for which the notice was given.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29307) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 834-C.S.,
passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.104 NOTICE OF DEVELOPMENTS NOT APPEALABLE TO THE COASTAL COMMISSION THAT
DO NOT REQUIRE A PUBLIC HEARING; PERMITTED USES.
   A notice of pending development approval shall be provided as prescribed in
§
156.103 of this subchapter, except:
   (A)   The notice shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the local
decision; and
   (B)   The notice shall contain a statement that a public comment period of
at least 14 working days shall be provided to allow for the submission of
comments by mail prior to the local decision.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29308) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.105 RESERVED.
§ 156.106 DETERMINATION OF APPLICABLE NOTICE AND HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The determination of whether a development is categorically excluded,
or appealable for purposes of notice, hearing and appeals shall be made by the
city at the time the application for development is submitted. This
determination shall be made with reference to the certified Local Coastal
Program, including maps, categorical exclusions, land use designations, and
zoning ordinances adopted as a part of the certified Local Coastal Program.
   (B)   Where an applicant, interested person, or the city has a question as
to the appropriate procedures, the following procedures shall be followed:
      (1)   The city shall make its determination as to what type of
development is being proposed (such as, exempt, categorically excluded,
appealable nonappealable) and shall inform the applicant of the notice and
hearing requirements for that particular development. The local determination
may be made by the designated approving authority;
      (2)   If the determination of the city is challenged by the applicant or
an interested person, or if the city wishes to have a Commission determination
as to the appropriate designation, the city shall notify the Commission by
telephone of the dispute/question and shall request an Executive Director's
opinion;
      (3)   The Executive Director shall within two working days of city
request (or upon completion of a site inspection where such an inspection is
warranted) transmit a determination as to whether the development is exempt,
categorically excluded, nonappealable or appealable;
      (4)   Where, after the Executive Director's investigation, the Executive
Director's determination is not in accordance with the city determination, the
Commission shall hold a hearing for the purpose of determining the appropriate
designation for the next Commission meeting in the appropriate geographic
region following the city request.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29310) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.107 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   A coastal development permit shall be approved only upon making the finding
that the proposed development conforms to the policies of the certified local
coastal program.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29310.1) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.108 APPEALS.
   Development pursuant to an approved coastal development permit shall not
commence until all applicable appeal periods expire, or, if appealed, until all
appeals, including to the Coastal Commission, if applicable, have been
exhausted.
   (A)   Action by the Director of Community Development on coastal development
permits may be appealed to the Planning Commission by the applicant, or an
aggrieved person as defined in §
156.006, or the Planning Commission or City Council on their own motion. The
appeal and accompanying fee established by resolution of the Council, must be
filed with the City Clerk within 10 calendar days of the decision. The appeal
shall be made on forms provided by the city and shall state why the decision of
the Director of Community Development is not in accord with the city’s Local
Coastal Program and or why it is believed that there was an error or an abuse
of discretion by the Director of Community Development.
   (B)   Upon notification that an appeal of the action of the Director of
Community Development has been filed with the City Clerk, the Secretary shall
set a public hearing before the Planning Commission. Notice shall be sent in
the manner prescribed in §
156.103 of this subchapter.
   (C)   Action by the Planning Commission on coastal development permits may
be appealed to the City Council by the applicant or an aggrieved person as
defined in §
156.006 or the City Council on its own motion. The appeal and accompanying fee
established by resolution of the Council, must be filed with the City Clerk
within ten calendar days of the decision. The appeal shall be made on forms
provided by the city and shall state why the decision of the Planning
Commission is not in accord with the city's Local Coastal Program and or why it
is believed that there was an error or an abuse of discretion by the Planning
Commission.
   (D)   Upon notification that an appeal of the action of the Planning
Commission has been filed with the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall set a
public hearing before the City Council. Notice shall be sent in the manner
prescribed in §
156.103 of this subchapter.
   (E)   Coastal development permits for developments which are subject to the
appeal jurisdiction of the Coastal Commission as specified in §
156.006 of this chapter, may be appealed to the Coastal Commission once the
appellant has exhausted local appeals pursuant to §
156.112 of this subchapter. Appeals shall be made in a manner consistent with
the Coastal Commission’s guidelines.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29310.2) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90; Ord. 676-C.S.,
passed 2-24-04; Am. Ord. 818-C.S., passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-
7-16)
§ 156.109 FINALITY OF CITY ACTION.
   A local decision on an application for a development shall be deemed final
when the local decision on the application has been made and all required
findings have been adopted, including specific factual findings supporting the
legal conclusions that the proposed development is or is not in conformity with
the certified local coastal program, and that the required conditions of
approval adequate to carry out the certified local coastal plan as required in
the implementing ordinances have been imposed, and when all rights of appeal
have been exhausted as defined in §
156.112 of this subchapter.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29311) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.110 FINAL CITY ACTION; NOTICE.
   Within seven calendar days of a final decision on an application for any
development (except categorically excluded or exempt developments) the city
shall provide notice of its action by first class mail to the Commission and to
any persons who specifically requested notice of such final action by
submitting a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the city (or, where required,
who paid a reasonable fee to receive such notice). Such notice shall include
conditions of approval and written findings and the procedures for appeal to
the Coastal Commission.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29312) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.111 FAILURE TO ACT; NOTICE.
   (A)   Notification by applicant. If the city has failed to act on an
application within the time limits set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65950
through 65957.5, thereby approving the development by operation of law, the
person claiming a right to proceed pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65950 through
65057.5 shall notify, in writing, the city and the Commission of his or her
claim that the development has been approved by operation of law. Such notice
shall specify the application which is claimed to be approved.
   (B)   Notification by city. When the city determines that the time limits
established pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65950 through 65957.5 have expired,
the city shall within seven calendar days of such determination, notify any
person entitled to receive notice pursuant to §
156.109 of this subchapter that it has taken, final action by operation of law
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65950 through 65957.5. The appeal period for
projects approved by operation of law shall begin to run only upon the receipt
of the city notice in the Commission office (this section shall apply equally
to a city determination that the projects approved by operation of law and to a
judicial determination that the project has been approved by operation of law).
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29313) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 834-C.S.,
passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.112 LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACTION; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   A final decision of the city on an application for a nonappealable
development shall become effective on the day the decision is made.
   (B)   (1)   A final decision of the city on an application for an appealable
development shall become effective after the 10 working days appeal period to
the Commission has expired or after the 21st calendar day following the final
local action unless any of the following occur:
         (a)   An appeal is filed in accordance with the Commission's
regulations;
         (b)   The notice of final local government action does not meet the
requirements of §§
156.109 and
156.110 of this subchapter.
      (2)   Where any of the circumstances in subdivisions (a) or (b) of this
division occur, the Commission shall, within five calendar days of receiving
notice of that circumstance, notify the city and the applicant that the
effective date of the city action has been suspended.
(‘63 Code, § 10-5.29314) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84; Am. Ord. 519-C.S.,
passed 8-26-90; Am. Ord. 834-C.S., passed 6-7-16)
§ 156.113 EXHAUSTION OF LOCAL APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   An appellant shall be deemed to have exhausted local appeals for
purposes of filing an appeal under the Commission's regulations and be an
aggrieved person where the appellant has pursued his appeal to the local
appellate body as required by the city appeal procedures; except that
exhaustion of all local appeals shall not be required if any of the following
occur:
         (a)   The city required an appellant to appeal to more local appellate
bodies for permits in the coastal zone, in the implementation section of the
Local Coastal Program;
         (b)   An appellant was denied the right of the initial local appeal by
a local ordinance which restricts the class of persons who may appeal a local
decision;
         (c)   An appellant was denied the right of local appeal because local
notice and hearing procedures for the development did not comply with the
provisions of this chapter;
         (d)   The city charges an appeal fee for the filing or processing of
appeals.
      (2)   Where the local government would ordinarily require an appeal fee
for the processing of appeals within the appealable areas of the coastal zone,
the city may elect to waive the appeal fee and apply to the Commission for a
reimbursement of that fee through an SB 90 claim or similar reimbursement
process.
   (B)   Where a project is appealed by any two members of the Commission,
there shall be no requirement of exhaustion of local appeals. Provided,
however, that notice of Commission appeals shall be transmitted to the local
appellate body (which considers appeals from the local body that rendered the
final decision) and the appeal to the Commission shall be suspended pending a
decision on the merits by that local appellate body. If the decision of the
local appellate body modifies or reverses the previous decision, the
Commissioners shall be required to file a new appeal from that decision.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29315) (Ord. 417-C.S., passed 12-6-84)
§ 156.114 EMERGENCY COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for development in cases of emergencies as defined in §
156.006 of this title shall be made to the Director of Community Development in
writing or if time does not allow written application, the application may be
made verbally in person or by telephone. The following information shall be
included in any such request:
      (1)   Nature of emergency;
      (2)   Cause of the emergency;
      (3)   Location of the emergency;
      (4)   The remedial, protective or preventative work either needed or
accomplished to deal with the emergency;
      (5)   The circumstances of the emergency that appeared to justify actions
taken, including the probable consequences of failing to take action.
   (B)   The Director of Community Development shall verify the facts of the
alleged emergency insofar as time allows.
   (C)   The Director of Community Development shall provide public notice of
the emergency work, with the extent and type of notice determined on the basis
of the nature of the emergency itself. Notice shall also be provided to the
Executive Director of the Coastal Commission.
   (D)   The Director of Community Development may grant an emergency permit
with reasonable terms and conditions, including an expiration date and the
necessity for a regular permit application later, if he or she finds that:
      (1)   An emergency exists and requires action more quickly than permitted
by the procedures for ordinary permits;
      (2)   Public comment on the proposed emergency action has been reviewed
if time allows;
      (3)   The work proposed would be consistent with the requirements of the
Local Coastal Program.
   (E)   Within 10 calendar days of the request for an emergency permit, the
owner/applicant shall submit an application for a coastal development permit.
Failure by the owner/applicant to follow through in a timely manner with a
regular application, shall be cause for the Director of Community Development
to revoke the emergency permit and to possibly direct removal of any
improvements installed under the emergency permit. The Director of Community
Development may conduct a public hearing prior to taking action in such
situations.
   (F)   (1)   The Director of Community Development shall report the granting
of an emergency permit, in writing, to the City Council and to the Coastal
Commission. The request to the City Council shall be scheduled for its next
regular meeting. The report shall be mailed to all persons who have requested
such notification in writing.
      (2)   The report of the Director of Community Development shall be
informational only. The decision to issue an emergency permit is solely at the
discretion of the Director of Community Development.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29317) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.115 AMENDMENTS TO COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   Applications for amendments to previously approved coastal development
permits shall be filed with the Community Development Department. The
application shall be in writing and shall contain sufficient detail to
adequately assess the nature of the amendment and any potential impacts of the
amendment.
   (B)   Applications for amendments shall be rejected if the proposed
amendment would lessen or avoid the intended effect of an approved or
conditionally approved permit unless the applicant presents newly discovered
material information which could not, with reasonable diligence, have been
discovered and produced before the original permit was granted.
   (C)   If, in the opinion of the Director of Community Development the
amendment is of a minor or trivial nature, with no impacts not already assessed
in the original permit action, and generally in keeping with the action of the
appropriate approving authority, the amendment may be approved by the Director
of Community Development. If the Director of Community Development determines
that the proposed amendment is immaterial, as described above, notice of such a
determination shall be sent to the Executive Director of the Coastal
Commission, to each property owner and occupant of property within 100 feet of
the property and to all other parties that the Director of Community
Development has reason to know who may be interested in the application. If no
written objection is received by the Community Development Department within 10
calendar days of sending the notice, the amendment shall be deemed approved. If
objections are received, the amendment shall be considered under division (D)
of this section.
   (D)   If in the opinion of the Director of Community Development, the
amendment is other than a minor or trivial nature, or may cause impacts not
already assessed in the original permit, or is not in keeping with the action
of the appropriate approving authority, the amendment shall be taken to the
approving authority of the original permit and processed consistent with the
original permit procedures.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29318) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
§ 156.116 LAPSE OF COASTAL DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A coastal development permit shall lapse and become void if
construction or implementation of the permit has not commenced within two years
from the date of final approval of the application for a coastal development
permit.
   (B)   Upon written request received prior to the expiration of the permit, a
one-year extension may be granted by the approving authority. The request may
be granted upon making the findings that no substantial change of circumstances
has occurred and that the extension would not be detrimental to the purpose of
this chapter. Notice of the requested extension shall be given to any person
determined by the Director of Community Development to have been aggrieved at
the original hearing. Any persons aggrieved by the Director of Community
Development's decision on an extension request may appeal that decision to the
City Council. The decision of the City Council on an extension request is
final.
('63 Code, § 10-5.29319) (Ord. 519-C.S., passed 8-26-90)
CHAPTER 157: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
   
157.000   Purpose
   
157.001   Definitions
   
157.002   Historic Preservation Commission
   
157.003   Authority and responsibilities of the Historic Preservation
Commission
   
157.004   Designation after effective date; change in status
   
157.005   Designation, alteration, demolition and appeal procedures
   
157.006   Standards for alterations and demolitions
   
157.007   Denial of permits as remedy; declaration as nuisance; enforcement by
citizens
   
157.008   Severability statement
§ 157.000 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Preservation Chapter is to provide policies and controls
that promote Eureka’s historical and cultural resources as a means to enhance
heritage tourism, economic development and a livable community; preserve and
protect city-owned historical and cultural resources; identify, interpret and
designate the historical and cultural resources within the city; maintain an
active historic preservation program within the city; strive to make new
development compatible with existing historical and cultural resources;
actively pursue funding for historic preservation, including funding for
educational materials, studies, surveys and incentives; encourage both public
and private stewardship of historical and cultural resources within the city.
Additionally, this chapter was adopted to accomplish the following:
   (A)   Designate historic districts and properties.
   (B)   Foster civic and neighborhood pride regarding the beauty and
accomplishments of the past and a sense of identity based on the city’s
history.
   (C)   Encourage the maintenance of historic properties and ensure that they
are well maintained.
   (D)   Prohibit demolition of historical and cultural resources except under
clearly defined circumstances where appropriate.
   (E)   Assure additions and exterior alterations to historic properties
conserve or enhance historic character.
   (F)   Encourage infill development that reflects the character of existing
neighborhoods.
   (G)   Educate the public about the importance of preservation and about
appropriate design and use of compatible building materials.
   (H)   Conserving valuable material and energy resources by ongoing use and
maintenance.
   (I)   Initiate incentives for designation of historic properties and
districts to support maintenance of those properties and districts.
   (J)   Use the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for the
Preservation, Rehabilitation, Restoration, and Reconstruction of Historic and
Cultural Resources.
(Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord. 791-C.S., passed 12-4-12)
§ 157.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADAPTIVE REUSE. The process of adapting a property, site, building, or
structure for a use other than that for which it was originally designed or
previously used.
   ALTERATION. Any modification to the exterior of a structure that would be
visible from a public way and for which a building permit is required, other
than a demolition.
   APPRAISAL. An appraisal of the fair market value of a property or structure
performed by an appraiser selected jointly by the city and the owner of the
property or structure being appraised or, if the city and the owner do not
agree on a joint selection within 15 days after an appraiser is first proposed,
an appraisal performed by an appraiser selected by the owner from a panel of
three appraisers nominated by the city.
   ARCHAIC MATERIAL. Construction materials found in historic resources; for
example, unstabilized adobe, terra cotta, sandstone, cast iron, wrought iron,
plaster on wood lath, etc., which are not common in new construction, although
they may be still available.
   BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind.
For the purposes of this section BUILDING shall not mean manufactured homes and
mobile homes as defined in Chapters 155 and 156 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
   CALIFORNIA OFFICE OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION. The agency that carries out the
National Parks’ Historic Preservation Programs, including nominating historic
properties to the National Register of Historic Places and qualifying local
programs for the Certified Local Government Program. It also administers the
state’s Preservation Programs, such as the California Register of Historic
Resources.
   CALIFORNIA REGISTER OF HISTORIC RESOURCES. The state’s official register of
buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts worthy of preservation
because of their significance in California’s history, architecture,
archeology, engineering, and culture. Said register is defined in Cal. Pub.
Res. Code § 5024.1 and in the Cal. Code of Regulations Title 14, Chapter 11.5,
§§ 4850 et seq., as it may be amended.
   CHARACTER. Refers to all visual aspects and physical features that comprise
the appearance of every historic building. Historic character is the sum of
attributes or features that make up and distinguish a historic building, site,
structure, object, or district.
   CONSERVATION. Practice encompassing technical examination, preservation,
protection, and maintenance of tangible cultural resources.
   CONTRIBUTING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A building or structure which has been
identified by the Historic Preservation Commission as one which contributes to
the designation of an area as a local Preservation District or a Historic
District.
   CULTURAL RESOURCE. Building, site, structure, object, or district having
cultural significance in prehistory or history.
   DEMOLITION. The destruction or removal of a building or structure, or parts
of a building or structure substantially equivalent to the whole.
   DESIGNATED PROPERTY. Any lot, and any buildings or structures on that lot,
included on the Local Register of Historic Places pursuant to this chapter.
     DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT or DIRECTOR. The Director of Community
Development of the city, unless otherwise noted.
   DISTRICT PROPERTY. Any lot, building, and any structures on that lot, which
is or are wholly or partly within a preservation district.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date, inserted by the City Clerk in this section, on
which this chapter becomes effective under the Charter; that is, April 19,
1996.
   ELIGIBLE PROPERTY. Each lot, and any buildings or structures on that lot
with significant historic and/or cultural value, which includes but is not
limited to buildings and structures over 50 years old, all properties listed in
the California Register of Historic Resources and National Register of Historic
Places, and each lot, and any structures on that lot, in a preservation
district.
   EMERGENCY. A sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to
prevent or mitigate loss or damage to life, health, property, or essential
public services.
   HISTORIC FABRIC.
      (1)   With regard to a historic building, HISTORIC FABRIC means the
particular materials, ornamentation, and architectural features which are
consistent with the historic character of the building.
      (2)   With regard to a historic district, HISTORIC FABRIC means all
sites, buildings, structures, features, landscaping, street elements, and
related design components of the district which are consistent with the
historic character of the district.
   HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION (HPC) or COMMISSION. The Historic
Preservation Commission created pursuant to § 157.002 of this chapter.
   HISTORICAL RESOURCE. Any building, structure or site over 50 years old that
is listed in or potentially eligible for the Local Register of Historic Places
as an individual or contributing building or structure in a district which is
historically or archaeologically significant, or which is significant in
architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational,
social, political, military, or cultural history of the city, county, state, or
nation. Structures less than 50 years old may also be historic if they possess
exceptional significance.
   IMMINENT THREAT. The existence of any condition within, or affecting, a
structure which, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, would
qualify such a building or structure as dangerous to the extent that the life,
health, property or safety of the public, its occupants or those performing
necessary repair, stabilization or shoring work, are in immediate peril due to
conditions affecting the building or structure.
   INTEGRITY. Authenticity of a property’s historic identity; the quality or
state of being complete, uncompromised and whole. Historic integrity is the
extent to which the original or significant features of a building remain
unchanged.
   LOCAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The City of Eureka’s official list of
designated buildings, structures, sites, and districts worthy of preservation
because of their significance in city history, architecture, archeology,
engineering, and/or culture.
   LOT. Parcel of land or a portion thereof, considered as a unit, devoted to
or intended for a use or occupied by a structure or a group of structures that
are united by a common interest or use.
   NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES. The nation’s official list of
buildings, structures, objects, sites, and districts worthy of preservation
because of their significance in American history, architecture, archeology,
engineering, and culture.
   NONCONTRIBUTING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING. A building or structure located
within an historic district that does not possess the qualifications or
characteristics of a contributing building due to such factors as age or
alteration, but which has been included within the district because of its
impact on the geographic integrity and overall character of the district.
   PERSON AGGRIEVED. Any person who’s quiet use or enjoyment, or ability to
rent or successfully conduct lawful activities at another property is
interfered with by the substandard or other condition giving rise to a nuisance
at the designated property pursuant to §
157.007(B).
   PRESERVATION. Preservation maintains the form, materials and features of the
historic property as it has evolved over time, acknowledging its growth, loss,
and change. PRESERVATION is the act or process of applying measures necessary
to sustain the existing form, integrity, and materials of a historic property.
   PRESERVATION DISTRICT. Any district within the city, which is designated
pursuant to §§
157.004 and
157.005 of this chapter.
   QUALIFIED PROPERTY. Any historical resource identified by the Historic
Preservation Commission and not on the Local Register of Historic Places.
   RECONSTRUCTION. The act or process of depicting, by means of new
construction, the form, features, and detailing of a non-surviving site,
landscape, building, structure, or object for the purpose of replicating its
appearance at a specific period of time and in its historic location.
Reconstruction re-creates a vanished or non-surviving historic property with
new materials.
   REHABILITATION. The act of making a compatible use of a historic property
through repair, alterations, and additions while preserving those portions or
features that convey its historical, cultural, or architectural values.
Rehabilitation retains the historic property as it has evolved by maintaining
and repairing historic features, while allowing additions and alterations for
contemporary and future uses.
   RESTORATION. The means of accurately depicting the form, features, and
character of a property as it appeared at a particular time by means of removal
of features from other periods in its history and reconstruction of missing
features from the restoration period. The limited and sensitive upgrading of
mechanical, electrical, and plumbing systems and other code-required work to
make properties functional, is appropriate within a restoration project.
RESTORATION depicts an appearance that existed during the historic property’s
most significant period by removing later additions and rebuilding or repairing
earlier features.
   SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR STANDARDS. The Secretary of the Interior’s
Standards for the Treatment of Historical Properties published by the U.S.
Department of the Interior, National Parks Service. Said publication provides
standards and guidelines for the appropriate preservation, rehabilitation,
restoration, reconstruction, and new construction to historic buildings, sites,
resources, structures, and districts.
   SITE, HISTORIC. The location of a significant event, a prehistoric or
historic occupation or activity where the location itself possesses historic,
cultural or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing
structure includes but not limited to a designed landscape or the ruins of a
building or structure.
   STREETSCAPE. The visual character of a street as determined by elements such
as structures, access, greenery, open space, view, and the like. The scene as
may be observed along a public street or public alley composed of natural and
man-made components, including buildings, paving, planting, street hardware,
and miscellaneous structures.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires a location on the
ground, including a building, bridge, tunnel, swimming pool, access drives or
walks. For the purpose of administering this chapter only, fences and walls of
any height shall be considered structures if designated a historical resource
by the Historic Preservation Commission.
   SURVEY. The process of inventorying city historical resources according to
California Office of Historic Preservation guidelines to identify those
resources eligible for the Local Register of Historic Places.
   TAKING. A restriction under this chapter which affects the value or use of a
property so severely that the city would be required to compensate the owner of
the property under the Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution; Article 1,
Section 19 of the California Constitution; or other applicable law.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord.
791-C.S., passed 12-4-12)
§ 157.002 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Historic Preservation Commission, which
shall consist of seven members appointed as prescribed by the City Charter and
§§
33.001 through
33.013 of the Eureka Municipal Code. The members shall have an interest in or
demonstrate experience to include: historic preservation, architecture,
archeology, land use, cultural resources, building construction, or other
similar qualifications satisfactory to the Mayor and the City Council.
   (B)   The terms of the seven appointed members shall begin on January 1,
immediately following expiration of their respective predecessors’ terms or
upon Council approval of their respective appointments, whichever occurs later,
and shall expire on December 31 four years after the expiration of their
predecessors’ terms.
   (C)   The Director, or a designee shall act as secretary of the Commission.
The Commission may establish rules and regulations for its own organization,
procedure, and meetings.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 664-C.S., passed 1-7-03; Am. Ord. 715-
C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord. 791-C.S., passed 12-4-12)
§ 157.003 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HISTORIC PRESERVATION
COMMISSION.
   (A)   In addition to the responsibilities conferred by other provisions of
this chapter, the Commission shall:
      (1)   Review applications for additions, alterations, new construction,
demolition of all or part of any structure or landscape elements (such as
historic walls and trees designated in the Historic Preservation Application)
which are located on a designated property pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   Endeavor to provide technical and economic assistance, as resources
permit and circumstances warrant, to facilitate compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   The HPC shall, to the extent it deems action appropriate, have the
authority to:
      (1)   Negotiate with owners of properties having potentially significant
historical characteristics for, and may recommend to the City Council the
approval of, contracts to restrict the use of such property and to retain such
historical characteristics.
      (2)   Review applications for preservation incentives and make
recommendations thereon to the Planning Commission and City Council, including,
but not limited to, negotiated Mills Act agreements pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 50280 et seq.
      (3)   Establish and maintain a list of historical resources considered
deserving of official recognition although not given regulatory protection
under this chapter. The purposes of the list shall be to recognize the merit of
and encourage the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of such
historical resources. For these purposes, the Commission may authorize such
steps as it deems desirable, including but not limited to the issuance of
certificates of recognition and the authorization of plaques.
      (4)   Carry out or assist studies and programs designed to identify and
evaluate historical resources which are worthy of preservation.
      (5)   Inspect and investigate historical resources which may be worthy of
preservation.
      (6)   Consider methods other than those described above for encouraging
and achieving preservation of worthy structures, resources, sites, and
districts or areas, including exploring means of financing the restoration or
maintenance thereof.
      (7)   Make appropriate recommendations on the general subject of
preservation to the Planning Commission, City Council, City Departments, other
public and private agencies and bodies, and the general public.
      (8)   Make appropriate recommendations to the Planning Commission, City
Council, City Departments, other public and private agencies and bodies and the
general public to assist property owners to repair, modify, improve,
rehabilitate, restore, et al, using archaic materials (especially recycled
building materials), and design criteria sensitive to the particular property
and surrounds.
   (C)   Provide comments and recommendations to the Planning Commission and
Community Development Department regarding proposed projects on properties that
are not specifically designated as historic, such as noncontributing
structures, but are within designated historic preservation districts.
   (D)   Review and make recommendations to the Community Development
Department, Planning Commission, and City Council regarding applications
subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), Cal. Pub. Res. Code
§§ 21000 et seq., specifically §§ 15064.5 et seq., CEQA Guidelines California
Code of Regulations, Title 14, Chapter 3.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord.
791-C.S., passed 12-4-12)
§ 157.004 DESIGNATION AFTER EFFECTIVE DATE; CHANGE IN STATUS.
   (A)   A property shall cease to be a designated property, following written
application by the owner of record or initiation by the Commission, and
determination of the following:
      (1)   That for a designated property which is not a district property,
that a change has occurred since the effective date so that on balance the
property does not possess sufficient historic or architectural attributes to
qualify as a designated property;
      (2)   That for a district property, that a change has occurred since the
effective date so that on balance the property does not possess sufficient
historical or architectural attributes to contribute significantly to the
character of the Preservation District which includes the property;
      (3)   That for any designated district or property, that a taking would
result unless the status of the property is changed; or
      (4)   That significant error was made during the designation process. A
significant error means: (i) that the property was listed in error because at
the time it was listed it did not possess sufficient historical or
architectural attributes to qualify for listing; or (ii) that the city failed
to provide notice as required by Ordinance 607-C.S. passed 3-19-96; or (iii)
the city failed to remove the property after receiving an election for
exclusions pursuant to Ordinance 607-C.S.
      (5)   Any application for a change in status shall be heard by the
Commission, and may be appealed to the City Council. Notice of appeal and the
conduct of all appeals shall follow the procedures set forth in §
155.287 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
   (B)   No property shall cease to be a designated property under divisions
(A)(1) or (2) of this section if that property has applied for and received
economic benefits or regulatory relief from the city by virtue of its status as
a designated property unless the property change rendering it nonhistorical or
architecturally significant was a natural disaster.
   (C)   A property which is not a designated property may become a designated
property upon application by any person, or initiation by the Commission, if
each of the following conditions is satisfied:
      (1)   If the application is not by the owner of record, the owner of
record consents in writing to the designation; and
      (2)   The property proposed for designation meets guidelines as in effect
at the time the designation is considered. Except to the extent modified by the
City Council after the effective date, the guidelines shall be those which
would apply to eligibility of the property for listing on the National Register
of Historic Places.
   (D)   A district which is not a preservation district may be made a
preservation district upon application by any person, or initiation by the
Commission, if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The Commission determines that the district meets guidelines as in
effect at the time the designation is considered. Except to the extent modified
by the City Council after the effective date, the guidelines shall be those
which would apply to eligibility of the district as a historic district on the
National Register of Historic Places; and
      (2)   The Director shall provide, by certified U.S. mail, return receipt
requested, a notice and ballot to each owner of record for each property within
the proposed district. Each such notice shall clearly inform the recipient of
the effect of district designation if approved, specify the status of the
recipient’s property in the proposed district (i.e., “contributing” or “non-
contributing”), and instruct the recipient as to the location and deadline for
submitting ballots to approve or disapprove the district designation; and
      (3)   The Commission has jurisdiction over contributing properties in the
Historic Preservation District but does not have jurisdiction over existing
noncontributing structures; and.
      (4)   Sixty percent of the votes cast in the proposed district must
support creation of the district for it to become a district. Votes shall be
allotted one vote per owner of record of property within the district.
   (E)   All lots within such a preservation district cannot opt out of the
district once designated under this section.
   (F)   Eligible properties that were voluntarily not included on the Local
Register of Historic Places as a result of the initial designation, opt-out
process, or were not given notice and opportunity to opt off, under Ordinance
607-C.S. passed 3-19-96, shall not be subject to involuntary inclusion within a
Historic District.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord.
791-C.S., passed 12-4-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 157.005 DESIGNATION, ALTERATION, DEMOLITION AND APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any application to change the status of a property or district under §
157.004 or to alter or demolish a designated property under §
157.006 shall be made to the Commission, in the form (if any) which that
Commission requires, and shall include such information and materials as that
Commission requires. The Commission may itself initiate a change in status of a
property or district. Any such Commission-initiated change in status under §
157.004(C) shall have the written consent of the property owner(s). Commission-
initiated status changes to districts shall follow the same procedures as
required by §
157.004(D). The Commission shall encourage the applicant to salvage building
materials should demolition or alteration be granted.
   (B)   The Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each complete
application which is received pursuant to division (A) of this section, and on
each change in status of a property or district initiated by the Commission.
Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to §
155.408.080.
   (C)   The owner of any affected property or any other person may appeal the
decision of the Commission concerning the designation of a property or
district, and decisions concerning demolitions and alterations, to the City
Council upon the same terms and conditions as would apply for appeal of a use
permit pursuant to §
155.416. Notice of such City Council hearings shall be given and the hearings
shall be conducted and decisions rendered pursuant to the rules contained in §§
155.404 through
155.432.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit the immediate demolition of a
structure that is deemed to be an imminent threat to life or property as the
result of an emergency as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Ord. 727-
C.S., passed 6-17-08; Am. Ord. 791-C.S., passed 12-4-12; Am. Ord. 834-C.S.,
passed 6-7-16; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 157.006 STANDARDS FOR ALTERATIONS AND DEMOLITIONS.
   (A)   No structure on a designated property shall be demolished unless the
city shall make one of the following three findings, following notice to the
extent required by §
157.005 and hearing(s) pursuant to this chapter.
      (1)   The designated structure is unsafe or a hazard to the public as a
result of an unforeseen event such as a fire or earthquake. Said demolition
shall only be undertaken if in accordance with City of Eureka Municipal Code,
Volume 2,
Chapter 150: Building Regulations, and Cal. Pub. Res. Code § 5028;
      (2)   Taking into account the potential value to the owner of the
property of all available city and other accommodations and incentives
including transferable development rights, zoning ordinance modifications,
alternative building code standards or provisions, loans, grants,
reimbursements and tax reductions, one or more of the following circumstances
exist;
         (a)   The current or most recent use of the property is not permitted
under the current planning code (except as a nonconforming use) and adaptive
reuse is not economically feasible;
         (b)   The adverse impact on the owner of the property is unreasonably
large in comparison to the public benefit from denying demolition;
         (c)    The demolition would further a substantial community interest
or result in a net community benefit;
         (d)   Denying permission to demolish would result in a taking or would
violate state or federal law.
      (3)   Demolition must be allowed pursuant to the State Housing Law (Cal.
Health and Safety Code §§ 17900 et seq.) or other applicable state or federal
law.
   (B)   Conditions may be imposed on demolition to the extent authorized by
any other applicable law or this chapter, including without limitation the
following:
      (1)   Documentation may be required of any structure to be demolished
and/or for the property;
      (2)   Historic Preservation Commission Review and Historic Preservation
Commission approval may be required for any subsequent development at the
property;
      (3)   Demolition may be delayed for up to 90 days to allow time to
identify a prospective buyer for the property, to identify a third party
interested in relocating the affected structure or to allow the city to
determine whether to begin eminent domain procedures, and for up to an
additional 90 days to allow completion of the purchase or relocation or
commencement of a judicial condemnation action if, within the initial 90 days a
buyer or third party is identified or the city determines to begin eminent
domain procedures. In the case of purchase or relocation by a third party,
demolition may be denied where a third party willing and able to purchase the
property or relocate the structure within the time established by this
subdivision is identified and makes a bona fide offer to purchase the property
or structure at fair market value, as determined by appraisal.
      (4)   With respect to demolition of a structure on a district property,
the city shall take into account the importance of an affected structure to the
integrity of the district, and may: limit the size of new development to that
of the existing structure; require that the scale of new development be
harmonious with other structures which contribute to the district’s character;
require retention or reconstruction of one or more facades; and/or require that
any replacement structure be of like kind or quality to the demolished
structure and contribute to the integrity of the preservation district.
   (C)   No structure on a designated property shall be altered unless the
alteration is approved by the city, following notice to the extent required by
§
157.005 and hearing(s) pursuant to this chapter. The Commission may adopt
guidelines for alterations and review of alteration applications, applicable
specifically to designated properties and/or district properties. Except to the
extent such guidelines provide differently, a proposed alteration shall be
considered in light of its effect on the existing character of the affected
structure as it relates to the streetscape.
   (D)   No zoning permit for a use or for a structure or sign or exterior
alteration, enlargement or major remodeling of an existing use, structure or
sign on a designated property that is subject to design review as prescribed in
Chapter 155 of the Eureka Municipal Code, shall be issued until the design has
been approved. Design review for projects subject to this chapter that have the
potential to permanently affect the historic integrity or character of the
property pursuant to the Secretary of the Interior's Standards shall be
approved by the Commission. Design review for projects not subject to this
chapter and that will not permanently affect the historic integrity or
character of the property shall be approved by the Design Review Committee.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord.
754-C.S., passed 8-3-10; Am. Ord. 791-C.S., passed 12-4-12; Am. Ord. 885-C.S.,
passed 5-21-19) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 157.007 DENIAL OF PERMITS AS REMEDY; DECLARATION AS NUISANCE; ENFORCEMENT BY
CITIZENS.
   (A)   In addition to all penalties otherwise provided by this code or other
applicable law, in the event of a demolition, new construction or alteration in
violation of this chapter, building, zoning and/or use permits may be denied
for the affected property for a period not to exceed five years. The Commission
shall recommend the extent of said penalty to the City Council, and the penalty
shall be reviewed and determined by a majority vote of the City Council.
   (B)   Any structure on a designated property which is the subject of an
outstanding order to abate a substandard condition pursuant to the City
Building Code, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. With respect to any such
structure, or any structure on a designated property which has been otherwise
declared a nuisance under city building regulations, any person aggrieved by
such a nuisance may bring an independent civil action against the owner of the
designated property for all appropriate relief, including damages, costs and
attorneys’ fees. Every day of such interference is a separate and distinct
nuisance.
(Ord. 607-C.S., passed 3-19-96; Am. Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord.
791-C.S., passed 12-4-12) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 157.008 SEVERABILITY STATEMENT.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, clause or phrase in this
chapter, or any part thereof, is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
sections or portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter,
irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared invalid
or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 715-C.S., passed 11-27-07; Am. Ord. 791-C.S., passed 12-4-12)
CHAPTER 158: CANNABIS
Section
General Provisions
   
158.001   Chapter purpose
   
158.002   Applicability
   
158.003   Relationship to state and federal law
   
158.004   Severability
   
158.005   Definitions
Personal Use Regulations
   
158.010   Subchapter purpose
   
158.011   Personal use cannabis cultivation
Commercial Cannabis Regulations
   
158.020   Subchapter purpose
   
158.021   Standards for all districts
   
158.022   Temporary cannabis events
Commercial Cannabis Licenses
   
158.030   Subchapter purpose
   
158.031   Commercial cannabis licenses
   
158.032   Enforcement and penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.001 CHAPTER PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter establishes regulations for commercial cannabis uses and
cannabis cultivation for personal use. These regulations are intended to:
      (1)   Provide safe access to medicinal and adult-use cannabis and
cannabis products;
      (2)   Prevent adverse impacts to adjacent properties, surrounding
neighborhoods, and the general community;
      (3)   Minimize potential environmental impacts resulting from commercial
cannabis uses;
      (4)   Promote economic vitality, new business investment, and the
creation and retention of quality jobs;
      (5)   Allow for a diversity of cannabis-related uses in Eureka;
      (6)   Provide for an efficient approval process for city-required permits
and licenses;
      (7)   Implement and enforce state law while not duplicating the
requirements of state licensing authorities;
      (8)   Ensure city-issued commercial cannabis licenses generate sufficient
revenue to cover city costs to oversee and regulate commercial cannabis
businesses;
      (9)   Assist law enforcement agencies in performing their duties
effectively and in accordance with state law; and
      (10)   Ensure cannabis uses operate in compliance with this chapter.
   (B)   This chapter implements the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis
Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA), codified in Cal. Business and Professions
Code §§ 26000 - 26250 (Cannabis).
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   General. This chapter applies to all personal use cannabis cultivation
activities and all commercial cannabis uses in Eureka, including commercial
cannabis uses legally established prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Coastal Zone.
      (1)   This chapter applies to all areas in Eureka, including areas inside
and outside of the coastal zone.
      (2)   Commercial cannabis uses and cannabis cultivation for personal use
in the coastal zone must also comply with cannabis regulations in
Chapter 156 of the Eureka Municipal Code and other applicable requirements of
the City of Eureka Local Coastal Program (LCP) certified by the California
Coastal Commission.
      (3)   In cases of conflict between this chapter and the certified LCP,
the certified LCP governs within the coastal zone.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.003 RELATIONSHIP TO STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.
   This chapter is not intended to conflict with federal or state law. Nothing
in this chapter permits activities that are otherwise illegal under federal,
state, or local law.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.004 SEVERABILITY.
   If any portion of this chapter is found invalid or unconstitutional by the
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision will not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.005 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether
crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom),
fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of
germination. CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined by § 11018.5
of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. Cannabis
cultivation includes the use of cannabis clones, mother plants, and nurseries.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION, INDOOR. The cultivation of cannabis within a fully
enclosed structure using exclusively artificial lighting.
      CANNABIS CULTIVATION AREA.
         (a)   The cumulative gross area used for cannabis cultivation measured
using either:
            (i)   The outward edge of the trays, pots or other containers used
for cultivation; or
            (ii)   The vegetative canopy, whichever is greater.
         (b)   If cannabis containers are stacked in horizontal layers, the
area of each layer is included in the cultivation area calculation. Space not
directly used for cultivation (e.g., storerooms, bathrooms, drying racks,
trimming areas) are not included in the cannabis cultivation area calculation.
      CANNABIS DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis
products to a customer.
      CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION. The procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis
and cannabis products between licensees. Distribution also includes the
inspection, storage, labeling, packaging and other processes required prior to
transport to a licensed cannabis retailer or cannabis manufacturing facility.
      CANNABIS EXTRACTION. The process by which cannabinoids and terpenes found
within cannabis are recovered from the plant material.
         (a)   CHEMICAL EXTRACTION. Cannabis extraction utilizing a chemical
solvent such as butane, propane, ethanol, or supercritical carbon dioxide.
         (b)   MECHANICAL EXTRACTION. Cannabis extraction utilizing only
pressure and/or physical action without the use of chemical solvents.
      CANNABIS FACILITY. A facility, premise, tenant space, site, or location
where one or more commercial cannabis use operates.
      CANNABIS MANUFACTURING. The production, preparation, processing,
propagation, or compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or
indirectly, or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, at a fixed
location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
relabels its container.
      CANNABIS PROCESSING. The manicuring, drying, curing, grinding, bagging,
packaging, rolling, and other similar transformation of cannabis.
      CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
plant material has been transformed, including, but not limited to,
concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or
concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
      CANNABIS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT. A facility that offers or performs
research and development of cannabis or cannabis products where no commercial
cultivation, processing, distribution, wholesale, or retail sales of cannabis
or cannabis products occurs. Growing of plants and the use of volatile solvents
(as listed in Tables 307.1(1) and 307.1(2) of the California Building Code) for
the purpose of conducting the research and development may be allowed. Research
and Development may include, but is not limited to, systematic activities
intended to create new products, processes, patents; scientific assessment of
the safety and efficacy of cannabis and cannabis compounds for research and
product development purposes; and/or work directed toward the innovation,
introduction and improvement of production, processes, and/or products.
      CANNABIS RETAIL. The sale and/or delivery of cannabis or cannabis
products to customers. Includes retail sales for both on-site and off-site
consumption of cannabis and cannabis products.
      CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY. A laboratory, facility, or entity that
offers or performs tests of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of
the following:
         (a)   Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all
other persons involved in commercial cannabis business in the state.
         (b)   Licensed by the Bureau of Cannabis Control.
      CITY. The City of Eureka.
      CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Eureka or his or her
designee.
      COASTAL ZONE. The area of land and water within the Eureka city limits,
extending inland from the state's seaward limit of jurisdiction to the boundary
as shown on Eureka's Local Coastal Program (LCP) Post-LCP Certification Permit
and Appeal Jurisdiction map as certified by the California Coastal Commission.
      COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USE. The commercial cultivation, possession,
manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, research and development,
labeling, transportation, distribution, delivery, or sale of cannabis or
cannabis products.
      COMPASSIONATE USE ACT. The Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition
215) codified as Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.5 et seq.
       GENERAL CANNABIS USE.
         (a)   A land use category that includes all of the following types of
commercial cannabis businesses:
            (i)   Indoor cannabis cultivation.
            (ii)   Cannabis distribution.
            (iii)   Mechanical cannabis extraction and other cannabis
manufacturing activities that do not involve chemical cannabis extraction.
            (iv)   Cannabis research and development.
            (v)   Cannabis testing laboratories.
         (b)   The general cannabis use category excludes cannabis retail and
chemical cannabis extraction.
      LICENSEE. A person who possesses both a state license and a city-issued
commercial cannabis license allowing commercial cannabis business activities.
      MEDICAL CANNABIS. Cannabis or a cannabis product intended to be sold or
donated for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition
215), found in § 11362.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal
cannabis patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation, or
in compliance with any compassionate use, equity, or other similar program
administered by the city.
      MOBILE CANNABIS VENDORS. The production, sale, and/or distribution of
cannabis from a vehicle or other type conveyance while located on a street,
private property, or traveling from place to place. Excludes cannabis delivery
conducted by a licensed cannabis retailer in compliance with this chapter.
      OWNER. Any of the following:
         (a)   A person with an aggregate ownership interest of 20 percent or
more in the person applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is
solely a security, lien, or encumbrance.
         (b)   The chief executive officer of a nonprofit or other entity.
         (c)   A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit.
         (d)   An individual who will be participating in the direction,
control, or management of the person applying for a license.
      PERSONAL USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION. The cultivation, harvesting, drying,
or processing of cannabis plants with the intent to possess, smoke, or ingest
cannabis or cannabis products for one's own individual use or by a primary
caregiver for their qualified patient(s) in accordance with state law.
      PREMISES. The designated structure or structures and land specified in
the application that is owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of
the applicant or licensee where the commercial cannabis business will be or is
conducted.
      PRIMARY CAREGIVER. As defined in § 11362.7 of the Cal. Health and Safety
Code.
      QUALIFIED PATIENT. As defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7
et seq.
      RESIDENCE. A legal dwelling unit consisting of a room or group of rooms
(including sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation facilities, but not more
than one kitchen), which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied
or intended for occupancy by one household on a long-term basis.
      SELL, SALE, and TO SELL. Any transaction whereby, for any consideration,
title to cannabis or cannabis products is transferred from one person to
another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products pursuant to
an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or receiving an
order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis
products by a licensee to the licensee from whom the cannabis or cannabis
product was purchased.
      STATE LICENSING AUTHORITY. The state agency responsible for the issuance,
renewal, or reinstatement of the license, or the state agency authorized to
take disciplinary action against the licensee.
      TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENT.
         (a)   An event involving the on-site sale and/or consumption of
cannabis products that is:
            (i)   Open to the public (an event not limited to invitees and
otherwise open to any member of the public with or without an admission fee or
charge); and
            (ii)   Attended by five or more participants (including sponsors
and guests).
         (b)   A temporary cannabis event does not include social gatherings
held in a private residence.
      VOLATILE SOLVENTS. Solvents used in the manufacture of cannabis products
determined to be volatile by the California Department of Public Health or the
Humboldt Bay Fire Department.
      ZONING CODE. Chapter 155 of the Eureka Municipal Code.
      ZONING DISTRICT. A defined area within the City of Eureka as established
in the Zoning Code where uniform land use and development standards apply in
accordance with the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Terms not defined. Terms not defined in this chapter must be
interpreted to give this chapter its most reasonable meaning and application,
consistent with Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
(MAUCRSA) and applicable state and federal law.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
PERSONAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 158.010 SUBCHAPTER PURPOSE.
   This subchapter establishes standards for personal use cannabis cultivation.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.011 PERSONAL USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION.
   (A)   General. Cannabis cultivation for personal use is allowed within any
residence subject to the standards in division (B) (Standards) below.
   (B)   Standards.
      (1)   Residence required. Cultivation may occur only on a property with a
legal residence, occupied full-time by the person cultivating the cannabis. The
residence must remain at all times a residence with legal and functioning
cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities.
      (2)   Personal use only. Cannabis may be cultivated only for the
cultivator's personal use. Cannabis may not be provided, donated, sold, and/or
distributed to any other person except as allowed by the Compassionate Use Act
for primary caregivers who cultivate medicinal cannabis for their patients.
      (3)   Age requirement. Cannabis may be cultivated only by persons:
         (a)   Twenty-one years of age or older for non-medical use; and
         (b)   Eighteen years of age or older for medical use.
      (4)   Maximum number. A maximum of six living plants are permitted per
residence unless otherwise allowed by the Compassionate Use Act for medicinal
cannabis.
      (5)   Maximum area. The cannabis cultivation area for a residence may not
cumulatively exceed 50 square feet. A maximum area of 100 square feet is
allowed for primary caregivers who cultivate medicinal cannabis for their
patients.
      (6)   Indoor cultivation only. Cultivation of cannabis for personal use
must occur only within a private residence, or in a self-contained accessory
building that is secured, locked, and fully enclosed and which is for the
exclusive use of the resident.
      (7)   Maintenance of required parking. Cultivation may not displace
required on-site parking unless replacement parking is provided elsewhere on
the property.
      (8)   Building and Fire Code compliance. Areas for cultivation must
comply with the Building and Fire Code, including all applicable ventilation
requirements.
      (9)   Public health and safety. The cultivation of cannabis must not
adversely affect the public health or safety or adjacent and nearby residents
through creation of mold, mildew, dust, glare, heat, noise, odor, noxious
gasses, smoke, traffic, vibration, surface runoff, or other impacts.
      (10)   Hazardous practices. Cultivation must not:
         (a)   Use or store hazardous or toxic chemicals or materials;
         (b)   Create hazardous or toxic products or wastes; or
         (c)   Use volatile solvents, processes, or other methods or substances
that pose a significant risk to public health or safety.
      (11)   Lighting. Cannabis cultivation lighting may not cumulatively
exceed 1,200 watts.
      (12)   Electrical equipment and wiring.
         (a)   All electrical equipment used to cultivate cannabis (e.g.,
lighting and ventilation) must be plugged directly into a wall outlet or
otherwise hardwired. Extension cords may not be used to supply power to
cultivation equipment.
         (b)   Electrical wiring/rewiring and installation or relocation of
wall outlets requires an electrical permit from the Building Department.
      (13)   Gas products. The use of gas products (e.g., CO2, butane) for
cannabis cultivation is prohibited.
      (14)   Exterior evidence. From a public right-of-way or adjacent
property, there must be no exterior evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring
at the property, including:
         (a)   Visible plants and/or cultivation equipment;
         (b)   Cultivation-related odor; and
         (c)   Light emanating from cultivation-related lighting.
      (15)   Prohibitions.
         (a)   Personal use cannabis cultivation is prohibited as a home
occupation.
         (b)   Distribution of cannabis cultivated for personal use is not
allowed.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS REGULATIONS
§ 158.020 SUBCHAPTER PURPOSE.
   This subchapter identifies where commercial cannabis uses are allowed,
permits required, and standards that apply to these uses.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.021 STANDARDS FOR ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Allowed uses and permits required.
      (1)   Allowed use tables. For zoning districts outside of the coastal
zone, allowed commercial cannabis uses and required permits are shown in Table
158-1. Within the coastal zone, allowed commercial cannabis uses and required
permits are specified in the certified Local Coastal Program. Notations within
these tables have the following meanings:
         (a)   Permitted uses. A "P" means a use is permitted by right in the
zoning district after obtaining a zoning clearance.
         (b)   Conditionally permitted uses. A "C" means a use requires
approval of a Conditional Use Permit.
         (c)   Minor permitted uses. An "M" means a use requires approval of a
Minor Use Permit.
         (d)   Uses not allowed. A "-" (dash) means a use is not allowed in the
zoning district.
Table 158-1: Allowed Commercial Cannabis Uses
 
Commercial Cannabis Use      Zoning Districts
                             DT DW NC HC WA OR HM SC HN
General Cannabis Use         P  P  M  M  M  C  C  P  P
Cannabis Retail              C  C  C  C  C  -  C  C  C
Chemical Cannabis Extraction -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  C
 
      (2)   Permit procedures.
         (a)   For commercial cannabis uses outside of the coastal zone, see
Zoning Code §
155.412 (Specific Permits and Approvals) for permit procedures.
         (b)   Within the coastal zone, permit procedures are as specified in
the certified Local Coastal Program.
      (3)   Licenses required. In addition to the permits required by
Tables 158-1, commercial cannabis uses require a license approved by the city
and the state. See Article 4 (Commercial Cannabis Licenses) for city license
requirements.
      (4)   Unlisted zoning districts. Commercial cannabis uses are prohibited
in any zoning district not listed in
Tables 158-1.
      (5)   HM Zoning District. In the Hospital Medical (HM) zoning district,
allowed commercial cannabis uses are limited to uses intended to primarily
serve employees, patients, and visitors of medical uses in the zoning district
as determined by the Conditional Use Permit process.
      (6)   Changes to approved use.
         (a)   Outside of the coastal zone, a change to a commercial cannabis
use with an approved Use Permit or Minor Use Permit must be approved by the
city as provided in Zoning Code §
155.420.080 (Changes to an Approved Project).
         (b)   Within the coastal zone, changes must be approved as specified
in the certified Local Coastal Program.
   (B)   Mobile cannabis vendors. Mobile cannabis vendors are prohibited within
city limits.
   (C)   Delivery services. Cannabis deliveries originating from outside city
limits and delivering cannabis or cannabis products within city limits are
allowed only with a business license and proof of local and state licensure.
   (D)   Compliance with state laws and regulations.
      (1)   All commercial cannabis uses must comply with applicable state
laws, rules and regulations, as may be adopted and amended from time to time,
including all permit, approval, inspection, reporting and operational
requirements imposed by the state and its regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over cannabis and/or cannabis businesses. These include, but are
not limited to, the Bureau of Cannabis Control, the Department of Food and
Agriculture, the Department of Public Health, the Department of Pesticide
Regulation, and the Board of Equalization.
      (2)   If requested by the city, a commercial cannabis use must provide
copies of state, regional and local agency permits, approvals, or certificates
to verify compliance.
   (E)   Compliance with Municipal Code. A commercial cannabis use must comply
with all applicable regulations in the Municipal Code, including but not
limited to the Zoning Code and all regulations governing building, grading,
plumbing, sewer, electrical, fire, hazardous materials, nuisance, and public
health and safety.
   (F)   On-site parking. For purposes of determining required on-site parking
spaces outside of the coastal zone based on Table 324-1 in Zoning Code §
155.324 (Parking), general cannabis uses and cannabis retail uses are
considered a "commercial use." Chemical cannabis extraction uses are considered
an "industrial and storage use."
   (G)   Entrance notice. Each entrance to a commercial cannabis use must be
clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under the age
of 21 are precluded from entering the premises, except for qualified patients,
unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian.
   (H)   Distance from schools.
      (1)   A new permit or license to operate may not be issued for a
commercial cannabis use within a 600-foot radius of an existing public charter
or K-12 school. The 600-foot buffer is measured from the edge of the parcel
containing the school to the edge of the parcel containing the commercial
cannabis use.
      (2)   A new public charter or K-12 school locating within 600 feet of an
existing commercial cannabis use is not grounds to deny the annual renewal of a
previously granted cannabis facility permit or license.
   (I)   Public health and safety. A commercial cannabis use may not adversely
affect the health or safety of the facility occupants or employees, or nearby
properties through the creation of mold, mildew, dust, glare, heat, noise,
odor, noxious gasses, smoke, traffic, vibration, surface runoff, or other
impacts.
   (J)   Hazardous materials. A commercial cannabis use must comply with all
applicable Health and Safety Code and California Fire Code requirements related
to the storage, use, and handling of hazardous materials and the generation of
hazardous waste.
   (K)   Security.
      (1)   General. A commercial cannabis use must implement sufficient
security measures to ensure public safety, prevent unauthorized access to
restricted areas, and protect the premises from theft.
      (2)   State requirements. A commercial cannabis use must comply with
security requirements such as limited-access areas, employee badges, video
surveillance systems, security personnel, locks, and alarm systems described in
16 CCR Sections 5042-5047.
      (3)   Risk classification. Specific security measures required for a
commercial cannabis use are based on the facility's risk classification as
determined by the Eureka Police Department. At any time, the Police Department
may change a use's risk classification (based on calls for service to the
facility and/or other relevant factors) and require additional or modified
security measures.
      (4)   Security plan. A commercial cannabis use must comply with a
security plan approved by the Eureka Police Department. Security plan
requirements are described in the commercial cannabis license application and
are based on the facility's risk classification. At a minimum, a security plan
must include:
         (a)   Signage to control theft on the premises;
         (b)   Video surveillance to record activity on the premises, both
inside and outside buildings;
         (c)   Commercial grade security, burglar, and panic alarm systems;
         (d)   General site control measures to deter and prevent unauthorized
entrance into areas containing cannabis (e.g., customer-restricted areas,
cannabis storage, safes and locks, exterior lighting);
         (e)   For high-risk facilities, entry controls such as man trap doors,
if required; and
         (f)   All security measures required by state law and determined
necessary by the Eureka Police Department.
   (L)   Odors.
      (1)   Cannabis odors must not be detectable outside of a building
containing a commercial cannabis use.
      (2)   A commercial cannabis use must incorporate a sufficient odor
absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that cannabis odor is not detected:
         (a)   Outside of the building containing the cannabis use;
         (b)   Anywhere on adjacent property or public right-of-way;
         (c)   On, in, or around the exterior or interior common area walkways,
hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas or any other areas available for use
by common tenants or the visiting public; or
         (d)   Within any other unit located inside the same building as the
commercial cannabis use.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.022 TEMPORARY CANNABIS EVENTS.
   (A)   Where allowed. Temporary cannabis events are allowed:
      (1)   On the premises of a licensed commercial cannabis use;
      (2)   On private property without a licensed commercial cannabis use in
any non-residential zoning district; and
      (3)   Within a city facility or other public property in any zoning
district.
   (B)   Required approvals.
      (1)   A temporary cannabis event requires city approval of a temporary
cannabis event permit.
      (2)   A temporary cannabis event may require state approval of a
temporary cannabis event license.
      (3)   Outdoor events on a city street or other public property also
require a city-approved special event permit under Municipal Code Chapter 96
(Parades and Assemblies).
      (4)   A temporary cannabis event is not permitted unless the applicant
obtains all required city and state approvals prior to the event.
   (C)   Event standards.
      (1)   Compliance with state law. A temporary cannabis event must comply
with 16 CCR 5601 (Temporary Cannabis Event License) and other applicable state
laws and regulations.
      (2)   Age. A temporary cannabis event is limited to persons 21 years of
age and older.
      (3)   Duration. The maximum duration of a temporary cannabis event is
four consecutive days.
      (4)   Frequency. No more than six temporary cannabis event permits may be
issued for the same location per calendar year.
   (D)   Temporary Cannabis Event Permit.
      (1)   Review authority. The City Manager takes action on all temporary
cannabis event permit applications.
      (2)   Application submittal and review.
         (a)   Applications for a temporary cannabis event permit must be made
in writing using an official city form and accompanied by all required fees,
information, and materials.
         (b)   Applications must be submitted to the city at least 30 days
prior to the proposed event.
         (c)   The city will review applications for completeness and to
determine compliance with applicable requirements.
      (3)   Findings for approval. To approve a temporary cannabis event
permit, the City Manager must make all of the following findings:
         (a)   The temporary cannabis event will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare.
         (b)   The temporary cannabis event will not create substantial adverse
impacts on adjoining properties, the surrounding neighborhood, or the community
in general.
         (c)   The size and configuration of the facility/location is adequate
and appropriate to accommodate the temporary cannabis event.
         (d)   Adequate temporary parking to accommodate vehicular traffic
generated by the temporary cannabis event will be available, either on-site, or
at alternate locations acceptable to the City Manager.
      (4)   Conditions of approval. The City Manager may attach conditions to a
temporary cannabis event permit as needed to mitigate potential impacts and
ensure compliance with any applicable requirement or regulation.
      (5)   Revoked permits. If a temporary cannabis event permit is revoked
for any reason, the event applicant or any business owner identified in the
temporary cannabis event permit application may not apply for a new temporary
cannabis event permit for 24 months.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS LICENSES
§ 158.030 SUBCHAPTER PURPOSE.
   This subchapter describes the process to obtain a commercial cannabis
license.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.031 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS LICENSES.
   (A)   License required.
      (1)   A commercial cannabis license, approved by the city, is required to
operate a commercial cannabis use in Eureka.
      (2)   If a cannabis facility combines two or more cannabis land use
categories listed in
Table 158-1, each land use category requires a separate city-approved
commercial cannabis license.
      (3)   If a cannabis facility combines two more types of cannabis
activities included in the definition of a general cannabis use, the facility
requires only one city-approved commercial cannabis license for the general
cannabis use.
   (B)   Review authority. Commercial cannabis license applications are acted
on by the City Manager.
   (C)   License application. Applications for a commercial cannabis license
must be made in writing on a form provided by the city. Applications must be
submitted to the city along with all required fees, information, and materials.
   (D)   Application review. The city will review the application to determine
if the proposed commercial cannabis use complies with this chapter. The city
may request additional information from the applicant as needed to determine
compliance.
   (E)   Criteria for approval. The City Manager must approve a commercial
cannabis license upon finding that the commercial cannabis use meets all of the
requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   Conditions of approval.
      (1)   The City Manager may attach conditions of approval to a commercial
cannabis license to ensure compliance with this chapter and other applicable
laws and regulations.
      (2)   The City Manager may modify conditions of approval to a commercial
cannabis license as needed to address repeated police or fire calls for serve
or other business-related complaints, such as odor.
   (G)   Annual renewal required. A commercial cannabis license must be renewed
on an annual basis. If a license is not renewed within one year following the
license effective date, the license will lapse and become void.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
§ 158.032 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Violations. Any activity that conflicts with this chapter is unlawful,
constitutes a public nuisance, and is subject to the remedies and penalties
provided for in this section.
   (B)   Enforcement authority.
      (1)   The City Manager has the primary responsibility to enforce this
chapter, in partnership with the Enforcement Officer as provided in Municipal
Code §
10.35 (Administrative Citations) et seq.
      (2)   The City Manager will coordinate enforcement of this chapter as
needed with the Development Services Director, Police Chief, City Attorney,
Building Official, Public Works Director, and/or any other city official(s) as
appropriate.
   (C)   Inspections, access, and entry.
      (1)   Pre-approval inspections, access, and entry.
         (a)   An applicant requesting a commercial cannabis license must allow
city staff to access the property subject to the application.
         (b)   An owner's or owner's authorized agent's signature on the
application form authorizes city staff to enter the subject property to
evaluate a proposed project.
      (2)   Post-approval inspections, access, and entry.
         (a)   After a commercial cannabis license is approved, the licensee
must allow city staff to access the property to determine continued compliance
with the license and mitigation measures.
         (b)   A licensee must allow city staff to examine facility records to
ensure compliance with the terms of the commercial cannabis license.
   (D)   Remedies.
      (1)   Available actions. To correct and/or abate a violation of this
chapter, the city may take any or all of the actions below. Actions taken will
reflect the nature and severity of the violation, threats to the public health
and safety, a licensee's history of violations, and other relevant factors as
determined by the city.
         (a)   Notice of violation. The city may issue a Notice of Violation as
provided in Municipal Code §
10.45 (Notice of Violation) that specifies a date by which the violation must
be corrected.
         (b)   Administrative citation. The city may issue an Administrative
Citation as provided in Municipal Code §
10.39 (Administrative Citations) which imposes an administrative fine for the
violation.
         (c)   Suspend license. The city may suspend the cannabis license as
provided in §
158.032(E) (License Suspension).
         (d)   Revoke license. The city may revoke the cannabis license as
provided in §
158.032(F) (License Revocation).
         (e)   Withhold other permits. The city may deny or withhold additional
permits and approvals for the property subject to the violation.
         (f)   Approve license with conditions. If the violation occurred prior
to issuance of a commercial cannabis license, the city may approve the license
subject to the condition that the violation be corrected.
         (g)   Stop work. With or without revoking a commercial cannabis
license, the city may stop work, in whole or in part, on any building,
structure, lot, or use.
         (h)   Termination of utility service. The city may terminate utility
service or services to the building, structure, lot, or use.
         (i)   Criminal citations. The city may issue a criminal citation, or
file a criminal complaint in-lieu of, subsequent to, or in conjunction with an
administrative citation.
         (j)   Other remedies. The city may exercise any and all other remedies
and enforcement powers granted by law.
      (2)   Remedies are cumulative. The remedies and enforcement powers
established in this section are cumulative, and the city may exercise them in
any order or combination and at any time.
   (E)   License suspension.
      (1)   Grounds for suspension. The City Manager may suspend a commercial
cannabis license for one or more of the reasons described in §
158.032(F)(1) (Grounds for Revocation).
      (2)   Notice. The city must provide written notice to the licensee of the
license suspension. The city may suspend the license after failure to correct a
violation by a date specified, or immediately, if circumstances warrant.
      (3)   Effect. Suspension of a commercial cannabis license means all
commercial cannabis operations must immediately cease, and may not be resumed
until the suspended license is re-instated.
      (4)   Corrected violations. Once all violations are corrected, the city
may re-instate a suspended license without a hearing, and commercial cannabis
operations may resume.
      (5)   Administrative hearing.
         (a)   If all violations are not corrected by the date specified in the
written notice, an administrative hearing will be held in the same manner as
license revocations. See §
158.032(F) (License Revocation).
         (b)   At the hearing, the City Manager may continue the license
suspension, re-instate the license, re-instate the license with modifications
and/or conditions, or revoke the license.
   (F)   License revocation.
      (1)   Grounds for revocation. The City Manager may revoke a commercial
cannabis license for one or more of the following reasons:
         (a)   The license was issued based on false or misleading information
in the application.
         (b)   The licensee has failed or refused to allow inspections for
compliance.
         (c)   One or more conditions of license or use permit approval have
been violated, or have not been complied with, or fulfilled.
         (d)   The licensee has violated a requirement in this chapter.
         (e)   The licensee's state license has been revoked, terminated, or
not renewed.
         (f)   The licensee has violated the Eureka Municipal Code, any city
regulation, or state law.
         (g)   The licensee has failed to take appropriate action to evict or
otherwise remove persons conducting commercial cannabis activities who do not
maintain the necessary permits or licenses in good standing with the city or
state.
         (h)   The licensee has been convicted for possession or delivery of
any form of illegal drugs.
         (i)   The licensee has conducted the commercial cannabis facility in a
manner that constitutes a public nuisance.
      (2)   Notice of proceedings. The city must provide written notice of the
license revocation proceedings to the licensee and any person who previously
requested notice. The notice will state the nature of the violation and the
date and place of the administrative revocation hearing.
      (3)   Administrative hearing. Before any action is taken on a pending
revocation, an administrative hearing must be conducted not less than 15 days
and not more than 60 days from date of notice. The City Manager will serve as
the hearing officer and the hearing must be conducted consistent with Municipal
Code §
10.51 (Conduct of Hearings).
      (4)   Decision. Following the Administrative Hearing, the City Manager
may revoke the license upon finding that one or more of the grounds for
revocation in §
158.032(F)(1) (Grounds for Revocation) applies. Alternatively, the City Manager
may:
         (a)   Allow the permit holder additional time to correct the violation
or non-compliance;
         (b)   Modify the license conditions of approval; or
         (c)   Determine that the violation has been corrected and end
abatement proceedings.
      (5)   Notice of decision. The City Manager will issue a written decision
within five days of closing the administrative hearing. Written notice of the
decision must be provided to the licensee and any other persons who previously
requested notice.
      (6)   Appeals. The City Manager's decision may be appealed to the City
Council in accordance with Municipal Code §
39.01 et seq. (Appeals).
      (7)   Effective date. If the City Manager's decision is not appealed, the
decision is final and effective 30 days after the decision is made. For
decisions appealed to the City Council, the decision is final when the City
Council makes a final decision on the appeal.
      (8)   Effect of revocation.
         (a)   The revocation of a license has the effect of terminating the
approval and denying the privileges granted by the license.
         (b)   The prior holder of a revoked license may not apply for a new
license for the same or substantially similar use on the property or in any
other location in the city within one year of the permit revocation.
   (G)   Effect of use permit expiration/revocation. If a Conditional Use
Permit or Minor Use Permit required for a commercial business expires or is
revoked, the commercial cannabis license for the business is automatically
revoked without requiring further action by the city.
(Ord. 933-C.S., passed 7-19-22)
CHAPTER 159: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section:
General Provisions
   
159.001   Purpose
   
159.002   Findings
   
159.003   Objectives
   
159.004   Applicability
   
159.005   Definitions
   
159.006   Development standards
Wireless Telecommunication Facility Permit - Requirements and Regulations
   
159.011   Application requirements; fees
   
159.012   Design review
   
159.013   Action on wireless telecommunication facility permit
   
159.014   Required findings
   
159.015   Historic Resources
Conditional Use Permit - Requirements and Regulations
   
159.021   Application requirements; fees
   
159.022   Education/outreach
   
159.023   Noticing
   
159.024   Design review
   
159.025   Action on conditional use permit
   
159.026   Required findings
   
159.027   Lapse of permit
   
159.028   Penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 159.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of
standards for the development and operation of wireless telecommunications
facilities. The regulations contained herein are intended to protect and
promote the public health, safety, community welfare and the aesthetic quality
of the city while at the same time providing reasonable opportunities for
providers of wireless telecommunications services to provide such services in a
safe, effective and efficient manner.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.002 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Community benefit. The city believes that access to wireless
telecommunication is an essential service and should be made available to all
persons, agencies, organizations and businesses desiring such service.
   (B)   Community welfare. The city acknowledges that there are concerns over
the exposure of people and animals to electromagnetic and radio frequency
radiation. The city also acknowledges that regulations promulgated by the
Federal Communications Commission limit the city's ability to regulate the
electromagnetic and radio frequency radiation emitted by wireless
telecommunication facilities.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.003 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Encourage and promote the location of new wireless
telecommunications facilities in areas that are not zoned for residential use;
      (2)   Provide for the appropriate location and development of wireless
telecommunication facilities;
      (3)   Protect the city’s built and natural environment by promoting
compatible design standards for wireless telecommunications facilities;
      (4)   Minimize adverse visual impacts of wireless telecommunication
facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
      (5)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antenna
failure through engineering and careful siting of wireless telecommunications
tower structures and antennas;
      (6)   Maximize use of existing wireless telecommunication towers and
alternative structures so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and
minimize the total number of towers throughout the city.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.004 APPLICABILITY.
   All wireless telecommunication facilities located in the city are controlled
by the provisions of this chapter. A tower or other wireless telecommunication
support structure built on speculation and for which there is no wireless
tenant is prohibited within city limits.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT. An historic district listed on the city's Local
Register of Historic Places.
   NATIONAL HISTORIC DISTRICT. An historic district listed on the National
Register of Historic Places.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. An organization that provides an essential commodity or
basic service to the public, such as water, energy, transportation, or
telecommunications. Utilities may be publicly or privately owned.
   SATELLITE TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. Government and private facilities that
transmit a variety of data through satellites, including photos of the earth,
messages to and from public safety officials, and a variety of other
information.
   WIRED TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. Telecommunications services such as wired
(land line) telephone, digital subscriber line (DSL) internet, and cable TV and
internet services where TV, voice, internet, data, and other content are routed
over a network of wires and cables and that do not require an antenna for
transmission or reception.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY. Public, commercial and private
electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and
receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network,
and wireless communications. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY includes the
towers and other support structures, commercial satellite dishes, antennas,
equipment buildings necessary for the specific facility, and facilities co-
located on utility poles. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY includes
“satellite telecommunication facility.” WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY
does not include “wired telecommunication facility,” or private personal
wireless facilities that do not require a license from the Federal
Communications Commission, including Direct-to-home satellite TV.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY PERMIT. An administrative permit issued
by the Director of Community Development or the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.006 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Residential neighborhoods. It is strongly preferred that the location
of new wireless telecommunication facilities be located outside of residential
neighborhoods. In an R District, all new wireless telecommunications
facilities, not including co-location with an existing permitted facility,
shall submit with the conditional use permit application factual information
and data proving that there is no site outside the R District where the
facility can be located to provide the same level of service.
   (B)   Design standards. All wireless telecommunication facilities are
subject to the following design standards:
      (1)   Facilities shall be designed to be visually unobtrusive. Colors and
designs should be compatible with the existing improvements on or adjacent to
the site;
      (2)   In an R District or within 100 feet of an R District, or in the HM
District within 150 feet of an R District, facilities located shall be
camouflaged or of an innovative design to minimize negative visual impacts of
the facility on the surrounding residential neighborhood;
      (3)   Screening and landscaping:
         (a)   In an R, OR, or C District, or within 100 feet of an R District,
or in the HM District within 150 feet of an R District, for facilities located
at or near ground level screening six feet in height shall be located adjoining
the facility, and an area ten feet in depth adjoining the facility shall be
landscaped with plant materials including a buffer of trees, unless the
Planning Commission finds that topographic or other conditions make screening
or landscaping unnecessary;
         (b)   In all other districts, for facilities located at or near ground
level screening six feet in height shall be located adjoining the facility
including a buffer of trees, unless the Planning Commission finds that
topographic or other conditions make screening unnecessary;
         (c)   Screening of the facility should take into account the existing
improvements on or adjacent to the site, including landscaping, walls, fences,
berms or other devices specifically designed to screen development.
      (4)   Facilities shall be sited to avoid or minimize obstruction of
scenic views;
      (5)   Facilities shall not be of a bright, shiny or glare reflective
finish;
      (6)   If feasible, the base station and all wires and cables necessary
for the operation shall be placed underground; and
      (7)   If the base station is located within or on the roof of a building,
it may be placed in any location not visible from the surrounding neighborhood,
with any wires and cables attached to the base station screened from public
view.
   (C)   Noise.
      (1)   For a wireless telecommunication facility in an R District, non-
transportation noise levels generated by the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility, measured immediately within the property line on
which the facility is located, shall not exceed the following performance
standards:
 
Noise level descriptor Daytime (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 Nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:
                       p.m.)                       00 a.m.)
Hourly Leq, dB         50                          45
Maximum level, dB      70                          65
Each of the noise levels specified above shall be lowered by five dB for
simple tone noises, noises consisting primarily of speech or music, or for
recurring impulsive noises.
 
      (2)   For a wireless telecommunication facility located in an HM District
within 150 feet of an R District, or in any other district within 100 feet of
an R District, the noise performance standards listed above shall be measured
at the boundary of the R District.
   (D) Height limits. The maximum height of all structures and accessory
structures shall be as prescribed for the district in which the facility is
located. The maximum height of towers and other support structures for a
wireless telecommunication facility and including the maximum height of all
antennas, dishes, and the like shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
District Maximum Height (feet)
         Free-standing On top of building
A        100           25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
RS-6000  60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       60 feet
RS-12000 60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       60 feet
RM-2500  60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       60 feet
RM-1000  60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
OR       60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       60 feet
HM       60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
CN       60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       60 feet
CP       60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
CC       60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
CW       60            25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       60 feet
CS       100           25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
ML       100           25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
MG       150           25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       150 feet
MC       150           25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       150 feet
P        100           25 feet above the height of the building, not to exceed
                       100 feet
 
   (E)   Minimum yards. The minimum yards for all structures and accessory
structures shall be as prescribed for the district in which the facility is
located. The minimum yards for free standing towers and other free-standing
support structures for a wireless telecommunication facility shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
         Minimum yards (feet)
District Within 100 feet of an R District More than 100 feet from an R District
         front side rear                  front side rear
A        30    30   30                    30    30   30
RS-6000  25    25   25                    -     -    -
RS-12000 25    25   25                    -     -    -
RM-2500  20    20   20                    -     -    -
RM-1000  20    20   20                    -     -    -
OR       20    20   20                    -     -    -
HM       20*   20*  20*                   0*    0*   0*
CN       20    20   20                    5     5    5
CP       50    50   50                    50    50   50
CC       20    20   20                    5     5    5
CW       20    20   20                    5     5    5
CS       20    20   20                    0     0    0
ML       20    20   20                    0     0    0
MG       20    20   20                    0     0    0
MC       20    20   20                    0     0    0
P        20    20   20                    0     0    0
 
* in the HM District the distance from an R District is measured at 150 feet
not 100 feet.
   (F)   Utility poles. Co-location of wireless telecommunication facility
antennas on utility poles shall be subject to the same permit requirements for
all other wireless telecommunication facilities, and shall be subject to the
following standards:
      (1)   The utility pole shall be located in a public right-of-way or in a
utility easement and subject to any applicable franchise fees or lease
agreements required by the city;
      (2)   The antenna(s) shall not extend more than ten feet above the top of
the utility pole;
      (3)   If the utility pole must be replaced to accommodate the antenna(s),
the replacement pole shall not be more than ten feet higher than the existing
utility pole. If the replacement pole exceeds the height of the existing pole,
the antenna(s) shall be mounted to the sides of the pole and shall not extend
above the top of the replacement pole. Replacement of a utility pole shall be
subject to a conditional use permit;
      (4)   Antenna(s) including the mounting structure with an outside
diameter between 24 inches and 36 inches shall be subject to a conditional use
permit;
      (5)   Antenna(s) including the mounting structure with an outside
diameter greater than 36 inches are not permitted on utility poles;
      (6)   If the antenna(s) and mounting structure are narrower than the top
of the utility pole, stealth shielding of the antenna(s) shall be used to make
the antenna(s) appear as a vertical extension of the utility pole;
      (7)   Electrical equipment shall either be attached directly to the
utility pole or placed underground. If the electrical equipment is attached to
the pole, the box(es) shall not be larger than 36 inches in height, 12 inches
deep and no wider than 20 inches. Not more than five such boxes shall be
mounted on any one utility pole (excluding the power meter and network
interface box). The boxes shall be stacked vertically, one above the other, and
shall be at least ten feet above the ground. The power meter and network
interface box may be installed below the ten-foot level;
      (8)   Antenna(s) and electrical boxes shall be painted to match the
utility pole to minimize visual impact;
      (9)   Generators or noise-producing venting systems shall not be
permitted;
      (10)   Lighting for aircraft is prohibited except where required by
federal law;
      (11)   Electrical and utility cables between the utility pole and
electrical boxes shall be placed underground;
      (12)   Prior to co-location the utility pole shall be certified by the
utility company or an independent structural engineer as being structurally
capable of supporting the existing and proposed equipment; and
      (13)   If the wired utilities using the pole are relocated or placed
underground, the telecommunications antennas and equipment shall be relocated
so that the utility pole can be removed at the same time as adjoining poles.
   (G)   Maintenance. All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be
maintained in a neat and orderly manner on a regular and as-need basis.
Maintenance shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Mowing, weeding, gardening and general maintenance of landscaping,
and including replacement of diseased or dying plant material;
      (2)   Painting;
      (3)   Removal of debris, garbage and waste; and
      (4)   Graffiti removal.
   (H)   Removal. Wireless telecommunication towers or support structures shall
be demolished, deconstructed or otherwise removed upon abandonment or
termination of use, and all debris shall be recycled and/or disposed of in an
appropriate manner. Removal shall be completed within 90 days of abandonment or
termination of use. Upon notification by the city to the property owner that
the tower or support structure appears abandoned, the property owner shall
remove the tower or support structure within 90 days, or the property owner
shall provide satisfactory evidence to the city that the tower or support
structure has not been abandoned. Expenses incurred to demolish, deconstruct or
otherwise remove wireless communication towers or support structures shall be
fully paid by the company owning the tower or support structure and/or the
property owner where the tower or support structure is located. Nothing in this
provision shall have the effect nor shall it be construed to interfere with
private contracts for facility uses in existence at the time of adoption of
this chapter.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10) Penalty, see §
159.028
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY PERMIT - REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 159.011 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Except as provided in this chapter, all wireless telecommunication
facilities shall require a wireless telecommunication facility permit.
   (B)   All wireless telecommunication facilities shall be co-located with
existing facilities, unless it is determined that co-location is not feasible.
   (C)   An application for a wireless telecommunication facility permit shall
include the following:
      (1)   All application materials otherwise required for design review as
prescribed in the Eureka Municipal Code;
      (2)   Scaled photo simulations, elevations and other visual or graphic
illustrations necessary to determine the visual compatibility of the proposed
project, including all equipment and antennae associated with future co-located
telecommunications, with the general character, aesthetics, scenic qualities,
and existing development in the surrounding neighborhood;
      (3)   A landscape plan that shows existing vegetation, vegetation to be
removed and proposed landscaping by type, size and location with the
expectation that maturity will occur in three to five years;
      (4)   A geographic service area map showing:
         (a)   The applicant's existing and anticipated future wireless
telecommunications network within three miles in all directions of the proposed
wireless telecommunication facility;
         (b)   The handoff sites within the area described in (a) above;
         (c)   The geographic area of the "cell" in which the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility could be located to provide the new or expanded
wireless service;
         (d)   All other existing facilities that could be used for co-location
within three miles in all directions of the proposed wireless telecommunication
facility.
      (5)   If the proposed wireless telecommunication facility will not be co-
located with an existing approved facility, written justification why co-
location is not feasible shall be submitted. Feasibility shall include the
following:
         (a)   Whether there are any existing facilities within the geographic
area of the cell required for the proposed wireless telecommunication facility;
         (b)   If there are existing facilities within the geographic area of
the cell for the proposed wireless telecommunication facility, feasibility
shall consider whether:
            1.   The existing facility(ies) is of sufficient height to meet the
needs of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility;
            2.   The existing tower(s) or support structure(s) have sufficient
structural strength to support the proposed new wireless telecommunication
antennas or antenna arrays and related equipment;
            3.   There is adequate vertical and horizontal distance available
on the existing tower(s) or support structure(s) to accommodate the proposed
wireless telecommunication antennas or antenna arrays and related equipment;
            4.   The proposed wireless telecommunication facility would cause
adverse electromagnetic interference with the existing facility(ies);
            5.   There is adequate site area and/or building floor area at the
existing facility(ies) to accommodate the proposed wireless telecommunications
ground equipment; and
            6.   The owner of the existing facility(ies) will consent to co-
location.
      (6)   A Federal Communications Commission TOWAIR Determination that the
antenna structure does not require registration, or an aircraft and airport
safety analysis providing a copy of the Federal Aviation Administration
approval letter that the project conforms to Federal Aviation Administration
regulations (Form FAA 7460-1 "Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration"
and “The Determination of No Hazard to Air Navigation") and including specific
safety requirements such as lighting, facility color, and the like;
      (7)   A structural analysis prepared by a qualified California licensed
civil engineer showing that the proposed wireless telecommunication facility
meets manufacturer's specifications and the requirements of the state's
building code contained in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, as
may be amended from time to time, relating to structural design, wind, ice and
snow loads;
      (8)   A public health report, prepared by a qualified radio frequency
engineer written in plain English and in conformance with the Federal
Communications Commission OET 65. The public health report shall state the
maximum electromagnetic and radio frequency radiation to be emitted by the
proposed facility and whether those emissions conform to safety standards
adopted by the Federal Communications Commission. The public health report
shall include the cumulative analysis of the electromagnetic and radio
frequency radiation of all other existing and anticipated future wireless
telecommunication facilities within 2,000 feet of the proposed facilily;
      (9)   Noise and acoustical information for non-transportation noise
sources, including the base transceiver station(s), equipment building(s) and
associated equipment, such as cooling equipment and back-up generator(s)
showing compliance with the development standards of §
159.006(A);
         (10)   Application fees as established by Resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.012 DESIGN REVIEW.
   (A)   All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be subject to design
review as prescribed in Chapters
155 and
156.
   (B)   The Design Review Committee may adopt pre-approved designs for
wireless telecommunications facilities. For proposed wireless telecommunication
facilities that use pre-approved designs the design review required by Chapters
155 and
156 may be approved by the Director of Community Development.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 159.013 ACTION ON WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY PERMIT.
   (A)   Action to approve or deny a wireless telecommunication facility permit
shall be taken by the Director of Community Development. The action of the
Director on the wireless telecommunication facility permit shall be after
design review as prescribed in §
159.012.
   (B)   The Director of Community Development may at his or her discretion
refer the wireless telecommunication facility permit to the Planning Commission
for action.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.014 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   (A)   A wireless telecommunication facility permit may be granted only if
the following findings are made:
      (1)   The proposed wireless telecommunication facility will not generate
electromagnetic or radio frequency radiation in excess of the Federal
Communications Commission adopted standards for human exposure; and
      (2)   The proposed wireless telecommunication facility will be compatible
with the general character, aesthetics, scenic qualities, and existing
development in the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.015 HISTORIC RESOURCES.
   In addition to the wireless telecommunication facility permit, all wireless
telecommunications facilities located within a Local or National Historic
District or within 100 feet of a Local or National Historic District shall
require a conditional use permit as prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT - REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 159.021 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; FEES.
   (A)   Where a wireless telecommunication facility requires a conditional use
permit, the conditional use permit shall also act as the wireless
telecommunication facility permit otherwise required by this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a conditional use permit for a wireless
telecommunication facility shall include the following:
      (1)   All application materials otherwise required for a conditional use
permit pursuant to the Eureka Municipal Code;
      (2)   All materials listed as required for a wireless telecommunications
facility permit application as prescribed in this chapter;
      (3)   In an R District, all new wireless telecommunications facilities,
not including co-location with an existing permitted facility, factual
information and data proving that there is no site outside the R District where
the facility can be located to provide the same level of service; and
      (4)   Application fees as established by Resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   In addition to the conditional use permit a wireless telecommunication
facility located in the coastal zone shall only be allowed upon the granting of
a coastal development permit as required pursuant to the Eureka Municipal Code.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.022 EDUCATION/OUTREACH.
   (A)   Within 60 days of submittal of a complete application for a
conditional use permit to locate a wireless telecommunication facility in an R
District, or in an HM District within 150 feet of an R District, or in any
other district within 100 feet of an R District, the applicant shall host a
neighborhood education and informational meeting at which, at a minimum, a
summary of the information provided with the conditional use permit application
shall be presented and made available to attendees in electronic and/or hard
copy.
   (B)   The education and informational meeting shall be noticed by the
applicant in conformance with §
159.023. The notice shall be printed on brightly-colored (preferably
fluorescent) heavy stock post cards. Additionally, a sign of a minimum size of
two and one half feet tall by three feet wide of a visible color other than
yellow advertising the education and informational meeting shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on or near the location of the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility. The sign shall state the date, time and location of
the education and informational meeting, the location of the proposed wireless
telecommunication facility, and a contact phone number of the applicant or
agent.
   (C)   The applicant shall prepare and submit to the Community Development
Department within 21 days of the education and informational meeting, at a
minimum, the following:
      (1)   A copy of the information presented and made available (in all
formats) by the applicant at the meeting;
      (2)   A summary of the issues and concerns, if any, that were presented
either verbally or in writing at the meeting along with proposed mitigation to
address them;
      (3)   A copy of all written correspondence received at the meeting;
      (4)   Information and/or documentation prepared by the applicant
addressing each of the issues and/or concerns, if any, expressed at the
meeting; and
      (5)   A list of names and email addresses of persons requesting to
receive notice of the public hearing for the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10) Penalty, see §
159.028
§ 159.023 NOTICING.
   (A)   All noticing for hearings on a conditional use permit application for
a wireless telecommunications facility shall be as otherwise required for a
conditional use permit pursuant to the Eureka Municipal Code;
   (B)   For a proposed wireless telecommunication facility greater than 60
feet in height in an R District, or in an HM District within 150 feet of an R
District, or in any other district within 100 feet of an R District, notice
shall also be provided to all owners and tenants of real property within 500
feet of the site proposed for the wireless telecommunication facility.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.024 DESIGN REVIEW.
   (A)   All wireless telecommunications facilities shall be subject to design
review.
   (B)   No conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility
shall be approved until the design review required by this chapter is approved
by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10; Am. Ord. 885-C.S., passed 5-21-19)
§ 159.025 ACTION ON CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   All conditional use permits for a wireless telecommunication facility shall
be acted upon as otherwise required for a conditional use permit pursuant to
the Eureka Municipal Code.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.026 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   (A)   A conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunication facility may
be granted only if the following findings are made:
      (1)   All findings otherwise required for a conditional use permit
pursuant to the Eureka Municipal Code; and
      (2)   All findings required for a wireless telecommunication facility
permit as prescribed in §
159.014.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10) Penalty, see §
159.028
§ 159.027 LAPSE OF PERMIT.
   Lapse of a conditional use permit for a wireless telecommunications facility
shall be the same as the lapse of all other conditional use permits as
prescribed in the Eureka Municipal Code.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
§ 159.028 PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or the provisions of
any code adopted by reference by this code. Any person violating any of such
provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this
code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor
under the provisions of this code shall be punishable by a fine of not more
than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which
any violation of any provision of this code, or the provisions of any code
adopted by reference by this code, is committed, continued, or permitted by
such person and shall be punishable accordingly. Any violation of this code
which is declared to be a misdemeanor shall be considered and treated as an
infraction subject to the procedures described in Cal. Penal Code §§ 19.6 and
19.7, when:
      (1)   The City Attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an
infraction unless the defendant, at the time he is arraigned, after being
informed of his rights, elects to have the case proceed as a misdemeanor; or
      (2)   The court, with the consent of the defendant, determines that the
offense is an infraction, in which event the case shall proceed as if the
defendant had been arraigned on an infraction complaint.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by this city, and each day
such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.
(Ord. 757-C.S., passed 10-19-10)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
5-    -      Regulating the laying of sidewalks.
6-    -      Opening C Street from 1st Street to 6th Street.
7-    -      Opening 7th Street from K Street to Arcata Road (Myrtle Ave.).
9-    -      Opening 6th Street and 7th Street from B Street to K Street.
10-   -      Ordering the laying of sidewalks.
14-   -      Opening A Street from 5th Street to Clark Street.
19-   -      Calling a general election.
27-   -      Authorizing W.H. Dureya and Others to lay water mains and pipes.
29-   -      Authorizing I. Ohman and Samuel Reis to lay gas mains.
35-   -      Ordering obstructions removed from Washington Street.
42-   -      Calling a general election.
45-   -      Authorizing Herbert Kraft to erect gas works and lay mains in streets.
47-   -      Calling a general municipal election.
52-   -      Ordering obstructions removed from J Street from 9th Street to 16th Street.
72-   -      Calling a special election to fill a vacancy in the Office of Assessor.
82-   -      Authorizing the Eureka and Trinidad Railroad Company to construct railroad tracks on
             certain streets.
88    4-7-   Accepting all dedicated streets and alleys.
      1885
89-   -      Authorizing the Eel River and Eureka Railroad to construct railroad tracks on certain
             streets.
91-   -      Amending Ordinance 89.
96-   -      Ordering obstructions removed from C Street south of Clark Street and from P Street
             between 5th Street and 7th Street.
97-   -      Authorizing the Eureka Waterworks to lay pipes in streets.
107-  -      Opening O Street between 7th Street and 9th Street and 8th Street between K Street
             and O Street.
111-  -      Authorizing Richard M. Fernald and Others the right to construct a Street Railroad.
118-  -      Submitting to the electors the question whether the city shall become organized as a
             city of the 5th Class under general laws.
120-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
124-  -      Amending Ordinance 111 granting the right to construct a street railroad.
134-  -      Declaring Summer Street from A Street to Washington Street to be a public street and
             fixing the grades.
135-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
141-  -      Calling a special annexation election.
145-  -      Accepting dedicated streets and alleys.
156-  -      Establishing the width and courses on Myrtle Ave.
157-  -      Establishing the width and courses on Broadway.
167-  -      Regulating the granting of franchises for constructing a street railroad.
170-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
177-  -      Relating to the acquisition of a waterworks system.
181-  -      Calling a special bond election for the acquisition of a city waterworks.
184-  -      Calling a special freeholder's charter election.
188-  -      Accepting dedicated streets and alleys.
189-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
192-  -      Calling a special election to elect a School Director for the Fourth Ward.
195-  -      Consenting to the purchase of land by the Board of Education.
202-  -      Accepting Pine Street between Brennan Street and Harris Street.
213-  -      Repealing sections of Ordinance Nos. 12, 23, 30, 32, 33, 41, 43, 44, 46, 50, 61, 65,
             67, 69, 73, 86, 92, 98, 99, 122, 125, 136, 144, 155, 163, 168, 171, 182, and 187.
214-  -      Fixing street grades.
225-  -      Providing for the purchase of land for a public park and repealing Ordinance 180.
235-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
242-  -      Providing for a boulevard along the waterfront and repealing Ordinance 241.
244-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
245-  -      Authorizing the Eel River and Eureka Railroad Company to lay railroad tracks upon
             certain streets.
249-  -      Vacating alleys in Block 62, enlargement of Clark's Addition.
255-  -      Providing for the sale of property in Block 121 to T.D. Petch.
257-  -      Vacating the alley in Block 1 of the Raymond Bishop Addition.
261-  -      Granting a franchise to the California Northern Railway Company to lay tracks on
             certain streets.
263-  -      Granting franchises to the Eureka and Klamath Railroad Company and the Humboldt
             Railroad Company to lay tracks on certain streets.
266-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
             Calling a special bond election for the Sewer System; the purchase of Ricks Water
276-  -      Company; a school building in the Third Ward; and, a school building in the Fifth
             Ward.
283-  -      Canvassing the vote of the special bond election held on 12-16-01
288-  -      Relating to bonds issued pursuant to Ordinance 276.
289-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for a sewer system.
290-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for a school building in the Third Ward.
291-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for a school building in the Fifth Ward.
293-  -      Vacating the alley running east and west through Block 12 if the Prairie Addition.
298-  -      Relating to streets and alleys in Sunny Slope Tract.
305-  -      Granting a franchise for a street railway.
306-  -      Authorizing the sale of lands in Blocks 96, 97, 99, 121, and 122.
309-  -      Accepting the alley in the block bounded by 16th, 17th, H, and I Streets.
310-  -      Granting an intrastate telephone and telegraph franchise.
312-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
318-  -      Granting a franchise for a street railway.
321-  -      Closing 14th Street between Blocks 2 and 3 of the Bishop tract and taking other land
             in lieu thereof.
325-  -      Granting a franchise to Bucksport and Elk River Railroad Company to lay railroad
             tracks on streets in Bucksport.
334-  -      Changing the name of Park Street to Harris Street.
344-  -      Granting a franchise for a street railway.
345-  -      Calling a special bond election for the construction of a City Hall; fire apparatus;
             and the completion of a sewer system.
347-  -      Canvassing the vote of the special bond election held May 10, 1904.
350-  -      Determining the manner of sale of bonds issued pursuant to Ordinance 345.
352-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for improvements in Forest Park.
353-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for a City Hall.
354-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for fire apparatus.
355-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for completion of sewer system.
359-  -      Granting to North Mountain Power Company permission to maintain poles
362-  -      Authorizing the purchase of the Pioneer School Building lot as a site for a City
             Hall.
363-  -      Awarding a contract for the construction of a City Hall.
364-  -      Awarding a contract for a supervising architect for the construction of a City Hall.
365-  -      Awarding a contract for the extension of the sewer system.
367-  -      Accepting deeds from the Board of Education and C.G. Taylor for lands for the Fire
             Department.
368-  -      Accepting a deed from the Board of Education for the Pioneer School lot for a site
             for the City Hall.
374-  -      Accepting a deed from John M. Vance and wife for land at First Street and C Street as
             a site for a flushing tank for the Sewer System.
377-  -      Granting a Franchise for a Street Railroad.
378-  -      Declaring the intention to open Buhne Street between California Street and Union
             Street.
386-  -      Submitting Charter amendments referring to initiative and referendum.
387-  -      Granting a franchise for a Street Railroad.
390-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
392-  -      Relating to the use of streets by a street railroad.
393-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on Whipple Street.
394-  -      Ordering work on D Street between Porter Street and Long Street.
400-  -      Amending Ordinance No. 214 relating to street grades.
404-  -      Authorizing the sale of land in Block 125 to Henry W. Cooper
405-  -      Authorizing the Board of Education to sell land in Block 132 to the city.
413-  -      Granting to F.L. Evans the right to construct and operate a steam railroad.
414-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on Myrtle Avenue.
415-  -      Ordering work on D Street from Porter Street to Long Street.
422-  -      Closing 12th Street between Blocks 1 and 2 of the Bishop Tract.
424-  -      Ordering Work on Myrtle Avenue from 8th Street to the City Limits.
425-  -      Establishing the width of South Hillsdale Street.
426-  -      Closing a portion of the alley between Dollison Addition and Dahle Tract.
429-  -      Ordering work on F Street from 7th Street to 12th Street.
430-  -      Closing a portion of an alley running east and west through Block 58.
431-  -      Directing conveyance to the United States of America a portion of the alley in the
             Post Office Block.
434-  -      Establishing the intersection grades of Hodgson Street at F, E, D, William, and C
             Streets and Harris Street at C Street.
437-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on William Street from Hillsdale Street to the
             south line of Dahle Tract.
438-  -      Vacating a portion of the alley in Randall Tract.
441-  -      Granting the right to Humboldt Gas and Electric Company to lay pipes in streets.
443-  -      Ordering work on F Street from Harris Street to 13th Street.
444-  -      Vacating an alley running East and West through Block 21 of the Prairie Addition.
445-  -      Designating the most practicable location for an electric railway on Broadway.
446-  -      Calling a special election to vote on a Liquor Ordinance.
448-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on Broadway from Wabash to the southern City
             Limits.
449-  -      Amending Ordinance No. 445 designating the most practicable location for an electric
             railway on Broadway.
452-  -      Submitting at the general election the question whether the Council shall offer a
             franchise for the operation of an intrastate telephone system.
453-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
454-  -      Amending Ordinance No. 453 ordering the holding of a general municipal election.
455-  -      Vacating alleys running East and West through Blocks 9 and 10 of Glatta Second
             Addition.
457-  -      Establishing the grades on Broadway.
460-  -      Ordering work on Albee Street from Cedar Street to Harris Street.
461-  -      Establishing grades on portions of Q, R, S, T, U, V, W, Dolbeer, Hillsdale, D, and
             William Streets.
462-  -      Changing the name of Forest Park to Sequoia Park.
465-  -      Calling a special election to elect a City Engineer.
466-  -      Granting a franchise for an intrastate telephone and telegraph system.
472-  -      Ordering work on 12th Street from H Street to I Street.
479-  -      Changing the grade at the intersection of Lowell and Sonoma Streets.
487-  -      Establishing grades on Chester, W, Grove, Dolbeer, Russell, Bainbridge, and Hemlock
             Streets.
488-  -      Changing the grade at the intersection of Huntoon Street and the Alley running north
             and south between William Street and C Street.
489-  -      Ordering work on Del Norte Street from D Street to J Street.
492-  -      Naming Church Avenue.
493-  -      Ordering work on Huntoon Street from C Street to E Street.
498-  -      Ordering work on Hawthorne Street from Albee Street to C Street.
499-  -      Vacating the alley in Block 50, enlargement of Prairie Addition.
506-  -      Establishing the grades at the intersection of 15th Street with K Street and L
             Street.
508-  -      Establishing the grades on 14th Street from M Street to R Street.
512-  -      Ordering work on 17th Street from H Street to J Street.
515-  -      Vacating 11th Street East of P Street.
516-  -      Vacating 9th Street East of P Street.
520-  -      Calling a special election for an amendment to the City Charter to provide for the
             recall of city officers.
521-  -      Calling a special election to submit Charter amendments.
523-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
531-  -      Vacating streets in Bucksport subject to the Right-of-way of Bucksport and Elk River
             Railroad Company and N.W.P.R.R.
536-  -      Establishing the grade on Whipple Street from Broadway to Railroad Avenue.
539-  -      Establishing the grade on F Street from Harris Street to the southerly City Limits.
543-  -      Vacating the alley running east and west through Block G of the Brett and Porter
             Addition.
549   5-3-10 Vacating streets and alleys in Bucksport.
557-  -      Calling a special election to fill a vacancy in the office of Police Judge.
560-  -      Declaring the intention to open McCullens Avenue from Iowa Street to the west line of
             Block 17 of the Graybrook Tract
565-  -      Establishing the grade on Pine Street from Harris Street to Amelia Street.
566   1-11-  Vacating the alley running east and west through Block 72.
      11
575-  -      Changing the Grade on I Street between Buhne Street and Carson Street.
576-  -      Establishing the grades on portions of Q, R, S, 8th, 10th, and 12th Streets.
577-  -      Establishing the grade on 17th Street between and L Street.
578-  -      Ordering work on the alley running east and west between Third Street and Fourth
             Street East of D Street.
579-  -      Providing for a primary election.
580-  -      Calling a general election.
588-  -      Ordering work M Street from California to Broadway.
590-  -      Calling a special Freeholders' Charter election.
592-  -      Establishing the grades on Hawthorne Street from Broadway to the westerly end of
             Hawthorne Street.
593-  -      Ordering work on Sonoma Street from C Street to D Street.
594-  -      Changing the grades on E Street between Porter Street and Hillsdale Street and on
             13th Street from E Street to F Street.
595-  -      Ordering work on Hawthorne Street from C Street to a point 487.59 feet west of
             Broadway.
598-  -      Establishing the grade on Murray Street from Broadway to the Bay.
599-  -      Proposing amendments to the City Charter.
600-  -      Calling a special election on the question of licensing the sale of alcoholic liquors
             and submitting Charter amendments.
603-  -      Ordering work on Summer Street from Whipple to Hawthorne Street.
605-  -      Ordering work on Pacific Avenue from California to Albee Street.
607-  -      Vacating an alley near Myrtle Avenue and Q Street.
608-  -      Ordering work on Pine Street from Hawthorne Street to Cedar Street.
609-  -      Changing the grades on portions of B, A, Murray, Trinity, Huntoon, Buhne, Long, and
             Dollison Street.
610-  -      Ordering work on F Street from Harris Street to the southerly City Limits.
611-  -      Ordering work on B Street from Wabash Avenue to Long Street.
614-  -      Changing the grades on portions of Sonoma, William, and Lowell Streets.
615-  -      Vacating the alley in the block bounded by 6th, 7th, J, and K Streets.
617-  -      Establishing the grade on K Street from 17th Street to a point 240 feet south of 17th
             Street.
619-  -      Vacating the alley in Block 91 of the second enlargement of Clark's Addition.
620-  -      Changing the grade on portions of Henderson, Grotto, Myrtle, Harris, A, B, and C
             Streets.
621 - -      Changing the grades on portions of William, Grotto, Harris, and Henderson Streets.
624-  -      Calling a primary election.
626-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
631-  -      Ordering work on C Street from Del Norte to Grotto Street.
633-  -      Changing the grade on Buhne Street from J Street to G Street.
634-  -      Changing the grade on D Street from Long Street to Dollison Street.
635-  -      Changing the grade on Sonoma Street from C Street to William Street and on Lowell
             Street from Sonoma Street to Del Norte Street.
636-  -      Vacating the alley in the block bounded by O, P, Wood, and Harris Streets.
638-  -      Ordering work on 17th Street from J Street to L Street.
639-  -      Ordering work on Wabash Avenue from H Street to Broadway.
640-  -      Changing the grades on Hawthorne Street from Broadway to Fairfield.
641-  -      Changing the grades on Pratt Street from Broadway to Fairfield.
644-  -      Accepting Trusdale Street.
645-  -      Changing the grades on portions of Lowell, Del Norte, Humboldt, and Trinity Streets.
646-  -      Changing the grades on Whipple Street from Broadway to Railroad Avenue.
648-  -      Changing the grades on certain streets.
651-  -      Vacating the alley in the block bounded by G, H, Del Norte, and Sonoma Streets.
652-  -      Vacating a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Del Norte, C, Sonoma, and
             Lowell Streets.
654-  -      Calling a special municipal election on whether the sale of alcoholic liquors shall
             be licensed.
655-  -      Establishing the grades on Harrison Avenue and on portions of Russ, Wood, and Harris
             Streets.
656-  -      Calling a special bond election for the purchase of the property of the Eureka Water
             Company.
657-  -      Vacating a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Del Norte, C, Sonoma, and
             Lowell Streets.
659-  -      Changing the grade on First Street from S Street to X Street.
660-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the purchase of the property of the Eureka Water
             Company.
661-  -      Vacating a portion of the alley in the block bounded by Del Norte, G, Sonoma, and H
             Streets.
662-  -      Providing for the sale of Water Works bonds.
663-  -      Ratifying the signature of the City Treasurer to the Water Works bonds and amending
             Ordinance No. 660 relating to the collection of taxes to pay said bonds.
664-  -      Declaring a parcel of land adjacent to the west line of Block 64 of the enlargement
             of Clark's Addition to be a public street.
668-  -      Changing the grades on Murray Street from Spring to Broadway and on Fairfield from
             Pratt to Wabash Avenue.
669-  -      Ordering work on Murray Street from C Street to Broadway.
672-  -      Vacating a portion of F Street near Manzanita Street.
673-  -      Vacating a portion of Humboldt Street east of J Street.
674-  -      Ordering work on Huntoon Street from E Street to H Street.
676-  -      Changing the grades on a portion of J Street and Humboldt Street.
678-  -      Ordering work on Simpson Street from Summer Street to C Street.
680-  -      Ordering work on Henderson Street from California Street to I Street.
682-  -      Establishing the grade on L Street from 13th Street to 15th Street.
684-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
685-  -      Establishing the grade on Fairfield Street from Buhne Street to Harris Street.
688-  -      Ordering work on William Street from Porter Street to Hams Street.
689-  -      Ordering work on J Street from Harris Street to 17th Street.
691-  -      Vacating a street in the Edeline Property on Harrison Avenue.
692-  -      Ordering work on Fairfield Street from Broadway to Harris Street.
693-  -      Ordering work on Harris Street from D Street to S Street.
695-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on Harris Street and repealing Ordinance 687.
696-  -      Vacating the alley running east and west through Block 22 of the Prairie Addition.
698-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
699-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
702-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
703-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
706-  -      Establishing the grades on Broadway from Washington Street to the north end of
             Broadway and on 3rd Street and 4th Street from Broadway to A Street.
707-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
709-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
710-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
711-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
714-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
715-  -      Proposing amendments to the City Charter.
             Calling a special election to vote on the purchase of Rock Quarry and Charter
717-  -      amendments proposed by Ordinance No. 715 and directing the submission of certain
             ordinances.
718-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
721-  -      Ratifying contracts made by various City Officers.
726-  -      Changing the grade on Broadway from Hawthorne Street to the southerly City Limits.
727-  -      Changing the grades on portions of B, Cedar, Broadway, and 5th Streets.
729-  -      Establishing the grade on Myrtle Avenue from 3rd Street to Harrison Avenue.
732-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on Garland Street.
733-  -      Establishing the grades on portions of Buhne Street and Garland Street.
734-  -      Vacating a portion of 15th Street between F Street and G Street.
740-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
744-  -      Ordering work on K Street from 11th Street to 13th Street.
748-  -      Establishing the grade on Broadway south of Wabash Avenue.
752-  -      Establishing the grades on certain alleys in the Downtown Section.
754-  -      Vacating Everding Street east of N Street.
755-  -      Vacating a portion of Harris Street adjacent to Fractional Block No. 7 of amended
             enlargement of Prairie Addition.
773-  -      Vacating a portion of Buhne Street between California Street and Pine Street.
785-  -      Establishing grades on Highway Avenue from 4th Street to P Street.
             Changing the grades on 4th Street from Broadway to the easterly City Limits; on P
786-  -      Street in the Eddy Tract; on Myrtle Avenue from 5th Street in the Eddy Tract to the
             northwesterly end of Myrtle Avenue; and on Broadway from 4th Street to the southerly
             City Limits line.
787-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
788-  -      Establishing the width on 4th Street from the east line of the Eddy Tract to the
             easterly City Limits line.
789-  -      Establishing the grade on 4th Street from the easterly line of the Eddy Tract to the
             westerly end of the approach to the bridge across Eureka Slough.
795-  -      Vacating a portion of Randall Street west of William Street.
797-  -      Providing for the extension of 5th Street from Summer Street to the east end of 5th
             Street in the Commercial Addition.
800-  -      Calling a special election for three propositions as set forth in Ordinance No. 796.
809-  -      Ordering the extension of 5th Street from Summer Street to the east end of 5th Street
             in the Commercial Addition.
828-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on the west side of Harrison Avenue from Myrtle
             Avenue to the southerly City Limits.
829-  -      Establishing the grade of Greg Street from Broadway to the westerly end of Greg
             Street.
             Determining that a petition signed by 15 of the electors has been filed proposing an
830-  -      amendment to the City Charter and directing the submission of said amendments to the
             electors at a special election.
831-  -      Calling a special election to vote on Charter amendments.
             Naming certain streets and changing the names of certain streets (Stewart, Burrill,
832-  -      Cleveland, Pearl, South Hillsdale, McKinleyville, Duck, Cousins, Tydd, Hill, Searles,
             Lowell, Gross, Elizabeth, William, and C Streets).
837-  -      Declaring the extension of 5th Street a public street and naming the same.
838-  -      Establishing the grade on 5th Street from Summer to Broadway.
841-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
842-  -      Calling a special bond election for the acquisition of the street car system of the
             Humboldt Transit Company.
848-  -      Vacating streets and alleys in the Howard Tract.
849-  -      Changing the grades on 5th Street from Summer Street to Broadway.
850-  -      Establishing the grades on K Street from Harris Street to a point 660 feet south of
             Hodgson Street.
851-  -      Vacating 2nd Street and an alley in the Carson Property on M Street.
852-  -      Vacating an alley in Block F of the Glatt Tract.
853-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the street railroad of the Humboldt Transit
             Company and improvements thereof.
854-  -      Determining the manner of sale of street railway bonds.
855-  -      Naming A Street a strip of land in Block 110 of the second enlargement of Clark's
             Addition.
862-  -      Establishing the grade on Bay Street from Myrtle Avenue to 7th Street.
863-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
864-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
865-  -      Establishing the grade on Pine Street from Brennan to Fernald Street.
872-  -      Vacating a portion of Trinity Street between A Street and B Street.
873-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
874-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
875-  -      Proposing Charter amendment relating to the deposit of city funds in banks.
876-  -      Calling a special election to vote on a Charter amendment.
878-  -      Calling a special bond election for the acquisition of a public park bounded by F, G,
             6th, and 7th streets and for the completion of the Eureka Street Railway.
879-  -      Changing the grades on Union Street from Russ Street to Cedar Street.
880-  -      Vacating a portion of Vine Street.
884-  -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the completion of the Eureka Street Railway.
885-  -      Vacating streets in the High School Addition.
886-  -      Providing for the sale of the Eureka Street Railway Completion Bonds.
887-  -      Declaring the intention to extend 7th Street to Broadway.
888-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
889-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
892-  -      Changing the grades on A Street from Long Street to Harris Street.
893-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
900-  -      Calling a special bond election for the acquisition of three public parks.
901-  -      Giving consent to the Board of Education for the purchase of real estate.
904-  -      Vacating the extension of 1st Street between A Street and Commercial Street.
905-  -      Changing the grade on Fairfield Street from Wabash to Harris Street.
906-  -      Changing the grade on H Street from 2nd Street to Trinity Street.
907-  -      Denying protests against the extension of 7th Street.
908-  -      Ordering the extension of 7th Street to Broadway and directing the commencement of a
             condemnation suit therefor.
909-  -      Vacating a portion of Randall Street between William Street and Lowell Street.
912-  -      Abandoning a portion of Greg Street.
914-  -      Extending the time for filing the 7th Street condemnation suit.
923-  -      Establishing the grade on Del Norte Street from J Street to O Street.
928-  -      Vacating a portion of Front Street near S Street.
929-  -      Vacating streets and alleys in the block bounded by Whipple, Broadway, Pacific
             Avenue, and Coster Street.
934-  -      Vacating a portion of Wood Street from W Street to Dolbeer Street.
937-  -      Establishing the grade on Commercial Street from 5th Street to a point 650.8 feet
             north of 3rd Street.
938-  -      Changing the grade on 2nd Street.
939-  -      Changing the grade on G Street from 15th Street to Carson Street.
940-  -      Changing the grade on Myrtle Avenue from 5th Street in the Eddy Tract to 7th Street.
941-  -      Establishing the grade on L Street on Del Norte to 17th Street.
955-  -      Calling a special bond election for a public park on Blocks 1 to 6 of the Parkside
             Addition.
956-  -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on Union Street from Harris Street to Andrew
             Street.
957-  -      Vacating portions of Randall Street and Wabash Avenue near C Street.
958-  -      Calling a general municipal election.
961-  -      Vacating streets in the Potter and Lawrence Addition.
963-  -      Vacating certain streets north of 2nd Street and West of A Street.
965-  -      Vacating the alley in Block 8 of the Prairie Addition.
967-  -      Vacating a street in the Nordstrom Tract.
968-  -      Vacating streets near the corner of 11th Street and I Street and 11th Street and H
             Street.
970-  -      Declaring the extension of 7th Street a public street and naming the same.
981-  -      Vacating streets in Block 23 of the Prairie Addition.
996-  -      Declaring the extension of Henderson Street from California to Pine Street a public
             street and naming the same.
997-  -      Changing the name of Fernald Street to Henderson Street.
998-  -      Vacating Creighton Street west of Fairfield Street.
1001- -      Vacating streets and alleys on the original map of Ocean Heights.
1002- -      Calling a special bond election on the completion of a street railway and removal of
             tracks on certain streets and the substitution of buses therefor.
1016- -      Calling a general municipal election.
1034- -      Vacating the alley in Block 81.
1044- -      Determining sufficiency to vote on certain Charter amendments.
1047- -      Directing submission of proposed Charter amendments to the electors.
1048- -      Calling a special election on Charter amendments.
1050- -      Vacating certain streets.
1057- -      Calling a general municipal election.
1087- -      Vacating a street in Block 37, Eddy Tract.
1090- -      Calling a general municipal election.
1097- -      Establishing the grade on Everding Street.
2012- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2019- -      Establishing the grade on William Street.
2021- -      Calling a special bond election for the Mad River Dam.
2030- -      Calling a special election for the Mad River Dam.
2033- -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the construction of the Mad River Dam.
2036- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2037- -      Calling a special bond election for the Municipal Auditorium.
2045- -      Consenting to the sale of property by the Board of Education.
2047- -      Vacating the alley in Block 59, Clark's Addition.
2048- -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the construction of the Municipal Auditorium.
2051- -      Calling a special bond election for the Washington Street Sewer Construction.
2057- -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the construction of the Washington Street Sewer.
2070- -      Calling a special election incurring bonded indebtedness for the construction of the
             Mad River Dam.
2071- -      Fixing the grade on California Street.
2075- -      Calling a special election for a swimming pool.
2076- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2078- -      Establishing the curb lines on 6th Street between J Street and Broadway.
2079- -      Incurring a bonded indebtedness for the construction of the Mad River Dam.
2085- -      Authorizing the removal of car tracks from J Street.
2092- -      Naming Progress Avenue and extending Huntoon Street.
2095- -      Establishing the grade on Pine Street.
2100- -      Repealing Ordinance No. 315 relating to Wabash Avenue and naming Wabash Avenue.
2103- -      Establishing the grades on K Street and L Street.
2114- -      Granting a franchise to the Pacific Gas and Electric Company to distribute gas.
2121- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2125- -      Calling a special election on abandoning and replacing the street car system.
2126- -      Reestablishing grades on portions of Huntoon, N, O, P, Sonoma, Del Norte, and Gates
             Streets.
2140- -      Granting a franchise to the Pacific Gas and Electric Company to distribute
             electricity.
2149- -      Granting a franchise to the Manning Transportation Company.
2152- -      Authorizing the abandonment of the street railway operation.
2162- -      Establishing the grade on O Street and Sonoma Street.
2164- -      Repealing certain fund ordinances as required by Section 78 of the City Charter.
             Repealing Ordinance Nos. 1, 11, 16, 20, 44, 100, 106, 108, 110, 112, 115, 116, 117,
             119, 132, 139, 151, 152, 158, 164, 176, 178, 179, 183, 196, 226, 259, 265, 274, 278,
             280, 281, 297, 300, 304, 308, 311, 323, 324, 326, 327, 335, 336, 339, 341, 343, 351,
             356, 357, 366, 369a, 370, 372, 376, 383, 384, 398, 402, 409, 416, 418, 421, 423, 440,
             456, 459, 463, 467, 471, 473, 476, 484, 495, 496, 497, 501, 504, 505, 507, 509, 511,
             513, 514, 517, 525, 526, 527, 537, 540, 542, 544, 552, 554, 562, 564, 573, 583, 586,
             596, 602, 606, 612, 625, 627, 628, 629, 632, 637, 642, 649, 650, 666, 679, 681, 683,
             704, 705, 712, 722, 725, 735, 736, 738, 739, 749, 750, 760, 761, 762, 764, 765, 767,
2168- -      772, 774, 775, 791, 792, 794, 796, 798, 799, 802, 806, 807, 808, 811, 812, 813, 815,
             816, 817, 821, 822, 844, 845, 846, 856, 858, 859, 860, 866, 890, 894, 896, 898, 899,
             915, 916, 918, 924, 925, 931, 935, 936, 945, 959, 960, 966, 969, 971, 974, 980, 982,
             984, 985, 987, 994, 995, 999, 1004, 1005, 1006, 1010, 1011, 1018, 1020, 1022, 1023,
             1033, 1038, 1041, 1046, 1054, 1055, 1056, 1059, 1060, 1061, 1068, 1071, 1072, 1073,
             1074, 1080, 1081, 1082, 1085, 1089, 1092, 1094, 1098, 1099, 2001, 2003, 2005, 2006,
             2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013, 2016, 2020, 2024, 2026, 2031, 2032, 2039, 2040,
             2043, 2050, 2054, 2060, 2063, 2064, 2066, 2072, 2074, 2083, 2089, 2099, 2107, 2111,
             2112, and 2128.
2174- -      Repealing Ordinance Nos. 320, 322, 533, 546, 563, 643, 723, 780, 913, 1027, 1035,
             1040, 1069, 2002, and 2099.
2178- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by adding Section 43¾ thereto relating to
             the collection of licenses.
2179- -      Calling a special election.
2180- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter.
2181- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter.
2182- -      Calling a special election.
2183- -      Abandoning Trinity Street between I Street and J Street.
2184- -      Repealing Ordinance Nos. 910 and 2084 relating to dry cleaning.
2185- -      Establishing the grades on O, 11th, 12th, 13th, P, Del Norte, Sonoma, and Trinity
             Streets.
2186- -      Calling a special election.
2187- -      Establishing the width of sidewalks on the north side of 11th Street, the east line
             of F Street, and the west line of G Street.
2192- -      Establishing the grades on Spring Street, Silva Avenue, Albee Street, Union Street,
             1st Avenue, Elizabeth Street, South Avenue, Andrew Street, and Farris Street.
2193- -      Establishing the grades on Madrone Street, Manzanita Avenue, Bryant Avenue, Hodgson
             Street, Everding Street, L Street, M Street, and N Street.
2194- -      Repealing Ordinance No. 28 relating to vice and immorality.
2195- -      Repealing Ordinance Nos. 1026, 1065, and 2109 relating to the regulation and
             construction of buildings.
2200- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2201- -      Establishing the grades on streets in the vicinity of N Street and Trinity Street.
2202- -      Establishing the grades on streets in the vicinity of G Street south of Harris
             Street.
2201- -      Establishing the grades on Del Norte Street and P Street.
2207- -      Closing streets in the Parkside Addition.
2208- -      Establishing the grade on Buhne Street and O Street.
2209- -      Abandoning an alley in the vicinity of Del Norte Street and P Street.
2214- -      Establishing the grades on streets in the Ocean Heights Addition.
2216- -      Adopting a map for police patrol.
2217- -      Establishing the grades in the vicinity of Allard Avenue and McCullen Avenue.
2218- -      Establishing the grades in the vicinity of Del Norte Street and L Street.
2226- -      Amending Ordinance No. 2149 relating to a bus franchise.
2242- -      Directing the sale of Elk River Property to Peter F. Loresen.
2243- -      Closing a portion of Sebring Street.
2250- -      Closing streets in the Brett and Porter Addition.
2251- -      Closing an alley between A, B, Grant, and Clark Streets.
2256- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2257- -      Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2173, 2227, 2233, 2240, 2245, and 2249 relating to salaries.
2267- -      Establishing the grades on Hodgson Street.
2268- -      Abandoning an alley in the vicinity of Sonoma Street and William Street.
2270- -      Closing streets and alleys in the vicinity of Harris Street and Spring Street.
2271- -      Repealing Ordinance No. 2269 relating to dim-outs.
2279- -      Establishing the grades on streets in the Pacific Heights Addition.
2290- -      Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2258, 2261, and 2284 relating to salaries.
2301- -      Granting a franchise for a railroad spur on S Street to N.W.P.R.R.
2310- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter for a Tax Levy for recreation.
2311- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter for the consolidation of Superintendent of
             Public Works with the office of City Engineer.
2312- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter for the consolidation of City and County
             Health Offices.
2315- -      Calling a general municipal election.
2316- -      Establishing the grade on 10th Street and O Street.
2319- -      Abandoning the alley between D Street and Long Street.
2331- -      Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2211, 2221, 2239, 2241, 2265, and 2272 relating to civilian
             defense.
2334- -      Abandoning Cedar Street.
2337- -      Establishing the grades on Tomlinson Avenue west from Broadway.
2343- -      Calling a special bond election to build a boat harbor.
2344- -      Calling a special election to raise the tax rate of Eureka High School District.
2345- -      Consolidating the elections called for in Ordinance Nos. 2343 and 2344.
2354- -      Establishing the grades on Hodgson Street and G Street.
2355- -      Establishing the grades on P Street.
2356- -      Establishing the grades on J Street.
2358- -      Authorizing the City Engineer to supervise the construction of an inner harbor and to
             incur necessary expenditures therefor.
2359- -      Providing for the issuance of harbor improvement bonds.
2373- -      Establishing the grades on Idaho Street, Oregon Street, Nevada Street, Highland
             Avenue, and McCullens Avenue.
2374- -      Proposing a new City Charter.
2376- -      Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by amending Section 77 thereof relating to
             the levy of taxes.
2378  5-2-47 Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by amending Section 113 thereof relating
             to the Police Department.
2379  5-7-47 Proposing amendments to the City Charter by amending Sections 8, 15, 22, 87, 162, and
             166 thereof relating to the length of terms of officers.
2381  5-6-47 Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by amending Section 182 thereof relating
             to officers, appointees, or employees interested in contracts.
2384  5-7-47 Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by amending Section 167 thereof relating
             to contractors.
2386  5-12-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by adding Section 77¼ thereto relating to
      47     the levy of special taxes.
2387  5-15-  Calling a general municipal election.
      47
2390  5-27-  Amending Ordinance No. 2387 calling a general municipal election.
      47
2392  6-24-  Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2210, 2323, and 2365 creating the position of Clerk of the
      47     Police Court.
2396  9-16-  Establishing the grades on Pine Street and Summer Street.
      47
2397  10-7-  Providing for a special census.
      47
2409  1-20-  Abandoning a road right-of-way from Myrtle Avenue in a southeasterly direction to
      48     Harrison Avenue across portions of Blocks 82, 83, 84, 85, and 86 of Huntoon Addition.
2410  2-3-48 Granting a franchise for a spur track over the northwest corner of Railroad Avenue to
             N.W.P.R.R.
2423  5-4-48 Abandoning an alley through Block 5 of Clark's South Park Addition.
2432  8-3-48 Closing Trinity Street between K Street and M Street.
2435  9-14-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to the deposit of money.
      48
2436  9-14-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to the length of terms of
      48     officers.
2437  9-14-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to the residence of officers in
      48     the city.
2438  9-14-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to the Police Department.
      48
2439  9-14-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to a Tax Levy.
      48
2440  9-14-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to the payment of premiums on
      48     bonds for officers and employees.
2442  9-21-  Calling a special election.
      48
2443  10-19- Closing a portion of Grant Street between A Street and B Street.
      48
2444  10-19- Closing the alley intersecting Block 34 of En. Gill Addition.
      48
2445  10-19- Closing a portion of R Street from Buhne Street to Huntoon Street.
      48
2450  1-4-49 Closing the alley running through the block bounded by Harris, Everding, S, and T
             Streets.
2454  2-1-49 Closing the alley extending through the blocks bounded by Trinity, Huntoon, S, and W
             Streets.
2455  2-15-  Reestablishing the grade on Glen Street from the south line of Harris Street to the
      49     north line of Gibson Avenue.
2459  4-5-49 Repealing Ordinance No. 2339 relating to the appointment of a Police Clerk.
2460  4-5-49 Establishing the grades on Lowell Street from Harris Street to Hodgson Street.
2462  4-26-  Repealing Ordinance No. 2452 relating to traffic.
      49
2463  4-27-  Calling a special election for water and sewer bonds.
      49
2464  5-3-49 Abandoning a portion of Thomas Street from High Street to Glen Street and accepting
             property to the north of the former Thomas Street.
2469  5-17-  Calling a general municipal election.
      49
2470  5-17-  Amending Ordinance 2463 to consolidate the special bond election with the municipal
      49     election.
      8-24-  Reestablishing the grades on West Avenue, 14th Street, and 17th Street and
2476  49     establishing the grades on 14th Street, 15th Street, 16th Street, and 17th Street
             from the west line of West Avenue to the west line of Q Street.
2477  8-24-  Reestablishing the grades on McDonald Street from Cottage Street to Gibson Street,
      49     Glen Street, High Street, and Thomas Street.
2478  9-6-49 Calling a special election for the election of a City Clerk and Ex Officio Tax
             Collector.
2480  12-7-  Establishing the grades on Union Street from Russ Street to Harris Street (not
      49     published).
2481  12-7-  Establishing the grades in the Eastwood Subdivision (not published).
      49
2482  1-17-  Reestablishing the grades on 3rd Street from A Street to Broadway Street (not
      50     published).
2484  2-7-50 Establishing the grades on a section of O Street from the vicinity of the north line
             of Bryant Avenue to the south line of O Street.
2485  2-7-50 Awarding a franchise to the Eureka Transit Lines.
2491  8-15-  Establishing the grades on Oregon Street from the north line of Gibson Avenue to
      50     Highland Avenue.
2492  8-15-  Establishing the grades on Gross, Cottage, and Glen Streets.
      50
2493  8-15-  Establishing the grades on Buhne Street from the east line of O Street to the west
      50     line of S Street.
2505  5-1-51 Proposing an amendment to Section 52 of Article 4 of the City Charter.
2506  5-1-51 Proposing an amendment to Section 53 of Article 4 of the City Charter.
2507  5-1-51 Proposing an amendment to Section 186 of the City Charter relating to the residence
             of officers.
2508  5-1-51 Proposing an amendment to Section 167 of the City Charter relating to contractors.
2509  5-1-51 Proposing an amendment to the City Charter by adding section 77¼ thereto relating to
             the levy of special taxes.
2510  5-15-  Establishing the grade on a portion of P Street.
      51
2511  5-15-  Establishing the grade on a portion of Summer Street.
      51
2514  5-22-  Calling a general municipal election.
      51
2515  5-22-  Calling a special election.
      51
2519  7-31-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Albee Street.
      51
2520  7-31-  Reestablishing the grade on Albee Street from the north line of 1st Avenue to the
      51     south line of Amelia Street.
2521  8-2-51 Establishing the grade on C Street to 400 feet south of Harris Street and on Whipple
             Street between Albee Street and Union Street.
2525  10-2-  Establishing the grades on Pine Street from the north line of Buhne Street to the
      51     south line of Hawthorne Street.
2531  11-27- Establishing the grades on 14th Street, 16th Street, and East Avenue.
      51
2535  12-19- Establishing the grades on Progress Avenue and on Orchard Street from E Street to F
      51     Street.
2538  3-4-52 Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2106, 2253, 2342, 2350, and 2513.
             Establishing the grades on McFarlan Street from 16th Street to 18th Street; Dean
2539  3-19-  Street from 16th Street to 18th Street; 16th Street from McFarlan Street to Harrison
      52     Avenue; 17th Street from McFarlan Street to Harrison Avenue; and 18th Street from
             McFarlan Street to Harrison Avenue.
      3-19-  Establishing the grades on Dolbeer Street from Russ Street to a line 400 feet north
2540  52     of Russ Street; Russ Street and Wood Street from Dolbeer Street to Harrison Avenue;
             and on Dolbeer Street from Harris Street to Russ Street.
2542  4-5-52 Establishing the grades on S Street from Hayes Street north to a point 200 feet north
             of the north line of Trinity Street.
2544  5-6-52 Establishing the grades and sidewalk widths on Oregon, Stewart, and Pearl Streets.
      9-16-  Establishing the grades on Pine Street from the north line of Henderson Street to a
2549  52     point 187 feet north of Henderson Street and on Summer Street from the north line of
             Henderson Street to a point 337 feet north of Henderson Street.
2550  9-16-  Establishing the grade of the alley bounded by Albee, Union, Cedar, and Whipple
      52     Streets.
      9-16-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Silva Avenue from the west line of Union
2551  52     Street to the west line of Spring Street and on Spring Street from Silva Avenue to
             the south City Limits.
             Abandoning the alley between Prospect Avenue and Lincoln Street; Lincoln Street from
2553  10-22- the south line of South Avenue to the southerly terminus of Lincoln Street; a portion
      52     of Amelia Street and a portion of Andrew Street; and an alley in the south half of
             Block 53 of Clark's Addition.
2555  11-18- Establishing the grades on L Street from the south line of Hodgson to the north line
      52     of Manzanita Street.
             Establishing the grades on Farris Street from Prospect Avenue 94.0 feet east of
2558  12-16- Elizabeth Street; Burrill Street from 116.3 feet west of Project Street to Elizabeth
      52     Street; Project Street from Farris Street to Burrill Street; and Elizabeth Street
             from Harris Street to 70.24 feet south of Burg Street.
2559  1-6-53 Establishing the grade on the alley extending from H Street to I Street between 5th
             Street and 6th Street.
      1-21-  Abandoning the alley running north and south between Utah Street and Nevada Street
2562  53     from the south line of Gibson Street to the north line of Highland Avenue and
             portions of High Street and Gross Street between Gross Street and Harris Street.
2563  1-21-  Establishing the grades in the Gross Tract and vicinity.
      53
2564  2-17-  Abandoning all alleys in the block bounded by Whipple Street, Pacific Avenue, Short
      53     Street, and Koster Street.
2565  2-17-  Establishing the grades on Summit Street from Creighton Street to Carson Street.
      53
2566  3-17-  Establishing the grades on 15th Street from L Street to M Street and on M Street from
      53     14th Street to 15th Street.
2567  4-7-53 Establishing the grades on Russ Street from T Street to U Street and on Nevada from
             Highland to Gibson Street.
2568  4-8-53 Proposing an amendment to Section 186 of Article XV of the City Charter relating to
             the residence of city employees.
      4-21-  Abandoning portions of Highland Avenue from the east line of Utah Street easterly to
2570  53     the east line of Graybrook Tract and Prospect Avenue from the south line of South
             Avenue south 224.5 feet to its southerly terminus.
2578  6-2-53 Establishing the grades on the blocks bounded by G Street, I Street, Manzanita
             Avenue, and the city limits.
2579  6-2-53 Establishing the grades on California Street from Highland to Hodgson and on Randolph
             Street.
2580  6-4-53 Calling a general municipal election.
2582  7-7-53 Establishing the grades on Gates, Wabash, and Del Norte Streets in the Von
             Alvensleben Addition.
2585  8-4-53 Establishing the width of sidewalks on Randolph Street from the east line of
             California Street to the east terminus of Randolph Street.
2587  10-6-  Amending Ordinance No. 2485 granting a franchise to increase Bus Fares.
      53
2588  10-27- Establishing the grades on Nevada Street from McCullen Street to Gibson Street.
      53
      10-27- Establishing the grades on McFarlan Street from 16th Street to Myrtle Avenue; 15th
2589  53     Street from McFarlan Street to Dean Street; and the vicinity of McFarlan Street and
             18th Street.
2593  12-15- Establishing the grades on Manzanita Avenue from the east line of Dolbeer Street to
      53     the easterly city boundary line.
2594  12-16- Naming Vigo Street running northwesterly from Broadway to the N.W.P.R.R.
      53
      12-16- Establishing the grades on Vigo Street from the west line of Broadway to a line
2595  53     1,198.68 feet westerly from the west line of Broadway and establishing the width of
             sidewalks on Vigo Street.
2596  12-16- Establishing the width of sidewalks on Gibson Avenue from the west line of Utah
      53     Street to the east line of Iowa Street.
2598  1-19-  Establishing the grades at the intersection of Wood Street and U Street.
      54
2601  4-6-54 Establishing the grades on E Street from Hodgson South.
2602  4-20-  Establishing the grades on Dean Street from 15th Street to 16th Street and on 15th
      54     Street from Dean Street to McFarlan Street.
2605  5-4-54 Establishing the grades on 23rd Street from Harrison Avenue to W Street.
2609  5-27-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on 5th Street from the easterly line of Myrtle
      54     Avenue to the Easterly Terminus of 5th Street.
      6-18-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Vigo, Hawthorne, Murray, Koster, Short,
2610  54     Octavia, Felt, Cedar, Clark, and Washington Streets and Railroad Avenue west of
             Broadway.
2613  7-1-54 Establishing the width of sidewalks on Broadway from the north line of Wabash Avenue
             to the northern terminus of Broadway.
2614  7-1-54 Establishing the width of sidewalks on Commercial Street between the south line of
             5th Street and the east line of Broadway.
2615  7-1-54 Establishing the width of sidewalks on 4th Street from the east line of Q Street to
             the easterly boundary of the city.
2616  7-20-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Utah from South Avenue to McCullen Avenue.
      54
2617  9-8-54 Establishing the width of sidewalks on the north side of Glatt Street from the west
             line of S Street to the west line of W Street.
2618  9-8-54 Establishing the grades on Madrone Avenue as fixed on Grade Map 75.
2619  9-8-54 Reestablishing the grades on Harris Street between W Street and Dolbeer Street as
             fixed on Grade Map 74.
2621  9-7-54 Relating to Parking District No. 1.
2623  9-27-  Establishing the widths of sidewalks on Sequoia Lane and a portion of Madrone Avenue.
      54
             Reestablishing the grades on N Street from Hodgson to Bryant Avenue, on Bryant Avenue
2625  12-7-  from N Street to O Street, and on Hodgson from N Street to a line 150 feet east of N
      54     Street and on the alley between Nevada Street and Central Avenue south of Harris
             Street.
2627  4-5-55 Annexing the Petersen Annexation.
      4-19-  Establishing the grades on I Street from Everding Street to 350 feet south of
2628  55     Manzanita and on Hodgson Street from H Street to J Street and on Manzanita Street
             from I Street to J Street.
2629  5-3-55 Calling a special annexation election.
2630  5-3-55 Abandoning Oregon Street from South Avenue to Gibson Street.
2631  5-3-55 Abandoning the alley 30 feet westerly from Lowell Street 90 feet to the east line of
             the alley running north and south between Henderson Street and Grotto Street.
2635  5-18-  Calling a general municipal election.
      55
2636  6-7-55 Annexing the “First Annexation to Eureka.”
2637  6-7-55 Establishing the width of sidewalk areas on 23rd Street from W Street to Harrison
             Avenue.
             Establishing the grades on S Street and T Street from 12th Street to 14th Street;
2638  6-7-55 12th Street from S Street to T Street; and 13th Street from a line 150 feet west from
             S Street to West Avenue.
2641  9-8-55 Establishing the grades on Colorado Street from McCullen Avenue to Highland Avenue.
2642  10-18- Establishing the width of sidewalks on Nevada Street from the south line of Stewart
      55     Street to the north line of Pearl Street.
2643  10-18- Naming Nevada Street.
      55
      10-19- Establishing the width of sidewalks on Union Street from the north line of Silva to
2644  55     the north line of Highland Avenue and on Highland Avenue from the west line of Union
             Street to an angle point at Summer Street.
2645  2-14-  Annexing the East Shore Highway Annexation.
      56
2646  2-21-  Reestablishing the grades on Q Street from Hodgson Street to Glatt Street.
      56
2649  3-20-  Proposing an amendment to the City Charter for a recreation tax.
      56
2650  4-3-56 Establishing the grades on Hodgson from California Street to Ingley Street and on
             Ingley Street.
2658  6-12-  Annexing the Barnum Ranch Annexation.
      56
2659  6-12-  Annexing the Campton-Excelsior Annexation.
      56
2663  7-26-  Changing the grades on Ingley Street from Hodgson Street south 237.5 feet.
      56
2664  8-29-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Burrill Street from the west line of Prospect
      56     Avenue to the east line of Central Avenue.
2665  8-29-  Abandoning a certain alley (Headrick) between Henderson Street and Russ Street.
      56
2666  8-29-  Abandoning a certain alley (Mathews, Carter) between R Street and S Street.
      56
2668  9-11-  Repealing Ordinance No. 2667 relating to the sales tax.
      56
2670  10-16- Establishing the grades in the vicinity of Willow, F, G, and H Streets.
      56
2671  10-24- Establishing the grades on California Street south from New Street 200 feet.
      56
2674  11-7-  Establishing the grades on Summer Street from Highland Avenue to New Street.
      56
2677  11-7-  Establishing the grades on Hodgson Street from E Street to F Street.
      56
2678  11-14- Establishing the width of sidewalks on the north side of Hodgson Street from the east
      56     line of E Street and west line of F Street.
2679  11-14- Establishing the width of sidewalks on Summer Street from Highland Avenue to the
      56     south terminus of Summer Street.
2680  11-14- Establishing the width of sidewalks on West Avenue from the south line of 18th Street
      56     to the north line of Sonoma Street.
2682  12-5-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on S Street from West Avenue to the north line of
      56     Hayes Street.
2683  12-18- Establishing the width of sidewalks on 3rd Street from the west line of A Street to
      56     the east line of Broadway and repealing Ordinance No. 2662.
2685  1-15-  Establishing the grades on Buhne Street from S Street to W Street.
      57
2688  2-20-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on E Street from the south line of Wabash Avenue
      57     to the north line of Harris Street.
2689  2-20-  Amending Ordinance No. 2665 abandoning a certain alley (Headrick).
      57
2690  2-20-  Abandoning a portion of Christie Street from Southard Street to Lot 5, Block 3,
      57     Bucksport Addition.
2692  3-20-  Abandoning a certain alley (Allen S. Hart) between Russ Street and Wood Street in
      57     Block 33, enlargement of Gill Addition.
2695  3-29-  Calling a special election relating to the Firemen's Wage Schedule.
      57
2696  4-2-57 Abandoning a certain alley (McGaraghan).
2698  5-6-57 Proposing an amendment to the City Charter relating to the Educational Department.
2699  5-7-57 Establishing the grades in the vicinity of Hodgson Street and O Street.
2700  5-7-57 Establishing the width of sidewalks on 2nd Street from the west line of A Street to
             the east line of Commercial Street.
2704  5-21-  Establishing the grade in the vicinity of Lowell Street and Manzanita Street.
      57
2705  5-21-  Repealing Ordinance Nos. 1079 and 2626 regulating the sale or lease of real property.
      57
2706  6-3-57 Calling a general municipal election.
2707  6-4-57 Establishing the grades on Fort Avenue and Highland Avenue between Iowa Street and
             Broadway Street.
             Abandoning the alley running easterly from the easterly line of Railroad Avenue
2708  8-6-57 between Wabash Avenue and Murray Street to the westerly line of Lot 4 of Block C,
             Subdivision of a portion of Lots 1 and 2, Block 128, Third Enlargement, Clark's
             Addition.
2709  8-6-57 Abandoning the alley running east and west through Block 13 from the east line of
             Short Street to the west line of Koster Street in Clark's south park addition.
2710  8-20-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on the north side of Allard Avenue from the west
      57     line of Iowa Street to the east line of Spring Street.
2711  8-20-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Long Street from the east line of M Street to
      57     the west line of Q Street.
      9-17-  Changing the name of a portion of Del Norte Street to Heather Lane running south and
2712  57     west from the south line of Gates Street to the west line of Heather Lane if extended
             northerly across Del Norte Street.
2713  9-17-  Changing the name of Colorado Street to Cottage Street.
      57
2714  9-17-  Changing the name of Montana Street to High Street.
      57
2715  9-17-  Changing the name of Idaho Street to Glen Street.
      57
      10-1-  Abandoning the alley running north and south between R Street and S Street in
2717  57     Lentell's Addition and extending south from Buhne Street, 696 feet, more or less, to
             the north line of the alley north of Hayes Street.
2718  10-15- Establishing the width of sidewalks on Hodgson Street from the east line of
      57     California Street to the west line of Ingley Street.
      11-5-  Abandoning the alley running north and south through the center of Block 104, second
2720  57     enlargement, Clark's Addition, from the south line of Buhne Street to the north line
             of Long Street.
2721  11-5-  Establishing the grades on Allard Avenue from Iowa Street to Spring Street and
      57     vicinity, as fixed on Plat No. 91.
2724  11-21- Establishing the grades on Bainbridge Street from Dolbeer Street to the east City
      57     Limits.
2728  12-6-  Abandoning a utility easement in Eastwood Heights.
      57
2729  12-6-  Abandoning the alley running north and south between F Street and G Street, Block 22,
      57     Russ Claim Addition.
2730  12-6-  Abandoning certain portions of streets and alleys in Graybrook Tract and Pacific
      57     Heights, portions of Cottage Street and High Street and Gibson Avenue.
2731  12-6-  Establishing the grades in the vicinity of Highland Avenue to McCullen Avenue from
      57     Iowa Street to Idaho Street.
2733  12-17- Establishing the grades in the vicinity of 14th Street between N Street and R Street.
      57
2741  2-18-  Repealing Ordinance Nos. 410, 486, 847, 1031, 2004, 2234, 2276, 2322, 2352, 2522, and
      58     2691, Section 2 of Ordinance No. 346, and Section 7 of Ordinance No. 947.
2743  3-4-58 Changing the name of 24th Street to Buhne Street.
2746  3-18-  Establishing the grades in the vicinity of Buhne Street and 23rd Street from W Street
      58     to Harrison Avenue.
2748  3-18-  Changing the name of Idaho Street to Glen Street.
      58
2749  3-18-  Establishing the grades on Cleveland Street from Stewart Avenue to Gibson Avenue and
      58     South Avenue east from Cleveland Street 128.5 feet.
2751  4-1-58 Establishing the width of sidewalks on the east side of Cleveland Street from Stewart
             Street to Gibson Street.
2752  4-18-  Repealing Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Ordinance No. 522 relating to the office of
      58     City Engineer.
2757  5-19-  Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1958-1959.
      58
2758  5-20-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Lowell Street south from the south line of
      58     Hodgson Street.
2759  5-26-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on the west side of D Street from Dollison Street
      58     to Henderson Street.
2760  6-4-58 Abandoning a certain easement for street purposes.
2761  6-9-58 Establishing the grades on 2nd Street, Y Street, and Z Street.
2762  6-17-  Establishing the grades on East Avenue from 14th Street to Myrtle Avenue and on 13th
      58     Street from West Avenue to East Avenue
2763  6-17-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on portions of 13th Street, 14th Street, Sunny
      58     Avenue, 23rd Street, Huntoon Street, McFarlan Street, and Dean Street.
2764  6-17-  Establishing the grades on Union Street from Silva Avenue to the south city boundary.
      58
2765  6-17-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on Union Street from Silva Avenue to the south
      58     city boundary.
2768  6-23-  Establishing the grades on Bay Street northerly from 7th Street.
      58
2769  6-23-  Establishing the grades on East Avenue from 17th Street to 18th Street; Sunny Avenue
      58     from 17th Street to 18th Street; and 18th Street from West Avenue to Sunny Avenue.
2770  7-1-58 Abandoning a portion of the alley running easterly and westerly through Block 62.
2773  7-15-  Abandoning a certain right-of-way conveyed by William M. Huntoon to the county for
      58     street purposes.
2777  8-19-  Establishing the grades on Dolbeer Street from Harris Street to Chester Street.
      58
2778  9-16-  Establishing the grades on Cousins Street and reestablishing the grade on 13th Street
      58     between R Street and S Street.
2779  10-7-  Establishing the width off sidewalks on 23rd Street between Dean Street and Harrison
      58     Avenue.
2780  10-7-  Reestablishing the grades on Gates Street from County Lane to Heather Lane and
      58     establishing the grades in the vicinity of T Street, County Lane, and 16th Street.
2781  10-7-  Establishing the grades on W Street from Harris Street to Russ Street; Russ Street
      58     from W Street to Dolbeer Street; and Wood Street west of Dolbeer Street.
2783  11-18- Establishing the grades on E Street from Hodgson Street to Willow Street.
      58
2784  11-18- Establishing the grades on various alleys.
      58
      12-2-  Establishing the grades on the alley bounded by E Street, F Street, Wabash Avenue,
2785  58     and Del Norte Street and reestablishing the grades on Wood Street west of Dolbeer
             Street.
2786  12-16- Establishing the grades on Trinity Street to 105 feet east of the east line of O
      58     Street.
2787  1-16-  Proposing a new City Charter.
      59
2789  2-17-  Abandoning a portion of M Street extending northerly from the south line of Close
      59     Addition.
2790  2-17-  Calling a special election for the purpose of submitting an Ordinance proposing the
      59     Council-Manager form of government under a new Charter.
2791  3-3-59 Naming the alley extending 100 feet easterly from the east line of G Street between
             5th Street and 6th Street in Block 58 Laura Lane.
2793  4-7-59 Reestablishing the grades on Dakota Street south of Gibson Avenue and on L Street
             north of Manzanita Avenue.
2796  5-19-  Reestablishing the width of sidewalks on Union Street from the south line of Harris
      59     Street to the north line of Highland Avenue.
2797  5-22-  Abandoning a certain portion of McKinley Street and a certain portion of the alley
      59     running west from Hill Street between McKinley Street and Myrtle Avenue.
2799  5-22-  Repealing Ordinance No. 2794 relating to the abandonment of a portion of L Street and
      59     Huntoon Street.
2801  6-2-59 Establishing the grades on C Street from Harris Street north to Grotto Street.
2803  6-24-  Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1959-1960.
      59
2805  7-7-59 Abandoning certain portions of L Street and Huntoon Street.
2808  7-7-59 Establishing the grades on the alley between I Street and J Street south of 17th
             Street and on the alley between N Street and O Street and 4th Street and 5th Street.
2809  7-7-59 Establishing the grades on P Street from Carson Street to Buhne Street and on County
             Lane from S Street to Gates Street.
2813  9-1-59 Reestablishing the grades on Hodgson Street from N Street to P Street.
2814  9-1-59 Reestablishing the grades on McFarlan Street south of Myrtle Avenue and on Manzanita
             Street from 400 feet east of Dolbeer Street to the east City Limits.
2818  11-18- Establishing the grades on I Street from Manzanita Street to Madrone Street and
      59     reestablishing the grades on P Street from Del Norte Street to Sonoma Street.
      11-18- Repealing Ordinance No. 2754 relating to the sale or lease of real property not
2819  59     dedicated to public use and the sale of personal property and lost, stolen, and
             unclaimed property.
2827  1-19-  Repealing Ordinance No. 568 relating to the keeping of chickens.
      60
2828  2-20-  Repealing Ordinance No. 502 relating to the duties of the city physician.
      60
2829  2-23-  Establishing the grades on 18th Street from West Avenue to County Lane and on County
      60     Lane from 17th Street to Gates Street.
2830  2-23-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on the west side of Progress Avenue.
      60
2831  4-5-60 Establishing the grades on O Street from the south City Limits to 1,320 feet north.
2838  5-17-  Establishing the grades on Trinity Street from S Street to 40 feet west of R Street.
      60
2841  6-28-  Fixing the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for the Fiscal Year
      60     1960-1961.
2842  6-28-  Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1960-1961.
      60
2847  9-7-60 Adopting the budget for the Fiscal Year 1960-1961.
2848  9-20-  Reestablishing the width of sidewalks on 3rd Street from A Street to C Street.
      60
2854  12-20- Annexing the Campton-Excelsior Annexation.
      60
2855  12-20- Providing that the Barnum Ranch Annexation become a part of the school district of
      60     the city.
2856  12-20- Accepting the requirements of Section 13522 of the Penal Code relating to the
      60     training of law enforcement officers.
2860  3-7-61 Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2191, 2498, and 2611 relating to leaves and vacations for
             employees.
2862  3-21-  Repealing Ordinance Nos. 2456 and 2557 relating to holidays for Police and Fire
      61     Department Personnel.
2863  6-1-61 Fixing the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for the Fiscal Year
             1961-1962.
2864  6-1-61 Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1961-1962.
2872  6-20-  Repealing Ordinance No. 2399 relating to the sale of tax delinquent property.
      61
2879  8-15-  Reestablishing the width of sidewalks on Commercial Street from its most northerly
      61     limit to the north line of 5th Street.
2884  10-17- Establishing the grades on Fairway Drive from Station 7 + 75.00 to Station 15 +
      61     33.85.
2892  12-19- Establishing the grades on Fairway Drive from Station 15 + 33.85 to Station 29 +
      61     12.29.
2893  12-19- Establishing the grades on Fairway Drive from Station 0 + 00 to Station 7 + 75.
      61
2894  12-19- Repealing Section 4 of Ordinance No. 2738 relating to master electricians' licenses
      61     and bonds.
2896  1-2-62 Repealing Section 13 of Ordinance No. 2391 relating to auction sales during the month
             of December.
2898  2-6-62 Establishing the grades on California Street from 220 feet south of New Street to
             1262.38 feet south of New Street.
2899  2-20-  Establishing the grades on various alleys.
      62
      2-20-  Establishing the grades on Willow Street from 180 feet west of D Street to the west
2900  62     line of F Street; Carson Street from L Street to M Street; and N Street from 14th
             Street 125 feet south.
2901  2-20-  Establishing the grades on various alleys.
      62
2902  2-20-  Establishing the grades on various alleys.
      62
2903  2-20-  Establishing the grades on various alleys.
      62
2910  6-6-62 Fixing the amount of money necessary to be raised by Taxation for the Fiscal Year
             1962-1963.
2911  6-6-62 Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1962-1963.
             Establishing the grades on Hawthorne Street between Broadway and Murray Street; R
2912  6-6-62 Street between 10th Street and 8th Street; and N Street between 14th Street and 16th
             Street.
             Establishing the grades on L Street between 17th Street and Del Norte Street; 11th
2913  6-6-62 Street between F Street and G Street; and Madrone Street between H Street and I
             Street.
             Establishing the grade on Wood Street between W Street and New W Street; Washington
2914  6-6-62 Street between Koster and Broadway and Mill Street between Broadway and N.W.P.R.R.
             right-of-way.
      6-11-  Amending Ordinance No. 2575 (Comprehensive) to reclassify from “R-1” Single-Family
2931  63     Residential to a “C-2” Central Commercial Zone of an area bounded generally by
             Henderson, Ocean, Harris, and Spring Streets.
2933  6-18-  Fixing the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for the Fiscal Year
      63     1963-1964.
2934  6-18-  Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1963-1964.
      63
1-    8-6-63 Adopting the Eureka Municipal Code.
C.S.
6-    12-3-  Establishing the grades on 10th Street between R Street and S Street and on R Street
C.S.  63     between 8th Street and 10th Street.
7-    12-3-  Establishing the grades on various alleys.
C.S.  63
10-   1-7-64 Declaring a portion of Fairway Drive to be a County Highway.
C.S.
17-   5-26-  Fixing the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for the Fiscal Year
C.S.  64     1964-1965.
18-   5-26-  Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1964-1965.
C.S.  64
22-   9-17-  Establishing and reestablishing the grades on Elizabeth Street 0 feet to 176.80 feet
C.S.  64     north of South Avenue; South Avenue 0 feet to 234.50 feet west of Elizabeth Street;
             and establishing the grades on Papke Court 0 feet to 307 feet east of S Street.
23-   9-17-  Establishing the grades on Russell Street, Dolbeer Street to the east City Limits,
C.S.  64     and on Hodgson Street between William Street and E Street.
24-          Declaring that city lands within Parking District No. 1 shall be held, used, and
C.S.  9-1-64 treated the same as parking places to be acquired within Parking District No. 1 from
             the proceeds of additional bonds to be issued and sold.
             Describing additional acquisitions and improvements to be made in Parking District
26-   10-20- No. 1 and sources from which operation and maintenance costs thereof and of city
C.S.  64     lands and of principal of and interest on assessment bonds to be issued are to be
             paid and secured.
27-   10-20- Establishing the grades on the streets in the area bounded by Whipple Street, Murray
C.S.  64     Street, Broadway, and Railroad Avenue.
31-          Establishing the grades on the alleys between Union and Summer Streets and Cedar and
C.S.  1-7-65 14th Streets, between B and C Streets and Cedar and 14th Streets, and between R and S
             Streets and Wood and Harris Streets.
32-   1-7-65 Establishing the grades on the alleys between K and L Streets and Buhne and Carson
C.S.         Streets and between Cottage and High Streets and McDonald Street and Highland Avenue.
40-   4-7-65 Establishing the grades on Hill Street from Myrtle Avenue to Searles Street and on
C.S.         Searles Street from Hill Street to Dowler Drive.
41-   4-7-65 Establishing the grades on West Avenue from 18th Street to S Street.
C.S.
42-   4-7-65 Reestablishing the grades on E Street from Hodgson Street to Willow Street.
C.S.
43-   4-7-65 Establishing the grades on V Street from 4th Street to 5th Street.
C.S.
44-   4-27-  Establishing the width of sidewalks on E Street from the south line of Harris Street
C.S.  65     to the north line of Willow Street.
48-   5-19-  Establishing the grades on the alleys between 14th and 15th Streets and California to
C.S.  65     Pine Streets and between California and Pine Streets north of 15th Street.
49-   5-19-  Establishing the grades on Washington Street west of Koster Street.
C.S.  65
51-   6-17-  Fixing the amount of money necessary to be raised by taxation for the Fiscal Year
C.S.  65     1965-1966.
52-   6-17-  Fixing the rate of taxes for the Fiscal Year 1965-1966.
C.S.  65
53-   6-17-  Reestablishing the grades on Central Avenue from Harris Street to Henderson Street.
C.S.  65
55-   8-4-65 Establishing the grades on M Street from 15th to 17th Streets.
C.5.
57-   8-18-  Establishing the grades on the west side of Harrison Avenue from Chester to Russell
C.S.  65     Streets.
58-   8-18-  Reestablishing the grades on Fairway Drive from Station 24 plus 00 to Station 80 plus
C.S.  65     00.
70-   4-5-66 Establishing the grades on 7th Street from 0 feet to 320 feet east of Bay Street.
C.S.
71-   4-5-66 Establishing the grades on S Street from Zero Street to 740 feet north of Trinity
C.S.         Street.
72-   4-5-66 Establishing the grades on Koster Street from 14th Street to Washington Street.
C.S.
73-   4-5-66 Establishing the grades on J Street from 0 feet to 360 feet north of Madrone Avenue.
C.S.
86-   1-17-  Authorizing a contract with the California State Employees' Retirement System.
C.S.  67
108-  7-16-  Establishing the grades on 8th Street from O Street to P Street; on Sonoma Street
C.S.  68     from O Street on the alley rounded by Long Avenue, Carson Street, Garland Street, and
             Summit Street; and on Garland Street from Buhne Street to Fairfield Street.
139-  2-17-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employee's
C.S.  70     Retirement System.
145-  6-30-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employee's
C.S.  70     Retirement System.
149-  10-21- Annexing the Gunther Island-Tideland Annexation.
C.S.  70
156-  11-4-  Disapproving the Annexation of Allard Avenue Annexation No. 1.
C.S.  70
159-  1-11-  Annexing the South Broadway Annexation No. 1.
C.S.  71
164-  3-12-  Providing for a contribution of city funds to the cost of improvements in Jacobs
C.S.  71     Avenue Sewer Assessment District.
176-  10-20- Annexing the Indianola Annexation No. 1.
C.S.  71
185-  4-18-  Adopting the Phase 1 Redevelopment (Urban Renewal) Plan of the City of Eureka Century
C.S.  72     III Neighborhood Development Program.
188-  7-19-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employee's
C.S.  72     Retirement System.
193-  10-4-  Repealing Article 1 of Chapter 2 of Title 8 relating to the Eureka Free Library
C.S.  72     Living Memorial Fund.
209-  5-2-73 Adopting the Phase II Redevelopment (Urban Renewal) Plan of the City of Eureka
C.S.         Century III Neighborhood Development Program.
210-  5-28-  Amending Official Grade Map No. 130, adopted by Ordinance No. 2914, to revise the
C.S.  73     official grades for Mill Street from the west line of Broadway to the east line of
             the Northwestern Pacific Railroad right-of-way.
212-  6-19-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employee's
C.S.  73     Retirement System.
224-  12-5-  Adopting the Redevelopment Plan for the Eureka Tomorrow Redevelopment Project.
C.S.  73
253-  5-29-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employee's
C.S.  75     Retirement System.
260-  11-18- Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employees
C.S.  75     Retirement System.
267-  10-6-  Prezoning Indianola Annexation No. 4 from the U Unclassified District to the CS-PD
C.S.  76     Service Commercial with Planned Unit Development Combining District.
283-  10-4-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employees
C.S.  77     Retirement System.
285-  11-1-  Annexing the South Broadway Annexation No. 2.
C.S.  77
305-  2-20-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract with the California Public Employees
C.S.  79     Retirement System.
317-  2-5-80 Reclassifying certain real properties known as South Broadway Annexation No. 3.
C.S.
             Reclassifying approximately 1.75 acres of land from “RS-6000” One-Family Residential
329-  10-2-  and “RM-1000” Multi-Family Districts to “CN” Neighborhood Commercial District and
C.S.  80     “RM-1000” Multi-Family Residential District as shown on Amendment No. 38 to Zoning
             Map No. 30.
             Reclassification of certain real property at the northeast corner of 8th and A
333-  2-17-  Streets from “RM-1000-AR” Multi-Family Residential with Architectural Review
C.S.  81     Combining District to “CS-AR” Service Commercial with Architectural Review Combining
             District.
339-  5-5-81 Reclassify certain real property from One-Family Residential “RS-6000” to Hospital-
C.S.         Medical “HM.”
342-  6-16-  Prezoning South Broadway Annexation No. 4 from “U” Unclassified District (County) to
C.S.  81     “A” Agricultural District (City).
348-  10-16- Rezoning real property from Agricultural “A” to Service Commercial “CS” and General
C.S.  81     Industrial “MG” as shown on Zoning Map No. 42.
349-  9-15-  Declaring a need for an Industrial Development Authority and declaring that such
C.S.  81     authority shall function.
352-  11-20- Reclassification of certain real property located on the south side of Buhne Street
C.S.  81     beginning approximately 130 feet westerly of Dean Street from “RS-6000” One-Family
             Residential District to “HM” Hospital Medical District as shown on Zoning Map No. 43.
             Reclassification of certain real property located between the Northwestern Pacific
355-         Railroad right-of-way and Humboldt Bay and running from the west line of S Street
C.S.  1-1-82 from “ML-AR” and MG-AR” Limited and General Industrial with Architectural Review and
             combining Districts to “CW-AR” Waterfront Commercial with Architectural Review
             Combining District as shown on Zoning Map No. 44.
377-  11-16- Amending the city's contract with the Public Employers Retirement System.
C.S.  82
383-  6-7-83 Regarding the amendment to the city's contract with the Public Employees Retirement
C.S.         System.
393-  1-3-84 Rezoning real property from “A” Agricultural District to “RS-6000-PD” One-Family
C.S.         Residential with Planned Unit Combining District.
394-  1-3-84 Rezoning real property from “CN” Neighborhood Commercial District and “RS-6000” One-
C.S.         Family Residential District to “OR” Office and Multi-Family Residential District.
399-  3-6-84 Reclassifying real property from “A” Agricultural District to “CS” Service Commercial
C.S.         District.
401-  3-20-  Rezoning real property located at 1411 Bay Street from “RS-6000” One-Family
C.S.  84     Residential to “RM-1000” Multi-Family Residential District.
404-  5-15-  Rezoning real property located at 2719 F Street from “RS-6000” One-Family Residential
C.S.  84     to “CN” Neighborhood Commercial District.
405-  5-15-  Rezoning real property located at 315 Henderson Street from “RS-6000” One-Family
C.S.  84     Residential to “CN” Neighborhood Commercial District.
407-         Rezoning real property formerly 726 and 734 A Street from “RM-1000-AR” Multi-Family
C.S.  7-3-84 Residential with Architectural Review Combining District to “CS-AR” Service
             Commercial with Architectural Review Combining District.
408-         Rezoning real property located at 303 and 315 Q Street and 1536 3rd Street from “CS-
C.S.  7-3-84 AR” Service Commercial Architectural Review to “OR-AR” Office and Multi-Family
             Residential.
413-  8-7-84 Rezoning real property located at 1459 Railroad Avenue from “P” Public District to
C.S.         “MG” General Industrial District.
415-  11-6-  Rezoning real property located at 3021 Broadway from “RM-2500” Multi-Family
C.S.  84     Residential to “CS” Service Commercial District.
420-  12-4-  Prezoning of South Broadway Annexation No. 6 to the city from “U” Unclassified
C.S.  84     District (County) to “NR” Natural Resources and “AC” Coastal Agricultural (City).
423-  1-2-85 Urgency ordinance permitting exceptions to merger of substantial lots.
C.S.
426-  5-7-85 Authorizing an amendment to the city's contract with the Public Employee's Retirement
C.S.         System.
431-  6-12-  Rezoning real property located 1545 6th Street from “RM-2500-AR” (Multi-Family
C.S.  85     Residential) to “CN” (Neighborhood Commercial).
434-  12-3-  Reclassify various properties located within the Coastal Zone.
C.S.  85
445-  3-18-  Rezone real property at 1200 Block of 6th Street from “RM-1000-AR” to “OR-AR.”
C.S.  86
449-  5-20-  Reclassify real property at 2750 Harrison Avenue from “RS-6000” to “HM.”
C.S.  86
454-  12-16- Adding provisions to Eureka Century III NDP Phase Redevelopment Plan.
C.S.  86
455-  12-16- Adding provisions to Eureka Century III NDP Phase II Redevelopment Plan.
C.S.  86
456-  12-24- Adding provisions to Eureka Tomorrow Redevelopment Plan.
C.S.  86
461-  6-2-87 Amending city's contract with Public Employees Retirement System.
C.S.
467-  12-8-  Rezone real property at 1330 Mill Street from “NR” to “CS.”
C.S.  88
472-  6-23-  Clarifying provisions to Eureka Century Phase I Redevelopment Plan.
C.S.  88
473-  6-23-  Clarifying provisions to Eureka Century Phase II Redevelopment Plan.
C.S.  88
474-  6-23-  Clarifying provision to Eureka Tomorrow Redevelopment Plan.
C.S.  88
486-  12-20- Reclassify real property at 1220, 1224, and 1230 West Avenue from “RS-6000” to “RM-
C.S.  88     1000.”
487-  12-20- Reclassify real property at 502 Broadway from “P” to “CS.”
C.S.  88
491-  3-21-  Reclassify real property at 2492 Bainbridge Street from S to “RS-6000.”
C.S.  89
510-  12-19- Rezone real property of Parcel One of Parcel Map No. 761 from “ML” to “CW.”
C.S.  89
517-  7-3-90 Authorizing an amendment to the city's contract with the Public Employee's Retirement
C.S.         Contract.
521-  11-8-  Reclassification of real property on Dolbeer Street from “RS-6000” to “HM.”
C.S.  90
522-  11-20- Rezone real property from “HM” to “RS-6000.”
C.S.  90
536-  12-17- Reclassify real property on G Street from “RS-6000” to “OR.”
C.S.  91
540-  2-20-  Reclassify real property from “OR” to “P.”
C.S.  92
541-  3-3-92 Reclassify real property on J Street from “RM-1000-AR” to “OR-AR.”
C.S.
550-  9-1-92 Reclassify real property on Buhne and 23rd Street west of Dean Street from “RS-6000”
C.S.         to “HM.”
562-  10-12- Reclassify real property from “RS-6000” to “OR.”
C.S.  93
563-  10-12- Reclassify real property from “RM-1000” to “OR-AR.”
C.S.  93
567-  3-22-  Reclassify real property from “NR” to “CS.”
C.S.  94
568-  3-22-  Reclassify real property from “RS-6000” to “RM-1000.”
C.S.  94
569-  4-5-94 Reclassify real property from “OR” to “P.”
C.S.
582-  12-6-  Adopting amendment to the Urban Renewal Plan for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase I
C.S.  94     Project Area.
583-  12-6-  Adopting amendment to the Urban Renewal Plan for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase II
C.S.  94     Project Area.
584-  12-6-  Adopting an amendment to the Redevelopment Plan for the Eureka Tomorrow Redevelopment
C.S.  94     Project.
591-  5-22-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
C.S.  95     Administration of the California Public Employees Retirement System.
             Reclassifying real property from “OR” (Office-Residential), “CC” (Central
594-  8-15-  Commercial), “CC-AR” (Central Commercial /Architectural Review), “CS” (Service
C.S.  95     Commercial), “CS-AR” (Service Commercial/Architectural Review), “CW” (Waterfront
             Commercial), “ML” (Limited Industrial) to incorporate “LW” (Live Work) as a combining
             zone.
597-  11-7-  Authorizing the amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
C.S.  95     Administration of the California Public Employees Retirement System.
Res.  1-7-97 Abolishing certain offices and employments and reorganizing those functions and
97-02        services to existing departments.
613-  1-23-  Imposing a moratorium on communication towers, to expire on October 21, 1997, unless
C.S.  97     extended by action of the City Council.
Res.  3-18-  Endorsing the petition of Eureka City Schools for Unification, invoking Section 1103
97-13 97     of the City Charter so that Eureka City Schools are no longer subject to the Eureka
             City Charter.
622-  11-25- Reclassifying real estate from “CS-Q” (Qualified Service Commercial) from “RM-2500”
C.S.  97     (Multiple-family Residential) and affecting Assessor Parcel Number 008-041-11.
623-  1-20-  Reclassifying real estate from “NC” (Neighborhood Commercial) from “RS-6000” (Single-
C.S.  98     family Residential) and affecting Assessor Parcel Numbers 010-231-22, 010-231-11, and
             010-231-12.
624-  2-3-98 Reclassifying real estate from “RS-6000” (Single-family Residential) to “OR” (Office
C.S.         and Multi-family Residential) and affecting Assessor Parcel Number 011-051-01.
626-  6-2-98 Reclassifying real estate from “RM-2500” (Multi-family Residential) to “CN”
C.S.         (Commercial Neighborhood) and affecting Assessor Parcel Number 011-024-01.
633-  12-7-  Adopting an amendment to the Redevelopement Plan for the Eureka Tomorrow
C.S.  99     Redevelopement Project.
636-  10-17- Reclassifying real property from RS-6000 (One-family Residential) to RM-2500 (Multi-
C.S.  00     family Residential).
637-  12-19- Reclassifying real property from RS-6000 (One-family Residential) to H-M (Hospital-
C.S.  00     Medical).
642-  4-3-01 Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
C.S.         Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.
643-  6-5-01 Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
C.S.         Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.
645-  6-19-  Reclassifying real property from RS-6000 (One-family Residential) to CN (Commercial
C.S.  01     Neighborhood).
649-  10-2-  Reclassifying real property from RS-6000 (One-family Residential) to CN (Commercial
C.S.  01     Neighborhood).
650-  11-20- Reclassifying real property from RS-6000 (One-family Residential) to CN (Commercial
C.S.  01     Neighborhood).
654-  12-7-  Amending the Urban Renewal Plan for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase I Project Area
C.S.  01     pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 33333.6(f)(2).
655-  12-7-  Amending the Urban Renewal Plan for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase II Project Area
C.S.  01     pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 33333.6(f)(2).
656-  6-4-02 Amending the Eureka Tomorrow Redevelopment Plan pursuant to Health and Safety Code §
C.S.         33333.6(e)(2).
657-  6-4-02 Amending the Urban Renewal Plan for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase I Project Area
C.S.         pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 33333.6(e)(2).
658-  6-4-02 Amending the Urban Renewal Plan for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase II Project Area
C.S.         pursuant to Health and Safety Code § 33333.6(e)(2).
659-  6-18-  Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
C.S.  02     Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.
661-  10-1-  Reclassifying real property from RS-6000 (One-family Residential) to P (Public).
C.S.  02
675-  1-7-04 Reclassifying real property consisting of a city block bounded by Wabash, Del Norte,
C.S.         Short and Koster Streets from General Industrial (MG) to Service Commercial (CS).
677-  2-25-  Reclassifying real property at the Northwest Corner of Harris Street and Ocean Street
C.S   04     known as APN 008-053-009 from One-Family Residential (RS-6,000) to Multi-Family
             Residential (RM-2500).
683-  10-20- Authorizing a correction to an amendment to the contract between the City Council and
C.S.  04     the Board of Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.
694-  7-19-  Adopting the amended and restated redevelopment plan for the Eureka Century III NDP
C.S.  05     Phase I Redevelopment Project.
695-  7-19-  Adopting the amended and restated redevelopment plan for the Eureka Century III NDP
C.S.  05     Phase II Redevelopment Project.
696-  7-19-  Adopting the amended and restated redevelopment plan for the Eureka Tomorrow
C.S.  05     Redevelopment Project.
698-  8-2-05 Reclassifying real property at 25 Fourth Street known as APN 001-064-001 and 001-064-
C.S.         011, from Limited Industrial (ML) to Service Commercial (CS).
             Reclassifying real property at 1535 Sixth Street, APN 001-051-008 and 001-05-006,
700-  9-20-  from Multi-family Residential (RM-2500) to Service Commercial (CS); and at 1545 Sixth
C.S.  05     Street, APN 001-051-007, from Neighborhood Commercial (CN) to Service Commercial
             (CS).
703-  12-20- Reclassifying real property at 1807 and 1809 Truesdale, APN 007-081-018, 007-081-020
C.S.  05     and 007-081-026 from General Industrial (MG) to Service Commercial (CS).
706-  2-21-  Reclassifying portions of real property at 1210 and 1240 Broadway, APN 003-131-005
C.S.  06     and 003-131-016, from Limited Industrial (ML) to Service Commercial (CS).
JD:   708-   9-19-06Reclassifying real property located at 939 Harris Street, APN 011-181-001,
"">   C.S.   from One-Family Residential (RS-6,000) to Public (P).
             Adopting a description of the program for the acquisition of real property for the
712-  10-16- redevelopment plans for the Eureka Century III NDP Phase I Redevelopment Project
C.S.  07     Area, the Eureka Century III NDP Phase II Redevelopment Project Area, and the Eureka
             Tomorrow Redevelopment Project Area.
             Amending the Implementation Plan Map (zoning map) of the adopted and certified Local
713-  10-16- Coastal Program, reclassifying 11 real properties located between "C" Street and
C.S.  07     Commercial Street and between First Street and Humboldt Bay from a Commercial
             Waterfront (CW) zone district to a Coastal Dependent Industrial (MC) zone district.
714-  10-16- Reclassifying real property at 730 H Street; APN 001-155-003, from Multi-Family
C.S.  07     Residential, Architectural Review, Live Work (RM-1000-AR-LW) to Central Commercial,
             Architectural Review, Live Work (CC-AR-LW).
716-  11-27- Reclassifying real property at 3975 Broadway; APN 019-341-003, from Public (P) to
C.S.  07     Service Commercial (CS).
729-  7-1-08 Authorizing an amendment to the contract between the City Council and the Board of
C.S.         Administration of the California Public Employees' Retirement System.
851-  1-17-  Approving a zone reclassification at 966 West Harris Street, APN 008-171-01 in the
C.S.  17     city from Planned Shopping Center (CP) to Neighborhood Commercial (CN).
935-  9-20-  Reclassifying real property at 3116 Harrison Avenue from Hospital Medical (HM) to
C.S.  22     Neighborhood Commercial (NC).
958-  12-17- Reclassifying real property at 272 Harris Street from Residential Low (R1) to
C.S.  24     Henderson Center (HC)
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to 1963 Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
Administrative Code
 
State Cite               Code Section
Title 14, § 13250(a),(b)156.097
Title 14, § 13252       156.097
Title 24, Part 8         150.073
 
Business and Professions Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite              Code Section
8771                    154.046
11003.2                 154.006
11004                   154.006
13530                   155.340.030
19850A                  113.31
19860                   113.35
19912A                  113.32
21660 et seq.           118.05
22435.4                 130.30
Div. 9, Ch. 13, § 25170121.14
26000 - 26250           158.001
                        
 
Civil Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite    Code Section
54.1          91.204,
              91.405
783           154.021,
              156.097
1350          154.006
1351          150.161
1355          154.048
1714.9        130.09
1789.31       155.504.030 ,
              155.508.040
1940(b)(2)    97.01
1940(b)(2)(B) 150.310
1941.3        150.310
1941.4        150.310
2782          39.37
2782.8        39.37
3479          155.508.020
3480          155.508.020
4080          150.403
              
 
Civil Procedures Code
 
State Cite                                           Code Section
1013a                                                39.25
                                                     150.164,
1094.5                                               150.168,
                                                     150.179
                                                     150.171,
1094.6                                               150.185,
                                                     150.308,
                                                     150.309
Art. 3 (Sec. 415.10 et seq.), Ch. 4, Title 5, Part 2 150.187
1822.50 - 1822.60                                    150.312 ,
                                                     92.10
 
Corporations Code
 
State Cite Code Section
5003       97.01
25100(f)   154.006
 
Elections Code
 
State Cite Code Section
           Charter, §§
10227      301,
           400
 
Financial Code
 
State Cite Code Section
[reserved]  
 
Food and Agricultural Code
 
State Cite    Code Section
31622         91.1004
47000 et seq. 118.05
 
Government Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                             Code Section
815 et seq.                            120.26
815.6                                  10.21
900 et seq.                            39.10,
                                       39.11
905                                    39.10,
                                       39.11
910                                    39.17
910 et seq.                            39.11
911.2                                  39.11,
                                       39.18
911.4                                  39.19
911.6 through 912.2                    39.19
912.4                                  39.11,
                                       39.21
935.4                                  39.16
945.6                                  39.11,
                                       39.15
                                       34.149,
946                                    39.11,
                                       39.15
1091                                   33.013
1091.1                                 33.013
1091.5                                 33.013
4529.10                                39.40
4529.12                                39.40
6062                                   150.165,
                                       150.187
6250 et seq.                           51.26,
                                       114.55
6254.15                                114.55
6500 et seq.                           55.01
7060 et seq.                           155.204.040,
                                       155.332.030
7070                                   104.02
7070 - 7072                            104.01
8550 et seq.                           155.104.060,
                                       155.508.020
12955                                  155.412.080
25831                                  51.20
38771 et seq.                          150.141
                                       92.10,
38773.5                                150.149,
                                       150.188,
                                       150.312
38790.1                                51.20
50280 et seq.                          157.003
51032                                  117.18
51035                                  155.304.070
53055                                  114.60
53055.1                                114.60
53055.2                                114.60
                                       10.35,
53069.4                                10.54,
                                       10.57
53088.2                                114.60
53088.2(r)                             114.38
53091                                  155.104.060
53150 et seq.                          92.02
54950 et seq.                          30.20
54950                                  156.111
54954.2                                30.00
54954.2(b)                             122.10
54954.5                                30.00
54957.95                               30.13
65090 et seq.                          155.408.080
65091 et seq.                          155.408.080
65100 et seq.                          152.01
65300 et seq.                          155.432.070,
                                       155.508.020
65302                                  153.001
65350 et seq.                          155.432.010
65358                                  155.432.020
65450                                  155.412.010,
                                       155.508.020
65560                                  153.001
                                       155.412.060,
65582                                  155.504.030,
                                       155.508.040
65583(a)(4)                            155.304.050
65591 et seq.                          155.328.060
65800                                  153.001
65850                                  155.104.030
65850.7                                150.402 -
                                       150.405
65852.1                                97.01
65852.150                              97.01
65852.2                                97.01
                                       155.204.010,
                                       155.204.040,
65852.21                               155.304.150,
                                       155.324.020,
                                       155.332.030
65852.22                               155.504.030,
                                       155.508.040
65853 et seq.                          155.432.010
65864 et seq.                          155.412.010,
                                       155.508.020
65901, 65902                           152.01
65913.4(a)(6), (B) - (K)               155.204.040,
                                       155.332.030
                                       155.344.040,
65915                                  155.344.070 ,
                                       155.344.080
65915(b)                               155.344.050
65915(c)                               155.344.050
65915(c)(3)                            155.344.070
65915(f)                               155.344.050
65915(g)                               155.344.040,
                                       155.344.070
65915(h)                               155.344.040,
                                       155.344.070
65915(k)(2)                            155.344.070
65915(p)                               155.344.040,
                                       155.344.070
65915 et seq.                          155.344.010
65915.5                                155.344.040,
                                       155.344.070
65915.7                                155.344.040,
                                       155.344.070
65950 - 65057.1                        156.111
65950 et seq.                          155.344.040
66300 et seq.                          155.224.050
66310 - 66324                          155.316.010
66323(a)(1)                            155.316.060
66323(a)(1) - (4)                      155.316.060
66323(a)(3)                            155.316.060
66323(a)(4)                            155.316.060
66333 - 66339                          155.316.040,
                                       155.316.060
66333(f)                               155.316.060
66341                                  155.316.060
66342                                  155.316.060
66410 et seq.                          154.001,
                                       155.508.020
66410                                  156.006
66410 to 66499                         155.508.020
                                       155.204.040,
66411.7                                155.316.040,
                                       155.324.020,
                                       155.332.030
66412(d)                               156.098
66436                                  154.038
66439                                  154.038
66445(f)                               154.038
66447                                  154.038
66451.3                                154.164
66452.5                                154.041
66499.35                               154.206
68632                                  118.99
84300                                  37.52
Title 1, Div. 4, Ch. 1, Art. 4         Charter, §
                                       807
Title 1, Div. 4, Ch. 9.5               34.18
Title 5, Div. 1, Part 1, Ch. 1, Art. 2 10.02
Title 5, Div. 1, Part 2, Ch. 2, Art. 2 35.030
Title 7, Ch. 3, §§ 65100 et seq.     152.01
                                       
 
Harbors and Navigation Code
 
State Cite Code Section
500 - 505  100.13
 
Health and Safety Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                    Code Section
1500 et seq.                  155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
1569 et seq.                  155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
1597.44                       155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
1597.465                      155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
1714.1(b)                     93.74
11000 et seq.                 134.03
11018.5                       158.005
11362.5                       158.005
11362.5 et seq.               158.005
11362.7                       158.005
11362.7 et seq.               158.005
11834.02                      155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
13009                         92.02
13009.1                       92.02
17900 et seq.                 157.007
17920.3                       155.316.060
17958.1                       155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
17958.11                      150.105
17975 et seq.                 150.309
17980                         150.190
18007                         155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
18009.3                       90.01
18010                         90.16
18010(a)                      90.01
18551                         155.504.030,
                              155.508.040
25110.02                      51.02
25115                         51.02
25117                         51.02,
                              55.022
25281                         51.02
25300 et seq.                 51.02
25316                         51.02
33007.5                       154.006
33333.6(f)(2)                 T.S.O.
50052.5                       155.344.070
50053                         155.344.070
101375                        31.03
101400                        31.03
113700 et seq.                118.07
113758                        155.504.030
113783                        51.02
113841                        51.02
113842                        51.02
115800                        93.70
118915                        97.04
121349 - 121349.3             93.53
122335                        91.208
Div. 10-10.1                  132.15
Div. 13                       155.304.120
Div. 13, Part 2.11, § 18215.5155.006
Div. 20, Ch. 6.1              51.02
Div. 20, Ch. 7.6              51.02
Div. 104, Part 9, Ch. 8       51.02
Div. 104, Part 14             51.02
                              
 
Labor Code
 
State Cite   Code Section
1720 et seq. 39.37
6404.5       97.01,
             97.02
 
Penal Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite               Code Section
Title 9, Ch. 7.5         155.304.030
19.6                     10.99,
                         159.028
19.7                     10.99,
                         159.028
186.2                    113.31
240                      134.03
242                      134.03
315                      150.304
316                      150.304
326.5                    113.15,
                         113.16
330                      113.37
365                      131.30
365.5                    91.405
365.7                    91.405
370                      134.03
371                      134.03
374.3                    130.14
403                      30.13
415                      131.30,
                         134.03
594(a)(1)                131.23
637.5                    114.60
640.6                    131.23
647(b)                   134.03,
                         150.304
653.22                   150.304
653.23                   150.304
667.5(c)                 134.03
829.5                    150.162
836.5                    53.42,
                         150.147
11105                    34.19
1192.7(c)                134.03
1203.4                   113.31
1203.4a                  113.31
1203.45                  113.31
12000 et seq.            134.03
30510                    104.02
30515                    104.02
Part 2, Title 3, Ch. 4.5 90.01
 
Public Contract Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite Code Section
3400(c)    39.37
20101      39.38
22032      39.38
22032(a)   39.38
22032(b)   39.38
22032(c)   39.38
           
 
Public Resources Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite     Code Section
5024.1         157.001
5028           157.006
21000 et seq. 155.508.020,
               157.003
25500          156.005
30000 et seq.  154.006
30150          156.095
30261(b)       156.005
30264          156.005
30333          156.095
30501          156.095
30519          156.005
30610(e)       156.006
40000 et seq.  51.01
40004          51.01
40141          51.02
41730          51.01
41731          51.01
41734          51.01
41734.5        51.01
41735          51.01
41736          51.01
41780.01       51.01
41800          51.01
42926          51.01
44004          51.01
50001          51.01
Ch. 12.8       51.01
Ch. 12.9       51.01
               
 
Public Utilities Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                Code Section
Ch. 2.3 of Div. 1, Part 1 55.01
230                       154.021
366.2                     55.01
5800 et seq.              114.57
5830                      114.58
5860                      114.59
5860(i)                   114.59
5870                      114.63
5870(b)                   114.63
5870(d)                   114.63
5870(g)(3)                114.63
5870(h)                   114.63
5870(n)                   114.63
5880                      114.62
5900                      114.60
21000 et seq.             114.61
21411                     35.170,
                          35.185
 
Revenue and Taxation Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite            Code Section
214.15                155.332.030
402.1                 155.332.030
2188.7                154.006
6001 et seq.          35.182
                      35.057,
6067                  35.169,
                      35.184
6091                  92.10
                      35.056,
6203                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.058,
6366                  35.170,
                      35.185
                      35.058,
6366.1                35.170,
                      35.185
                      35.056,
6701                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.056,
6702                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.056,
6711                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.056,
6715                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.056,
6737                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.056,
6797                  35.168,
                      35.183
                      35.056,
6828                  35.168,
                      35.183
7251 et seq.          35.162,
                      35.177
7285.9                35.162,
                      35.177
11921 - 11929         35.097
17274                 150.164
24436.5               150.164
Div. 1, Part 9, Ch. 5 35.099
                      35.056,
                      35.167,
                      35.168,
Div. 2, Part 1        35.171,
                      35.182,
                      35.183,
                      35.186
                      35.052,
Div. 2, Part 1.5      35.056,
                      35.058 -
                      35.060
                      35.162,
                      35.167,
                      35.172,
Div. 2, Part 1.6      35.177,
                      35.182,
                      35.185 -
                      35.187
                      35.171,
Div. 2, Part 1.7      35.177,
                      35.186
Div. 2, Part 6.7      35.095,
                      35.098
 
Streets and Highways Code
 
State Cite         Code Section
2113               35.018
2800 et seq.       72.071
35100 et seq.      33.056,   
                   72.071
Divs. 1, 3, Art. 5 35.018
Part 6             35.115
 
Vehicle Code
State Cite Code Section
State Cite                        Code Section
467.5                             121.13
4000 et seq.                      35.170,
                                  35.185
5004                              90.37
9105                              72.095
9840 et seq.                      35.170,
                                  35.185
13202.6                           131.25
21100(k)                          130.05
21113                             100.19
Div. 11, Ch. 1, Art. 4.5, § 21215121.01,
                                  121.13
21663                             71.04
21950                             130.11
21954                             130.11
21955                             130.11
21957                             130.11
21964                             130.11
21966                             130.11
22455(b)                          75.01
22500(i)                          73.06
22511.5                           72.095
                                  90.15,
22523                             90.32,
                                  90.99
                                  90.15,
22651(k)                          90.31,
                                  90.99
22660                             90.02
22661                             90.34
22661(a)                          90.38
22661(c)                          90.34
22661(f)                          90.37
22662                             90.37
22663                             90.33
                                  90.31,
22669                             90.32,
                                  90.38
22710                             90.32
22850                             90.35
22850.3                           90.35
22851.2 - 22851.12                90.36
22852                             90.35
Div. 11, Ch.12, Art.2, § 23152   121.14
25845                             90.39
40202                             72.059,
                                  72.078
Division 6                        90.01
Division 9                        70.02
Division 11                       70.02
Division 14                       90.01
                                  
 
Water Code
 
State Cite    Code Section
350 et seq.   53.35,
              53.43
13000 et seq. 54.021 ,
              150.200
13050         51.02,
              54.022
71640 et seq. 53.35
 
Welfare and Institutions Code
 
State Cite   Code Section
256          130.05
602          131.23
728          131.23
5000 et seq. 155.504.030 ,
             155.508.040
             
 
REFERENCES TO 1963 CODE
1963 Code Section 1997 Code Section
1963 Code Section      1997 Code Section
1-1.01                 10.01
1-1.02                 10.02
1-1.03                 10.03
1-1.04                 10.04
1-1.05                 10.05
1-1.06                 10.06
1-1.07                 10.07
1-1.08                 10.08
1-1.09                 10.09
1-2.01                 10.99
1-2.02                 10.22
1-2.03                 10.23
1-2.04                 10.23
1-2.05                 10.24
1-2.06                 10.25
1-2.07                 10.99,
                       70.99
1-3.01                 10.10
1-3.02                 10.11
1-3.03                 10.12
1-3.05                 10.13
1-3.06                 10.14
1-3.07                 10.15
1-3.08                 10.16
1-3.09                 10.17
1-3.10                 10.18
1-3.11                 10.18
1-3.12                 10.19
1-3.13                 10.20
1-3.14                 10.21
1-4.01                 39.01
1-4.02                 39.02
1-4.03                 39.03
2-2.01                 30.01
2-2.02                 30.02
2-2.03                 30.03
2-2.04                 30.04
2-2.05                 30.05
2-2.06                 30.06
2-2.07                 30.07
2-2.08                 30.04
2-2.09                 30.08
2-2.10                 30.09
2-2.11                 30.10
2-2.12                 30.11
2-2.14                 30.12
2-2.15                 30.12
2-2.16                 30.12
2-2.18                 30.99
2-2.19                 30.14
2-2.20                 30.10
2-2.21                 30.15
2-2.22                 30.16
2-2.23                 30.17
2-2.24                 30.18,
                       30.99
2-2.25                 30.19
2-2.26                 30.20
2-2.27                 30.21
2-3.701                31.03
2-3.901                31.02
2-4.101                37.01
2-4.102                37.02
2-5.101                34.01
2-5.102                34.02
2-5.103                34.03
2-5.104                34.04
2-5.105                34.05
2-5.106                34.05
2-5.107                34.05
2-5.108                34.05
2-5.109                34.06
2-5.110                34.07
2-5.111                34.08
2-5.112                34.08
2-5.113                34.08
2-5.114                34.08
2-5.115                34.09
2-5.116                34.10
2-5.117                34.10
2-5.118                34.10
2-5.119                34.10
2-5.120                34.10
2-5.121                34.11
2-5.122                34.12
2-5.123                34.13
2-5.124                34.14
2-5.125                34.15
2-5.126                34.16
2-5.127                34.17
2-5.128                34.18
2-5.129                34.07
2-5.130                34.19
2-5.131                34.20
2-5.201                31.01
2-5.202                31.01
2-5.203                31.01
2-5.304                34.30
2-5.304.1              34.31
2-5.304.2              34.31
2-5.306                34.33
2-5.307                34.33
2-5.308                34.34
2-5.309                34.35
2-5.310                34.36
2-5.311                34.37
2-5.312                34.38
2-5.313                34.39
2-5.314                34.40
2-5.315                34.41
2-5.316                34.42
2-5.316.1              34.43
2-5.317                34.44
2-6.01                 39.35
2-6.02                 39.36
2-6.04                 39.37
2-6.12                 39.42
2-6.14                 39.42
2-6.16                 39.40
2-6.17                 39.42
2-8.101                36.01
2-8.102                36.02
2-8.103                36.03
2-8.201                36.20
2-8.202                36.20
2-8.203                36.21
2-8.204                36.22
2-8.205                36.23
2-8.206                36.24
2-8.207                36.25
2-8.208                36.26
2-8.209                36.27
2-8.210                36.28
2-8.301                36.40
2-8.302                36.40
2-8.303                36.41
2-8.304                36.42
2-8.305                36.43
2-8.306                36.44
2-8.307                36.45
2-8.308                36.46
2-8.309                36.47
2-8.310                36.48
2-8.401                36.02
2-8.402                36.04
2-8.403                36.02
2-8.404                36.05
2-8.405                36.05
2-8.406                36.06
3-1.01                 73.02
3-1.02                 73.02
3-1.03                 73.03
3-1.04                 73.04
3-1.05                 73.05
3-1.06                 73.01
3-1.07                 73.06
3-1.08                 73.01
3-1.09                 73.01
3-2.01                 38.01
3-2.02                 38.02
3-2.03                 38.03
3-2.04                 38.03
3-2.05                 38.04
3-2.06                 38.04
3-2.07                 38.05
3-2.08                 38.06
3-2.09                 38.07
3-2.10                 38.08,
                       38.99
3-3.04                 92.03
3-3.07                 92.04
3-3.08                 92.05
3-3.09                 92.06
3-3.10                 92.07
3-3.11                 92.99
3-4.301                72.072
3-4.304                72.074
3-4.305                72.075
3-4.306                72.076
3-4.307                72.077
3-4.308                72.078
3-4.309                72.079
3-4.310                72.080
3-5.04                 72.051
3-5.05                 72.052
3-5.06                 72.053
3-5.07                 72.053
3-5.08                 72.054
3-5.09                 72.054
3-5.10                 72.055
3-5.11                 72.056
3-5.12                 72.057
3-5.13                 72.058
3-5.14                 72.059
3-6.101 - 3-6.120      70.01
3-6.201                70.35
3-6.202                70.39
3-6.203                70.39
3-6.204                70.39
3-6.205                70.36
3-6.206                70.36
3-6.301                70.37
3-6.302                70.38
3-6.303                70.03
3-6.304                70.03
3-6.305                70.05
3-6.306                70.04
3-6.307                70.05
3-6.308                70.06
3-6.309                70.40
3-6.310                70.41
3-6.311                70.37
3-6.401                70.15
3-6.402                70.16
3-6.403                70.17
3-6.404                70.18
3-6.405                70.19
3-6.406                70.15
3-6.407                70.20
3-6.408                70.20
3-6.409                70.21
3-6.501                71.25
3-6.502                71.25
3-6.504                71.26
3-6.601                71.13
3-6.701                71.40
3-6.702                71.41
3-6.703                71.42
3-6.801                71.01
3-6.802                71.02
3-6.803                71.03
3-6.804                71.04
3-6.805                71.05
3-6.806                71.06
3-6.807                71.07
3-6.808                71.08
3-6.809                71.09
3-6.811                71.10
3-6.812                71.11
3-6.814                71.12
3-6.815                71.11
3-6.901                71.85
3-6.902                71.85
3-6.903                71.86
3-6.1001               72.001
3-6.1002               72.002
3-6.1003               72.003
3-6.1004               72.004
3-6.1006               72.005
3-6.1007               72.006
3-6.1008               72.006
3-6.1009               72.007
3-6.1010               72.008
3-6.1011               72.009
3-6.1012               72.010
3-6.1013               72.011
3-6.1101               72.025
3-6.1102               72.026
3-6.1103               72.027
3-6.1104               72.028
3-6.1105               72.030
3-6.1106               72.031
3-6.1107               72.032
3-6.1108               72.033
3-6.1109               72.034
3-6.1110               72.035
3-6.1201               72.095
3-6.1202               72.095
3-6.1203               72.096
3-6.1204               72.097
3-6.1205               72.098
3-6.1206               72.099
3-6.1207(a)            72.100
3-6.1207(c)            Ch.74, Sch. II
3-6.1208               72.101
3-6.1209               72.102
3-6.1210               72.103
3-6.1211               72.104
3-6.1301               71.70
3-6.1302               71.71
3-6.1401               Ch.74, Sch. I
3-6.1403               71.16
3-6.1501               71.72
3-6.1502               71.73
3-6.1601               71.14
3-6.1602               71.14
3-6.1603               71.14
3-6.1604               71.14
3-6.1605               71.14
3-6.1606               71.14
3-6.1701               71.15
3-6.1801               70.02
3-7.01                 71.55
3-7.02                 71.55
3-7.03                 71.56
3-7.04                 71.58
3-7.05                 71.59
3-7.06                 71.57
3-9.01                 133.01
3-9.02                 133.02
3-9.03                 133.03
3-9.04                 133.04
3-9.05                 133.05
3-9.06                 133.06
3-10.01                90.01
3-10.02                90.02
3-10.03                90.15,
                       90.99
3-10.04                90.30
3-10.05                90.31
3-10.06                90.31
3-10.07                90.31
3-10.08                90.32
3-10.09                90.33
3-10.10                90.33
3-10.11                90.03
3-10.12                90.34
3-10.13                90.35
3-10.14                90.36
3-10.15                90.35
3-10.16                90.37
3-10.17                90.37
3-10.18                90.38
3-10.19                90.38
3-10.20                90.39
3-10.21                90.39
3-10.22                90.16
3-11.01                99.01
3-11.02                99.02
4-1.01                 131.02
4-1.02                 131.02
4-2.01                 94.35
4-4.01                 130.01
4-4.06                 130.03
4-5.01                 94.01
4-5.02                 94.02
4-5.03                 94.03
4-12.01                113.50
4-13.01                94.15
4-13.02                94.16
4-13.04                94.18
4-13.05                94.18
4-13.06                94.19
4-13.07                94.20
4-13.08                94.21
4-13.09                94.22
4-13.10                94.22
4-13.11                94.22
4-13.12                94.22
4-13.13                94.23
4-13.14                94.24
4-13.15                94.25
4-14.03                94.17
4-18.01                132.15
4-18.02                132.16
4-18.03                132.17
4-18.04                132.18
5-2.01                 93.02
5-2.04                 93.03
5-2.05                 93.03
5-3.01                 115.01
5-3.02                 115.02
5-3.03                 115.03
5-3.04                 115.04
5-5.101                50.001
5-5.102                50.120
5-5.103                50.002
5-5.104                50.003
5-5.1001 - 5-5.1006    50.123
5-5.1101               50.124
5-5.1102               50.124
5-5.1104               50.126
5-5.1201               50.125
5-5.1202               50.125
5-5.1301               50.127
5-5.1302               50.127
5-5.1401               50.105
5-5.1402               50.105
5-5.1403               50.105
5-5.1501               50.106
5-5.1502               50.007
5-5.1503               50.006
5-5.1504               50.006
5-5.1601               50.090
5-5.1602               50.090
5-5.1603               50.091
5-5.1604               50.092
5-5.1701               50.093
5-5.1702               50.093
5-5.1703               50.093
5-5.1801               50.107
5-5.1802               50.107
5-5.1803               50.107
5-5.1804               50.107
5-5.1805               50.108
5-5.1806               50.108
5-5.1807               50.109
5-5.201                50.020
5-5.202                50.021
5-5.203                50.022
5-5.204                50.023
5-5.205                50.024
5-5.206                50.025
5-5.301                50.035
5-5.302                50.036
5-5.303                50.037
5-5.304                50.038
5-5.305                50.039
5-5.306                50.004
5-5.401                50.050
5-5.402                50.051
5-5.403                50.051
5-5.404                50.051
5-5.405                50.051
5-5.406                50.052
5-5.407                50.052
5-5.408                50.053
5-5.501                50.054
5-5.502                50.055
5-5.503                50.056
5-5.504                50.057
5-5.505                50.058
5-5.506                50.059
5-5.507                50.054
5-5.601                50.070
5-5.602                50.071
5-5.603                50.072
5-5.604                50.073
5-5.605                50.074
5-5.606                50.075
5-5.607                50.076
5-5.608                50.077
5-5.609                50.078
5-5.610                50.079
5-5.611                50.080
5-5.612                50.080
5-5.613                50.081
5-5.701                50.121
5-5.702                50.121
5-5.801                50.005
5-5.901                50.122
5-6.01                 53.01
5-6.02                 53.02
5-6.03                 53.03
5-6.04                 53.04
5-6.05                 53.05
5-6.07                 53.06
5-6.08                 53.07
5-6.09                 53.08
5-6.10                 53.09
5-6.11                 53.10
5-6.12                 53.11
5-6.13                 53.12
5-6.14                 53.13
5-6.15                 53.14
5-6.16                 53.14
5-6.17                 53.15
5-6.18                 53.16
5-6.19                 53.17
5-6.20                 53.18
5-6.20.5               53.18
5-6.21                 53.19
5-6.22                 53.99
5-6.23                 53.20
5-6.24                 53.21
5-7.01                 53.35
5-7.02                 53.36
5-7.03                 53.37
5-7.04                 53.38
5-7.05                 53.39
5-7.06                 53.40
5-7.07                 53.41
5-7.08                 53.41
5-7.09                 53.44,
                       53.99
5-7.10                 53.42
5-7.11                 53.43
5-8.01                 94.45
5-10.101               53.55
5-10.102               53.56
5-10.103               53.57
5-10.104               53.58
5-10.105               53.59
5-10.106               53.60
5-10.107               53.61
5-10.108               53.62
5-10.109               53.63
6-1.101 - 6-1.103      110.01
6-1.104                110.02
6-1.105                110.15
6-1.106                110.16
6-1.107                110.17
6-1.108                110.18
6-1.109                110.19
6-1.110                110.18
6-1.111                110.18
6-1.112                110.20
6-1.113                110.20
6-1.114                110.20
6-1.115                110.21
6-1.116                110.22
6-1.117                110.22
6-1.118                110.23
6-1.119                110.24
6-1.120                110.25
6-1.121                110.26
6-1.122                110.26
6-1.123                110.26
6-1.124                110.27
6-1.125                110.28
6-1.126                110.29
6-1.127                110.30
6-1.128                110.31
6-1.129                110.32
6-1.130                110.33
6-1.131                110.34
6-1.132                110.34
6-1.133                110.35
6-1.134                110.36
6-1.135                110.37
6-1.136                110.38
6-1.137                110.39
6-1.138                110.40
6-1.139                110.99
6-1.201                110.50
6-1.202                110.51
6-1.203                110.52
6-1.204                110.53
6-1.205                110.54
6-1.206                110.55
6-1.207                110.56
6-1.208                110.57
6-1.209                110.58
6-1.210                110.59
6-1.301                110.03
6-1.302                110.04
6-2.01                 112.01
6-2.02                 112.15
6-2.03                 112.16
6-2.04                 112.16
6-2.05                 112.16
6-2.06                 112.17
6-2.07                 112.17
6-2.08                 112.16
6-2.09                 112.18
6-2.10                 112.19
6-2.11                 112.19
6-2.12                 112.20
6-2.13                 112.21
6-2.14                 112.22
6-2.15                 112.23
6-2.16                 112.24
6-2.17                 112.25
6-2.18                 112.25
6-2.19                 112.25
6-2.20                 112.25
6-2.21                 112.25
6-2.22                 112.35
6-2.23                 112.36
6-2.24                 112.02
6-5.01                 113.30
6-5.02                 113.31
6-5.03                 113.31
6-5.04                 113.31
6-5.05                 113.31
6-5.06                 113.31
6-5.07                 113.31
6-5.08                 113.31
6-5.09                 113.32
6-5.10                 113.32
6-5.11                 113.32
6-5.12                 113.32
6-5.13                 113.33
6-5.14                 113.34
6-5.15                 113.35
6-5.16                 113.36
6-5.17                 113.37
6-8.01                 121.01
6-8.02                 121.02
6-8.03                 121.02
6-8.04                 121.03
6-8.05                 121.04
6-8.06                 121.05
6-8.07                 121.06
6-8.08                 121.06
6-8.09                 121.07
6-8.10                 121.07
6-8.11                 121.08
6-8.12                 121.09
6-8.13                 121.10
6-8.14                 121.11
6-8.15                 121.12
6-10.01                119.01
6-10.02                119.02
6-10.03                119.02
6-10.04                119.03
6-10.05                119.03
6-10.06                119.04
6-11.01                118.15
6-11.02                118.01
6-11.03                118.02
6-11.04                118.16
6-11.09                118.03
6-14.01                117.01
6-14.02                117.15
6-14.03                117.16
6-14.04                117.17
6-14.05                117.17
6-14.06                117.18
6-14.07                117.18
6-14.08                117.17
6-14.09                117.19
6-14.10                117.20
6-14.11                117.20
6-14.12                117.21
6-14.13                117.21
6-14.14                117.21
6-14.15                117.21
6-14.16                117.21
6-14.17                117.21
6-14.18                117.02
6-14.19                117.22
6-14.20                117.23
6-14.21                117.03
6-15.01                113.15
6-15.02                113.16
7-2.101                98.30
7-2.102                98.30
7-2.103                98.31
7-2.104                98.31
7-2.105                98.32
7-2.107                98.33
7-2.108                98.34
7-2.109                98.34
7-2.201                98.45
7-2.202                98.46
7-2.203                98.47
7-2.204                98.48
7-2.205                98.49
7-2.206                98.49
7-2.207                98.50
7-2.208                98.50
7-2.209                98.50
7-2.210                98.51
7-2.211                98.52
7-2.212                98.53
7-2.213                98.54
7-2.214                98.55
7-2.215                98.56
7-2.216                98.56
7-2.217                98.57
7-2.218                98.57
7-2.219                98.57
7-2.220                98.57
7-2.221                98.57
7-2.222                98.57
7-2.223                98.57
7-2.301                98.35
7-2.302                98.35
7-2.303                98.35
7-2.304                98.35
7-2.305                98.35
7-2.306                98.35
7-3.101                98.01
7-3.201                98.02
7-3.202                98.02
7-3.301                98.03
7-4.01                 98.70
7-4.02                 98.71
7-4.03                 98.72
7-4.04                 98.72
7-4.05                 98.73
7-4.06                 98.74
7-4.07                 98.74
7-4.08                 98.75
7-4.09                 98.76
7-5.01                 98.90
7-5.03                 98.91
7-5.04                 98.92
7-6.01                 52.01
7-6.02                 52.02
7-6.03                 52.02
7-6.04                 52.03
7-6.05                 52.04
7-6.06                 52.04
7-6.07                 52.05
7-6.08                 52.06
7-6.09                 52.06
7-6.10                 52.06
7-6.11                 52.07
8-1.01                 35.001
8-1.02                 35.002
8-1.03                 35.002
8-1.04                 35.002
8-1.05                 35.003
8-2.101                35.015
8-2.102                35.016
8-2.201                35.017
8-2.202                35.017
8-2.301                35.018
8-2.302                35.018
8-2.303                35.018
8-3.01                 35.030
8-3.02                 35.031
8-3.03                 35.032
8-3.04                 35.033
8-3.05                 35.034
8-3.06                 35.035
8-3.07                 35.036
8-4.01                 35.050
8-4.02                 35.051
8-4.03                 35.050
8-4.04                 35.052
8-4.05                 35.053
8-4.06                 35.054
8-4.07                 35.054
8-4.08                 35.055
8-4.09                 35.056
8-4.10                 35.056
8-4.11                 35.057
8-4.12                 35.058
8-4.13                 35.059
8-4.14                 35.060
8-4.15                 35.999
8-5.01                 35.070
8-5.02                 35.071
8-5.03                 35.072
8-5.04                 35.073
8-5.05                 35.074
8-5.06                 35.075
8-5.07                 35.076
8-5.08                 35.077
8-5.09                 35.078
8-5.10                 35.079
8-5.11                 35.080
8-5.12                 35.081
8-5.13                 35.082
8-5.14                 35.084
8-6.01                 35.095
8-6.02                 35.096
8-6.03                 35.096
8-6.09                 35.098
8-6.10                 35.099
8-7.01                 35.110
8-7.02                 35.111
8-7.03                 35.112
8-7.04                 35.113
8-7.05                 35.114
8-7.06                 35.115
8-7.07                 35.116
8-7.08                 35.117
8-7.09                 35.117
8-7.10                 35.118
8-7.11                 35.119
8-7.12                 35.120
9-1.101                150.015
9-4.01                 150.001
9-4.02                 150.001
9-4.03                 150.001
9-5.01                 150.002
9-5.02                 150.002
9-5.03                 150.002
9-7.101                150.065
9-7.102                150.066
9-7.103                150.067
9-7.104.1              150.068
9-7.104.2              150.068
9-7.104.3              150.068
9-7.104.4              150.068
9-7.105.1              150.069
9-7.105.2              150.069
9-7.107                150.071
9-7.108.1              150.072
9-7.108.2              150.072
9-7.108.3              150.072
9-7.108.4              150.072
9-7.108.5              150.072
9-7.109                150.073
9-7.110.1              150.074
9-7.110.2              150.074
9-7.111                150.075
10-1.01                151.01
10-1.02                151.02
10-1.03                151.03
10-1.04                151.04
10-1.05                151.05
10-1.06                151.06
10-1.07                151.07
10-1.08                151.08
10-1.09                151.09
10-1.10                151.10
10-1.11                151.11
10-1.12                151.12
10-2.01                152.01
10-2.02                152.01
10-4.101               154.001
10-4.102               154.002
10-4.103               154.003
10-4.104               154.004
10-4.105               154.005
10-4.201               154.006
10-4.202.1             154.007
10-4.202.2             154.007
10-4.202.3             154.007
10-4.202.4             154.007
10-4.202.5             154.007
10-4.202.6             154.007
10-4.202.7             154.007
10-4.202.8             154.007
10-4.301               154.020
10-4.302               154.021
10-4.303               154.021
10-4.304               154.022
10-4.401               154.035
10-4.402.1             154.036
10-4.402.2             154.037
10-4.402.3             154.038
10-4.402.4             154.039
10-4.402.5             154.039
10-4.402.6             154.040
10-4.402.7             154.041
10-4.402.8             154.042
10-4.402.9             154.043
10-4.402.10            154.044
10-4.403.1             154.045
10-4.403.2             154.046
10-4.403.3             154.047
10-4.403.4             154.047
10-4.403.5             154.048
10-4.5.501             154.085
10-4.5.502             154.086
10-4.5.503             154.087
10-4.5.504             154.088
10-4.5.505             154.089
10-4.5.506             154.090
10-4.5.507             154.091
10-4.5.508             154.092
10-4.5.509             154.093
10-4.501.1             154.060
10-4.501.2             154.060
10-4.501.3             154.061
10-4.501.4             154.061
10-4.501.5             154.062
10-4.501.6             154.063
10-4.501.7             154.064
10-4.501.9             154.065
10-4.501.8             154.065
10-4.501.10            154.066
10-4.501.11            154.067
10-4.501.12            154.068
10-4.502.1             154.069
10-4.502.2             154.070
10-4.502.3             154.071
10-4.502.4             154.071
10-4.502.5             154.072
10-4.502.9             154.072
10-4.502.8             154.072
10-4.502.7             154.072
10-4.502.6             154.072
10-4.502.10            154.073
10-4.601               154.105
10-4.602               154.106
10-4.603               154.107
10-4.604               154.108
10-4.605               154.109
10-4.701               154.120
10-4.702.1             154.121
10-4.702.2             154.122
10-4.702.3             154.123
10-4.702.4             154.124
10-4.702.5             154.125
10-4.702.6             154.126
10-4.702.7             154.127
10-4.801               154.140
10-4.802               154.141
10-4.803               154.142
10-4.804               154.143
10-4.805               154.144
10-4.807               154.145
10-4.808               154.146
10-4.809               154.147
10-4.810               154.147
10-4.811               154.148
10-4.812               154.149
10-4.901               154.160
10-4.902               154.161
10-4.903               154.162
10-4.904               154.163
10-4.905               154.164
10-4.906               154.165
10-4.1001              154.175
10-4.1002              154.176
10-4.1003              154.177
10-4.1004              154.178
10-4.1005              154.179
10-4.1101              154.205
10-4.1102              154.206
10-4.1103              154.207
10-4.1104              154.208
10-4.1201              154.190
10-4.1202              154.191
10-4.1203              154.192
10-4.1204              154.193
10-5.2901              156.001
10-5.2902              156.002
10-5.2903              156.003
10-5.2904              156.004
10-5.2905              156.005
10-5.2906              156.006
10-5.2907              156.008
10-5.2908              156.009
10-5.2909              156.010
10-5.2910              156.011
10-5.2911              156.012
10-5.2912              156.013
10-5.2913              156.014
10-5.2914              156.015
10-5.2915              156.016
10-5.2916              156.017
10-5.2917              156.018
10-5.2918              156.018
10-5.2919              156.019
10-5.2919.1            156.020
10-5.2919.2            156.030
10-5.2919.3            156.021
10-5.2920              156.031
10-5.2921              156.032
10-5.2922              156.033
10-5.2923              156.034
10-5.2925              156.035
10-5.2926              156.036
10-5.2927              156.037
10-5.2928              156.038
10-5.2929              156.039
10-5.2930              156.040
10-5.2940              156.050
10-5.2941              156.051
10-5.2942              156.052
10-5.2943              156.053
10-5.2944              156.054
10-5.2945              156.055
10-5.2946              156.056
10-5.2950              156.065
10-5.2951              156.065
10-5.2952              156.065
10-5.2953              156.065
10-5.2955              156.066
10-5.2956              156.066
10-5.2957              156.066
10-5.2958              156.066
10-5.2960              156.067
10-5.2961              156.067
10-5.2962              156.067
10-5.2963              156.067
10-5.2970              156.068
10-5.2971              156.068
10-5.2972              156.068
10-5.2973              156.068
10-5.2974              156.068
10-5.2975              156.068
10-5.2976              156.068
10-5.2977              156.068
10-5.2980              156.069
10-5.2981              156.069
10-5.2982              156.069
10-5.2983              156.069
10-5.2984              156.069
10-5.2985              156.069
10-5.2986              156.069
10-5.2987              156.069
10-5.2988              156.069
10-5.2990              156.070
10-5.2991              156.070
10-5.2992              156.070
10-5.2993              156.070
10-5.2994              156.070
10-5.2995              156.070
10-5.2996              156.070
10-5.29100             156.071
10-5.29101             156.071
10-5.29102             156.071
10-5.29103             156.071
10-5.29104             156.071
10-5.29105             156.071
10-5.29106             156.071
10-5.29107             156.071
10-5.29110             156.072
10-5.29113             156.072
10-5.29114             156.072
10-5.29115             156.072
10-5.29116             156.072
10-5.29117             156.072
10-5.29120             156.073
10-5.29121             156.073
10-5.29122             156.073
10-5.29123             156.073
10-5.29124             156.073
10-5.29125             156.073
10-5.29126             156.073
10-5.29127             156.073
10-5.29130             156.074
10-5.29131             156.074
10-5.29132             156.074
10-5.29133             156.074
10-5.29134             156.074
10-5.29135             156.074
10-5.29136             156.074
10-5.29137             156.074
10-5.29140             156.075
10-5.29141             156.075
10-5.29142             156.075
10-5.29143             156.075
10-5.29144             156.075
10-5.29145             156.075
10-5.29146             156.075
10-5.29147             156.075
10-5.29150             156.076
10-5.29151             156.076
10-5.29152             156.076
10-5.29153             156.076
10-5.29154             156.076
10-5.29155             156.076
10-5.29156             156.076
10-5.29157             156.076
10-5.29160             156.077
10-5.29161             156.077
10-5.29162             156.077
10-5.29163             156.077
10-5.29164             156.077
10-5.29165             156.077
10-5.29166             156.077
10-5.29167             156.077
10-5.29170             156.078
10-5.29172             156.078
10-5.29173             156.078
10-5.29174             156.078
10-5.29175             156.078
10-5.29176             156.078
10-5.29177             156.078
10-5.29180             156.079
10-5.29181             156.079
10-5.29182             156.079
10-5.29184             156.079
10-5.29185             156.079
10-5.29186             156.079
10-5.29187             156.079
10-5.29188             156.080
10-5.29190             156.081
10-5.29191             156.081
10-5.29192             156.081
10-5.29193             156.081
10-5.29194             156.081
10-5.29195             156.081
10-5.29196             156.081
10-5.29197             156.081
10-5.29198             156.081
10-5.29200             156.082
10-5.29201             156.082
10-5.29202             156.082
10-5.29203             156.082
10-5.29204             156.082
10-5.29205             156.082
10-5.29206             156.082
10-5.29207             156.082
10-5.29208             156.082
10-5.2921.1            156.032
10-5.29300             156.095
10-5.29302             156.096
10-5.29303             156.097
10-5.29304             156.097
10-5.29304.1           156.098
10-5.29304.2           156.098
10-5.29304.3           156.099
10-5.29304.4           156.099
10-5.29304.5           156.099
10-5.29304.6           156.100
10-5.29305             156.101
10-5.29306             156.102
10-5.29307             156.103
10-5.29308             156.104
10-5.29310             156.106
10-5.29310.1           156.107
10-5.29310.2           156.108
10-5.29311             156.109
10-5.29312             156.110
10-5.29313             156.111
10-5.29314             156.112
10-5.29315             156.113
10-5.29317             156.114
10-5.29318             156.115
10-5.29319             156.116
10-5.29400             156.007
10-6.101               152.15
10-6.102               152.16
10-6.103               152.17
10-6.104               152.18
11-1.201               100.01
11-1.202               100.03
11-1.301               100.04
11-1.302               100.05
11-1.303               100.06
11-1.304               100.07
11-1.305               100.08
11-1.306               100.08
11-1.307               100.09
11-1.308               100.10
11-1.309               100.11
11-1.310               100.12
11-1.311               100.13
11-1.312               100.13
11-1.313               100.14
11-1.314               100.15
11-1.315               100.16
11-1.316               100.17
11-1.317               100.17
11-1.401               100.18
11-1.402               100.18
11-1.403               100.18
11-1.404               100.18
11-1.405               100.18
11-1.406               100.18
11-1.407               100.18
11-1.501               100.19
11-1.502               100.19
11-1.503               100.19
11-1.504               100.19
11-1.505               100.19
11-1.601               100.99
11-2.01                93.25
11-2.02                93.26
11-2.03                93.27
11-4.01                93.01
11-4.02                93.01
11-5.01                93.05
11-6.01                93.51
11-6.02                93.51
11-6.03                93.52
11-6.04                93.55
11-6.05                93.50
11-6.06                93.56
11-6.07                93.54
11-6.08                93.57
11-6.09                93.57
11-6.10                93.53
11-6.11                93.58
11-7.01                95.01
11-7.02                95.02
11-7.03                95.03
11-7.04                95.04
11-7.05                95.15
11-7.06                95.16
11-7.07                95.17
11-7.08                95.18
11-7.09                95.19
11-7.10                95.20
11-7.11                95.21
11-7.12                95.22
11-7.13                95.23
11-7.14                95.24
11-7.15                95.25
11-7.16                95.26
11-7.17                95.27
11-7.18                95.27
11-7.19                95.28
11-7.20                95.29
11-7.21                95.30
11-7.22                95.31
11-7.23                95.32
11-7.24                95.33
11-7.25                95.34
11-7.26                95.35
11-7.27                95.36
11-7.28                95.37
11-8.101               93.04
11-8.103               93.04
Title 8, Exhibits A, B 35.999
                       
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
5        - -         T.S.O.
6        - -         T.S.O.
7        - -         T.S.O.
9        - -         T.S.O.
10       - -         T.S.O.
14       - -         T.S.O.
19       - -         T.S.O.
27       - -         T.S.O.
29       - -         T.S.O.
35       - -         T.S.O.
42       - -         T.S.O.
45       - -         T.S.O.
47       - -         T.S.O.
52       - -         T.S.O.
72       - -         T.S.O.
82       - -         T.S.O.
88       4-7-1885    T.S.O.
89       - -         T.S.O.
91       - -         T.S.O.
96       - -         T.S.O.
97       - -         T.S.O.
107      - -         T.S.O.
111      - -         T.S.O.
118      - -         T.S.O.
120      - -         T.S.O.
124      - -         T.S.O.
134      - -         T.S.O.
135      - -         T.S.O.
141      - -         T.S.O.
145      - -         T.S.O.
156      - -         T.S.O.
157      - -         T.S.O.
167      - -         T.S.O.
170      - -         T.S.O.
177      - -         T.S.O.
181      - -         T.S.O.
184      - -         T.S.O.
188      - -         T.S.O.
189      - -         T.S.O.
192      - -         T.S.O.
195      - -         T.S.O.
202      - -         T.S.O.
207      - -         98.03
208      - -         94.35
213      - -         T.S.O.
214      - -         T.S.O.
215      - -         93.05
220      - -         150.002
224      - -         130.01,
                     130.03
225      - -         T.S.O.
235      - -         T.S.O.
242      - -         T.S.O.
244      - -         T.S.O.
245      - -         T.S.O.
249      - -         T.S.O.
255      - -         T.S.O.
257      - -         T.S.O.
261      - -         T.S.O.
263      - -         T.S.O.
266      - -         T.S.O.
276      - -         T.S.O.
283      - -         T.S.O.
288      - -         T.S.O.
289      - -         T.S.O.
290      - -         T.S.O.
291      - -         T.S.O.
293      - -         T.S.O.
298      - -         T.S.O.
305      - -         T.S.O.
306      - -         T.S.O.
309      - -         T.S.O.
310      - -         T.S.O.
312      - -         T.S.O.
317      - -         130.01
318      - -         T.S.O.
321      - -         T.S.O.
325      - -         T.S.O.
334      - -         T.S.O.
344      - -         T.S.O.
345      - -         T.S.O.
347      - -         T.S.O.
350      - -         T.S.O.
352      - -         T.S.O.
353      - -         T.S.O.
354      - -         T.S.O.
355      - -         T.S.O.
359      - -         T.S.O.
362      - -         T.S.O.
363      - -         T.S.O.
364      - -         T.S.O.
365      - -         T.S.O.
367      - -         T.S.O.
368      - -         T.S.O.
374      - -         T.S.O.
377      - -         T.S.O.
378      - -         T.S.O.
386      - -         T.S.O.
387      - -         T.S.O.
390      - -         T.S.O.
392      - -         T.S.O.
393      - -         T.S.O.
394      - -         T.S.O.
400      - -         T.S.O.
404      - -         T.S.O.
405      - -         T.S.O.
413      - -         T.S.O.
414      - -         T.S.O.
415      - -         T.S.O.
422      - -         T.S.O.
424      - -         T.S.O.
425      - -         T.S.O.
426      - -         T.S.O.
429      - -         T.S.O.
430      - -         T.S.O.
431      - -         T.S.O.
434      - -         T.S.O.
437      - -         T.S.O.
438      - -         T.S.O.
441      - -         T.S.O.
443      - -         T.S.O.
444      - -         T.S.O.
445      - -         T.S.O.
446      - -         T.S.O.
448      - -         T.S.O.
449      - -         T.S.O.
452      - -         T.S.O.
453      - -         T.S.O.
454      - -         T.S.O.
455      - -         T.S.O.
457      - -         T.S.O.
460      - -         T.S.O.
461      - -         T.S.O.
462      - -         T.S.O.
465      - -         T.S.O.
466      - -         T.S.O.
472      - -         T.S.O.
479      - -         T.S.O.
487      - -         T.S.O.
488      - -         T.S.O.
489      - -         T.S.O.
492      - -         T.S.O.
493      - -         T.S.O.
498      - -         T.S.O.
499      - -         T.S.O.
506      - -         T.S.O.
508      - -         T.S.O.
512      - -         T.S.O.
515      - -         T.S.O.
516      - -         T.S.O.
520      - -         T.S.O.
521      - -         T.S.O.
523      - -         T.S.O.
531      - -         T.S.O.
536      - -         T.S.O.
539      - -         T.S.O.
543      - -         T.S.O.
549      5-3-10      T.S.O.
557      - -         T.S.O.
560      - -         T.S.O.
565      - -         T.S.O.
566      1-11-11     T.S.O.
575      - -         T.S.O.
576      - -         T.S.O.
577      - -         T.S.O.
578      - -         T.S.O.
579      - -         T.S.O.
580      - -         T.S.O.
588      - -         T.S.O.
590      - -         T.S.O.
592      - -         T.S.O.
593      - -         T.S.O.
594      - -         T.S.O.
595      - -         T.S.O.
598      - -         T.S.O.
599      - -         T.S.O.
600      - -         T.S.O.
603      - -         T.S.O.
605      - -         T.S.O.
607      - -         T.S.O.
608      - -         T.S.O.
609      - -         T.S.O.
610      - -         T.S.O.
611      - -         T.S.O.
614      - -         T.S.O.
615      - -         T.S.O.
617      - -         T.S.O.
619      - -         T.S.O.
620      - -         T.S.O.
621      - -         T.S.O.
624      - -         T.S.O.
626      - -         T.S.O.
631      - -         T.S.O.
633      - -         T.S.O.
634      - -         T.S.O.
635      - -         T.S.O.
636      - -         T.S.O.
638      - -         T.S.O.
639      - -         T.S.O.
640      - -         T.S.O.
641      - -         T.S.O.
644      - -         T.S.O.
645      - -         T.S.O.
646      - -         T.S.O.
648      - -         T.S.O.
651      - -         T.S.O.
652      - -         T.S.O.
654      - -         T.S.O.
655      - -         T.S.O.
656      - -         T.S.O.
657      - -         T.S.O.
659      - -         T.S.O.
660      - -         T.S.O.
661      - -         T.S.O.
662      - -         T.S.O.
663      - -         T.S.O.
664      - -         T.S.O.
668      - -         T.S.O.
669      - -         T.S.O.
672      - -         T.S.O.
673      - -         T.S.O.
674      - -         T.S.O.
676      - -         T.S.O.
678      - -         T.S.O.
680      - -         T.S.O.
682      - -         T.S.O.
684      - -         T.S.O.
685      - -         T.S.O.
688      - -         T.S.O.
689      - -         T.S.O.
691      - -         T.S.O.
692      - -         T.S.O.
693      - -         T.S.O.
695      - -         T.S.O.
696      - -         T.S.O.
698      - -         T.S.O.
699      - -         T.S.O.
702      - -         T.S.O.
703      - -         T.S.O.
706      - -         T.S.O.
707      - -         T.S.O.
709      - -         T.S.O.
710      - -         T.S.O.
711      - -         T.S.O.
714      - -         T.S.O.
715      - -         T.S.O.
717      - -         T.S.O.
718      - -         T.S.O.
721      - -         T.S.O.
726      - -         T.S.O.
727      - -         T.S.O.
729      - -         T.S.O.
732      - -         T.S.O.
733      - -         T.S.O.
734      - -         T.S.O.
740      - -         T.S.O.
744      - -         T.S.O.
748      - -         T.S.O.
752      - -         T.S.O.
754      - -         T.S.O.
755      - -         T.S.O.
773      - -         T.S.O.
785      - -         T.S.O.
786      - -         T.S.O.
787      - -         T.S.O.
788      - -         T.S.O.
789      - -         T.S.O.
793      - -         98.02
795      - -         T.S.O.
797      - -         T.S.O.
800      - -         T.S.O.
809      - -         T.S.O.
824      - -         98.02
828      - -         T.S.O.
829      - -         T.S.O.
830      - -         T.S.O.
831      - -         T.S.O.
832      - -         T.S.O.
837      - -         T.S.O.
838      - -         T.S.O.
841      - -         T.S.O.
842      - -         T.S.O.
848      - -         T.S.O.
849      - -         T.S.O.
850      - -         T.S.O.
851      - -         T.S.O.
852      - -         T.S.O.
853      - -         T.S.O.
854      - -         T.S.O.
855      - -         T.S.O.
862      - -         T.S.O.
863      - -         T.S.O.
864      - -         T.S.O.
865      - -         T.S.O.
872      - -         T.S.O.
873      - -         T.S.O.
874      - -         T.S.O.
875      - -         T.S.O.
876      - -         T.S.O.
878      - -         T.S.O.
879      - -         T.S.O.
880      - -         T.S.O.
884      - -         T.S.O.
885      - -         T.S.O.
886      - -         T.S.O.
887      - -         T.S.O.
888      - -         T.S.O.
889      - -         T.S.O.
892      - -         T.S.O.
893      - -         T.S.O.
900      - -         T.S.O.
901      - -         T.S.O.
904      - -         T.S.O.
905      - -         T.S.O.
906      - -         T.S.O.
907      - -         T.S.O.
908      - -         T.S.O.
909      - -         T.S.O.
912      - -         T.S.O.
914      - -         T.S.O.
923      - -         T.S.O.
928      - -         T.S.O.
929      - -         T.S.O.
934      - -         T.S.O.
937      - -         T.S.O.
938      - -         T.S.O.
939      - -         T.S.O.
940      - -         T.S.O.
941      - -         T.S.O.
955      - -         T.S.O.
956      - -         T.S.O.
957      - -         T.S.O.
958      - -         T.S.O.
961      - -         T.S.O.
963      - -         T.S.O.
965      - -         T.S.O.
967      - -         T.S.O.
968      - -         T.S.O.
970      - -         T.S.O.
981      - -         T.S.O.
996      - -         T.S.O.
997      - -         T.S.O.
998      - -         T.S.O.
1001     - -         T.S.O.
1002     - -         T.S.O.
1008     - -         98.01
1016     - -         T.S.O.
1034     - -         T.S.O.
1044     - -         T.S.O.
1047     - -         T.S.O.
1048     - -         T.S.O.
1050     - -         T.S.O.
1057     - -         T.S.O.
1087     - -         T.S.O.
1090     - -         T.S.O.
1097     - -         T.S.O.
2012     - -         T.S.O.
2019     - -         T.S.O.
2021     - -         T.S.O.
2030     - -         T.S.O.
2033     - -         T.S.O.
2036     - -         T.S.O.
2037     - -         T.S.O.
2045     - -         T.S.O.
2047     - -         T.S.O.
2048     - -         T.S.O.
2049     - -         35.018
2051     - -         T.S.O.
2057     - -         T.S.O.
2070     - -         T.S.O.
2071     - -         T.S.O.
2075     - -         T.S.O.
2076     - -         T.S.O.
2078     - -         T.S.O.
2079     - -         T.S.O.
2085     - -         T.S.O.
2092     - -         T.S.O.
2093     - -         119.01 -
                     119.04
2095     - -         T.S.O.
2100     - -         T.S.O.
2103     - -         T.S.O.
2114     - -         T.S.O.
2121     - -         T.S.O.
2124     - -         73.02 -
                     73.05
2125     - -         T.S.O.
2126     - -         T.S.O.
2140     - -         T.S.O.
2146     - -         35.001 -
                     35.003
2149     - -         T.S.O.
2152     - -         T.S.O.
2162     - -         T.S.O.
2164     - -         T.S.O.
2168     - -         T.S.O.
2169     - -         35.003
2174     - -         T.S.O.
2178     - -         T.S.O.
2179     - -         T.S.O.
2180     - -         T.S.O.
2181     - -         T.S.O.
2182     - -         T.S.O.
2183     - -         T.S.O.
2184     - -         T.S.O.
2185     - -         T.S.O.
2186     - -         T.S.O.
2187     - -         T.S.O.
2192     - -         T.S.O.
2193     - -         T.S.O.
2194     - -         T.S.O.
2195     - -         T.S.O.
2200     - -         T.S.O.
2201     - -         T.S.O.
2202     - -         T.S.O.
2207     - -         T.S.O.
2208     - -         T.S.O.
2209     - -         T.S.O.
2214     - -         T.S.O.
2216     - -         T.S.O.
2217     - -         T.S.O.
2218     - -         T.S.O.
2220     - -         31.01
2226     - -         T.S.O.
2242     - -         T.S.O.
2243     - -         T.S.O.
2250     - -         T.S.O.
2251     - -         T.S.O.
2256     - -         T.S.O.
2257     - -         T.S.O.
2267     - -         T.S.O.
2268     - -         T.S.O.
2270     - -         T.S.O.
2271     - -         T.S.O.
2279     - -         T.S.O.
2290     - -         T.S.O.
2301     - -         T.S.O.
2310     - -         T.S.O.
2311     - -         T.S.O.
2312     - -         T.S.O.
2315     - -         T.S.O.
2316     - -         T.S.O.
2319     - -         T.S.O.
2331     - -         T.S.O.
2334     - -         T.S.O.
2336     - -         150.002
2337     - -         T.S.O.
2343     - -         T.S.O.
2344     - -         T.S.O.
2345     - -         T.S.O.
2349     - -         35.017
2351     - -         150.001
2354     - -         T.S.O.
2355     - -         T.S.O.
2356     - -         T.S.O.
2358     - -         T.S.O.
2359     - -         T.S.O.
2372     - -         113.50
2373     - -         T.S.O.
2374     - -         T.S.O.
2376     - -         T.S.O.
2378     5-2-47      T.S.O.
2379     5-7-47      T.S.O.
2381     5-6-47      T.S.O.
2384     5-7-47      T.S.O.
2386     5-12-47     T.S.O.
2387     5-15-47     T.S.O.
2390     5-27-47     T.S.O.
2392     6-24-47     T.S.O.
2396     9-16-47     T.S.O.
2397     10-7-47     T.S.O.
2403     11-5-47     130.01
2409     1-20-48     T.S.O.
2410     2-3-48      T.S.O.
2413     2-17-48     100.01,
                     100.03
2416     3-16-48     100.03
2419     3-16-48     93.03
2423     5-4-48      T.S.O.
2428     5-18-48     150.001
2432     8-3-48      T.S.O.
2435     9-14-48     T.S.O.
2436     9-14-48     T.S.O.
2437     9-14-48     T.S.O.
2438     9-14-48     T.S.O.
2439     9-14-48     T.S.O.
2440     9-14-48     T.S.O.
2442     9-21-48     T.S.O.
2443     10-19-48    T.S.O.
2444     10-19-48    T.S.O.
2445     10-19-48    T.S.O.
2447     11-19-48    96.01 -
                     96.05
2449     12-7-48     150.002
2450     1-4-49      T.S.O.
2454     2-1-49      T.S.O.
2455     2-15-49     T.S.O.
2459     4-5-49      T.S.O.
2460     4-5-49      T.S.O.
2462     4-26-49     T.S.O.
2463     4-27-49     T.S.O.
2464     5-3-49      T.S.O.
2469     5-17-49     T.S.O.
2470     5-17-49     T.S.O.
2476     8-24-49     T.S.O.
2477     8-24-49     T.S.O.
2478     9-6-49      T.S.O.
2480     12-7-49     T.S.O.
2481     12-7-49     T.S.O.
2482     1-17-50     T.S.O.
2484     2-7-50      T.S.O.
2485     2-7-50      T.S.O.
2491     8-15-50     T.S.O.
2492     8-15-50     T.S.O.
2493     8-15-50     T.S.O.
2505     5-1-51      T.S.O.
2506     5-1-51      T.S.O.
2507     5-1-51      T.S.O.
2508     5-1-51      T.S.O.
2509     5-1-51      T.S.O.
2510     5-15-51     T.S.O.
2511     5-15-51     T.S.O.
2514     5-22-51     T.S.O.
2515     5-22-51     T.S.O.
2519     7-31-51     T.S.O.
2520     7-31-51     T.S.O.
2521     8-2-51      T.S.O.
2525     10-2-51     T.S.O.
2531     11-27-51    T.S.O.
2535     12-19-51    T.S.O.
2538     3-4-52      T.S.O.
2539     3-19-52      
2540     3-19-52     T.S.O.
2542     4-5-52      T.S.O.
2544     5-6-52      T.S.O.
2549     9-16-52     T.S.O.
2550     9-16-52     T.S.O.
2551     9-16-52     T.S.O.
2553     10-22-52    T.S.O.
2555     11-18-52    T.S.O.
2558     12-16-52    T.S.O.
2559     1-6-53      T.S.O.
2562     1-21-53     T.S.O.
2563     1-21-53     T.S.O.
2564     2-17-53     T.S.O.
2565     2-17-53     T.S.O.
2566     3-17-53     T.S.O.
2567     4-7-53      T.S.O.
2568     4-8-53      T.S.O.
2570     4-21-53     T.S.O.
2578     6-2-53      T.S.O.
2579     6-2-53      T.S.O.
2580     6-4-53      T.S.O.
2582     7-7-53      T.S.O.
2585     8-4-53      T.S.O.
2587     10-6-53     T.S.O.
2588     10-27-53    T.S.O.
2589     10-27-53    T.S.O.
2593     12-15-53    T.S.O.
2594     12-16-53    T.S.O.
2595     12-16-53    T.S.O.
2596     12-16-53    T.S.O.
2598     1-19-54     T.S.O.
2601     4-6-54      T.S.O.
2602     4-20-54     T.S.O.
2605     5-4-54      T.S.O.
2609     5-27-54     T.S.O.
2610     6-18-54     T.S.O.
2613     7-1-54      T.S.O.
2614     7-1-54      T.S.O.
2615     7-1-54      T.S.O.
2616     7-20-54     T.S.O.
2617     9-8-54      T.S.O.
2618     9-8-54      T.S.O.
2619     9-8-54      T.S.O.
2621     9-7-54      T.S.O.
2623     9-27-54     T.S.O.
2625     12-7-54     T.S.O.
2627     4-5-55      T.S.O.
2628     4-19-55     T.S.O.
2629     5-3-55      T.S.O.
2630     5-3-55      T.S.O.
2631     5-3-55      T.S.O.
2635     5-18-55     T.S.O.
2636     6-7-55      T.S.O.
2637     6-7-55      T.S.O.
2638     6-7-55      T.S.O.
2641     9-8-55      T.S.O.
2642     10-18-55    T.S.O.
2643     10-18-55    T.S.O.
2644     10-19-55    T.S.O.
2645     2-14-56     T.S.O.
2646     2-21-56     T.S.O.
2649     3-20-56     T.S.O.
2650     4-3-56      T.S.O.
2658     6-12-56     T.S.O.
2659     6-12-56     T.S.O.
2660     6-19-56     151.01 -
                     151.12
2663     7-26-56     T.S.O.
2664     8-29-56     T.S.O.
2665     8-29-56     T.S.O.
2666     8-29-56     T.S.O.
2668     9-11-56     T.S.O.
2670     10-16-56    T.S.O.
2671     10-24-56    T.S.O.
2673     10-24-56    133.01 -
                     133.05
2674     11-7-56     T.S.O.
2677     11-7-56     T.S.O.
2678     11-14-56    T.S.O.
2679     11-14-56    T.S.O.
2680     11-14-56    T.S.O.
2681     11-20-56    133.01,
                     133.06
2682     12-5-56     T.S.O.
2683     12-18-56    T.S.O.
2685     1-15-57     T.S.O.
2688     2-20-57     T.S.O.
2689     2-20-57     T.S.O.
2690     2-20-57     T.S.O.
2692     3-20-57     T.S.O.
2695     3-29-57     T.S.O.
2696     4-2-57      T.S.O.
2698     5-6-57      T.S.O.
2699     5-7-57      T.S.O.
2700     5-7-57      T.S.O.
2704     5-21-57     T.S.O.
2705     5-21-57     T.S.O.
2706     6-3-57      T.S.O.
2707     6-4-57      T.S.O.
2708     8-6-57      T.S.O.
2709     8-6-57      T.S.O.
2710     8-20-57     T.S.O.
2711     8-20-57     T.S.O.
2712     9-17-57     T.S.O.
2713     9-17-57     T.S.O.
2714     9-17-57     T.S.O.
2715     9-17-57     T.S.O.
2717     10-1-57     T.S.O.
2718     10-15-57    T.S.O.
2720     11-5-57     T.S.O.
2721     11-5-57     T.S.O.
2724     11-21-57    T.S.O.
2728     12-6-57     T.S.O.
2729     12-6-57     T.S.O.
2730     12-6-57     T.S.O.
2731     12-6-57     T.S.O.
2733     12-17-57    T.S.O.
2740     2-18-58     93.51,
                     93.52
2741     2-18-58     T.S.O.
2743     3-4-58      T.S.O.
2745     - -         115.01 -
                     115.04
2746     3-18-58     T.S.O.
2748     3-18-58     T.S.O.
2749     3-18-58     T.S.O.
2751     4-1-58      T.S.O.
2752     4-18-58     T.S.O.
2755     9-2-58      72.071
2757     5-19-58     T.S.O.
2758     5-20-58     T.S.O.
2759     5-26-58     T.S.O.
2760     6-4-58      T.S.O.
2761     6-9-58      T.S.O.
2762     6-17-58     T.S.O.
2763     6-17-58     T.S.O.
2764     6-17-58     T.S.O.
2765     6-17-58     T.S.O.
2768     6-23-58     T.S.O.
2769     6-23-58     T.S.O.
2770     7-1-58      T.S.O.
2773     7-15-58     T.S.O.
2777     8-19-58     T.S.O.
2778     9-16-58     T.S.O.
2779     10-7-58     T.S.O.
2780     10-7-58     T.S.O.
2781     10-7-58     T.S.O.
2783     11-18-58    T.S.O.
2784     11-18-58    T.S.O.
2785     12-2-58     T.S.O.
2786     12-16-58    T.S.O.
2787     1-16-59     T.S.O.
2789     2-17-59     T.S.O.
2790     2-17-59     T.S.O.
2791     3-3-59      T.S.O.
2793     4-7-59      T.S.O.
2796     5-19-59     T.S.O.
2797     5-22-59     T.S.O.
2799     5-22-59     T.S.O.
2801     6-2-59      T.S.O.
2803     6-24-59     T.S.O.
2805     7-7-59      T.S.O.
2808     7-7-59      T.S.O.
2809     7-7-59      T.S.O.
2813     9-1-59      T.S.O.
2814     9-1-59      T.S.O.
2818     11-18-59    T.S.O.
2819     11-18-59    T.S.O.
2822     11-18-59    71.55 -
                     71.59
2827     1-19-60     T.S.O.
2828     2-20-60     T.S.O.
2829     2-23-60     T.S.O.
2830     2-23-60     T.S.O.
2831     4-5-60      T.S.O.
                     30.01 -
2834     4-19-60     30.19,
                     30.99,
2838     5-17-60     T.S.O.
2841     6-28-60     T.S.O.
2842     6-28-60     T.S.O.
2847     9-7-60      T.S.O.
2848     9-20-60     T.S.O.
                     39.35 -
2849     10-4-60     39.37,
                     39.42
2853     12-6-60     113.30 -
                     113.37
2854     12-20-60    T.S.O.
2855     12-20-60    T.S.O.
2856     12-20-60    T.S.O.
                     112.01,
                     112.02,
2858     2-7-61      112.15 -
                     112.25,
                     112.35,
                     112.36
2860     3-7-61      T.S.O.
2862     3-21-61     T.S.O.
2863     6-1-61      T.S.O.
2864     6-1-61      T.S.O.
2865     6-6-61      30.19
2866     6-6-61      131.02
2867     6-6-61      72.050 -
                     72.059
2868     6-6-61      121.01 -
                     121.11
2872     6-20-61     T.S.O.
2874     7-18-61     93.01
2878     8-15-61     152.01
2879     8-15-61     T.S.O.
2880     9-5-61      93.25 -
                     93.27
2884     10-17-61    T.S.O.
                     72.050,
2886     11-21-61    72.053,
                     72.057,
                     72.059
2887     11-21-61    72.072 -
                     72.078
2892     12-19-61    T.S.O.
2893     12-19-61    T.S.O.
2894     12-19-61    T.S.O.
2896     1-2-62      T.S.O.
2898     2-6-62      T.S.O.
2899     2-20-62     T.S.O.
2900     2-20-62     T.S.O.
2901     2-20-62     T.S.O.
2902     2-20-62     T.S.O.
2903     2-20-62     T.S.O.
2908     4-17-62     98.70 -
                     98.76
2910     6-6-62      T.S.O.
2911     6-6-62      T.S.O.
2912     6-6-62      T.S.O.
2913     6-6-62      T.S.O.
2914     6-6-62      T.S.O.
2928     12-18-62    94.01 -
                     94.03
                     70.01 -
                     70.06,
                     70.15 -
                     70.21,
                     70.35 -
                     70.41,
                     71.01 -
                     71.16,
                     71.25,
                     71.26,
                     71.40 -
                     71.42,
2930     4-17-63     71.70 -
                     71.73,
                     71.85,
                     71.86,
                     72.001 -
                     72.011,
                     72.025 -
                     72.028,
                     72.030 -
                     72.035 ,
                     72.095 -
                     72.104,
                     Ch. 74, Schs. I,
                     II
2931     6-11-63     T.S.O.
2933     6-18-63     T.S.O.
2934     6-18-63     T.S.O.
                     34.30,
2936     8-9-63      34.33 -
                     34.42,
                     34.44
3-C.S.   9-20-63     31.03
6-C.S.   12-3-63     T.S.O.
7-C.S.   12-3-63     T.S.O.
10-C.S.  1-7-64      T.S.O.
9-C.S.   1-17-64     72.051
11-C.S.  3-6-64      72.079,
                     72.080
13-C.S.  3-17-64     113.35
17-C.S.  5-26-64     T.S.O.
18-C.S.  5-26-64     T.S.O.
19-C.S.  8-6-64      34.38
24-C.S.  9-1-64      T.S.O.
22-C.S.  9-17-64     T.S.O.
23-C.S.  9-17-64     T.S.O.
26-C.S.  10-20-64    T.S.O.
27-C.S.  10-20-64    T.S.O.
30-C.S.  1-3-65      35.075
31-C.S.  1-7-65      T.S.O.
32-C.S.  1-7-65      T.S.O.
                     35.070 -
                     35.074,
30-C.S.  1-30-65     35.076 -
                     35.082,
                     35.084
                     70.05,
                     70.15,
34-C.S.  4-3-65      70.41,
                     71.25,
                     71.40
40-C.S.  4-7-65      T.S.O.
41-C.S.  4-7-65      T.S.O.
42-C.S.  4-7-65      T.S.O.
43-C.S.  4-7-65      T.S.O.
44-C.S.  4-27-65     T.S.O.
48-C.S.  5-19-65     T.S.O.
49-C.S.  5-19-65     T.S.O.
51-C.S.  6-17-65     T.S.O.
52-C.S.  6-17-65     T.S.O.
53-C.S.  6-17-65     T.S.O.
55-C.5.  8-4-65      T.S.O.
57-C.S.  8-18-65     T.S.O.
58-C.S.  8-18-65     T.S.O.
60-C.S.  11-5-65     35.073
63-C.S.  12-2-65     35.030 -
                     35.036
                     94.15,
66-C.S.  1-21-66     94.16,
                     94.18 -
                     94.24
67-C.S.  1-21-66     98.45 -
                     98.57
70-C.S.  4-5-66      T.S.O.
71-C.S.  4-5-66      T.S.O.
72-C.S.  4-5-66      T.S.O.
73-C.S.  4-5-66      T.S.O.
86-C.S.  1-17-67     T.S.O.
84-C.S.  1-26-67     35.077
89-C.S.  3-10-67     30.01
                     35.095,
98-C.S.  1-1-68      35.096,
                     35.098,
                     35.099
106-C.S. 6-15-68     35.072
108-C.S. 7-16-68     T.S.O.
109-C.S. 9-6-68      93.55
113-C.S. 1-12-69     52.01 -
                     52.07
116-C.S. 3-7-69      34.38
132-C.S. 10-4-69     93.50
139-C.S. 2-17-70     T.S.O.
145-C.S. 6-30-70     T.S.O.
                     53.01 -
140-C.S. 7-1-70      53.20,
                     53.99
150-C.S. 9-4-70      93.56
149-C.S. 10-21-70    T.S.O.
156-C.S. 11-4-70     T.S.O.
133-C.S. 12-5-70     Ch. 74, Sch. I
159-C.S. 1-11-71     T.S.O.
162-C.S. 2-3-71      34.38
164-C.S. 3-12-71     T.S.O.
163-C.S. 4-2-71      112.15
176-C.S. 10-20-71    T.S.O.
175-C.S. 10-22-71    34.31
185-C.S. 4-18-72     T.S.O.
188-C.S. 7-19-72     T.S.O.
189-C.S. 8-31-72     34.38
193-C.S. 10-4-72     T.S.O.
198-C.S. 1-5-73      72.051
199-C.S. 1-5-73      113.31
203-C.S. 4-6-73      34.01 -
                     34.18
                     34.30,
204-C.S. 4-6-73      34.33,
                     34.40,
                     34.43
209-C.S. 5-2-73      T.S.O.
206-C.S. 5-19-73     53.21
210-C.S. 5-28-73     T.S.O.
212-C.S. 6-19-73     T.S.O.
                     117.01 -
211-C.S. 6-22-73     117.03,
                     117.15 -
                     117.23
224-C.S. 12-5-73     T.S.O.
222-C.S. 12-21-73    98.90 -
                     98.92
223-C.S. 1-4-74      Ch. 74, Sch. I
225-C.S. 1-18-74     72.096,
                     72.099
228-C.S. 6-21-74     98.30 -
                     98.34
230-C.S. 7-10-74     53.03 -
                     53.05
232-C.S. 7-26-74     121.02,
                     121.12
234-C.S. 8-16-74     35.072
236-C.S. 9-6-74      115.03
240-C.S. 12-6-74     52.02,
                     52.06
253-C.S. 5-29-75     T.S.O.
                     38.01 -
251-C.S. 7-4-75      38.08,
                     38.99
252-C.S. 7-4-75      30.01
258-C.S. 11-14-75    34.31
260-C.S. 11-18-75    T.S.O.
263-C.S. 6-4-76      53.05,
                     53.06
267-C.S. 10-6-76     T.S.O.
269-C.S. 1-21-77     53.18,
                     53.99
270-C.S. 2-4-77      34.38
271-C.S. 4-1-77      113.15,
                     113.16
                     53.35 -
274-C.S. 5-17-77     53.42,
                     53.44,
                     53.99
275-C.S. 5-17-77     93.57
273-C.S. 6-16-77     93.54
406-C.S. 6-19-77     Ch. 74, Sch. I
276-C.S. 8-19-77     Ch. 74, Sch. I
283-C.S. 10-4-77     T.S.O.
285-C.S. 11-1-77     T.S.O.
287-C.S. 12-16-77    Ch. 74, Sch. I
294-C.S. 9-14-78     72.058
296-C.S. 10-3-78     53.03
297-C.S. 10-17-78    34.31
298-C.S. 10-17-78    113.35
334-C.S. 11-7-78     30.20
303-C.S. 12-5-78     72.095
305-C.S. 2-20-79     T.S.O.
307-C.S. 3-6-79      93.57
311-C.S. 6-1-79      100.16
                     95.01 -
312-C.S. 6-5-79      95.04,
                     95.15 -
                     95.37
                     100.01,
                     100.03 -
                     100.05,
311-C.S. 6-19-79     100.08,
                     100.10 -
                     100.15,
                     100.17 -
                     100.19
314-C.S. 8-21-79     34.19
315-C.S. 9-18-79     72.058
317-C.S. 2-5-80      T.S.O.
                     36.01 -
                     36.06,
                     36.20 -
318-C.S. 2-5-80      36.28,
                     36.40 -
                     36.42,
                     36.44 -
                     36.48
323-C.S. 4-15-80     30.99
324-C.S. 6-4-80      72.100,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. II
                     39.15,
325-C.S. 6-17-80     39.17 -
                     39.19,
                     39.21
328-C.S. 9-16-80     71.56
329-C.S. 10-2-80     T.S.O.
331-C.S. 1-6-81      72.100,
                     Ch. 74, Sch. II
332-C.S. 2-3-81      93.53,
                     93.58
333-C.S. 2-17-81     T.S.O.
335-C.S. 2-17-81     34.20
                     100.01,
336-C.S. 3-18-81     100.03 -
                     100.19,
                     100.99
339-C.S. 5-5-81      T.S.O.
342-C.S. 6-16-81     T.S.O.
345-C.S. 8-4-81      133.06
349-C.S. 9-15-81     T.S.O.
                     92.02 -
350-C.S. 10-6-81     92.07,
                     92.99
351-C.S. 10-6-81     98.32
348-C.S. 10-16-81    T.S.O.
353-C.S. 11-3-81     39.37
347-C.S. 11-5-81     150.015
352-C.S. 11-20-81    T.S.O.
36-C.S.  12-1-81     53.05
416-C.S. 12-6-81     154.048
355-C.S. 1-1-82      T.S.O.
357-C.S. 1-5-82      98.35
358-C.S. 1-5-82      30.21
                     53.03,
359-C.S. 1-19-82     53.08,
                     53.10,
                     53.11
362-C.S. 5-18-82     10.99,
                     70.99
363-C.S. 5-18-82     93.57,
                     130.01
364-C.S. 5-18-82     96.01
323-C.S. 8-3-82      30.13
                     30.01,
                     30.04 -
                     30.06,
                     30.08,
                     30.09,
370-C.S. 8-3-82      30.11,
                     30.12,
                     30.15,
                     30.17 -
                     30.19,
                     30.99
367-C.S. 8-17-82     93.04
371-C.S. 9-2-82      35.072
                     33.085 -
                     33.089,
                     52.02,
                     52.04,
                     52.06,
                     53.01,
                     53.02,
                     53.18,
                     53.20,
                     93.01,
                     93.50,
375-C.S. 10-19-82    93.54 -
                     93.57,
                     98.30 -
                     98.32,
                     98.34,
                     98.35,
                     98.50,
                     98.55 -
                     98.57,
                     98.72 -
                     98.74,
                     98.76,
                     98.90
377-C.S. 11-16-82    T.S.O.
                     110.01 -
                     110.04,
                     110.15 -
378-C.S. 12-7-82     110.40,
                     110.50 -
                     110.59,
                     110.99
380-C.S. 3-15-83     130.01
380-C.S. 5-15-83     93.57
                     35.070 -
382-C.S. 5-17-83     35.082,
                     35.084
384-C.S. 5-17-83     35.030
383-C.S. 6-7-83      T.S.O.
385-C.S. 7-21-83     35.110 -
                     35.120
388-C.S. 9-20-83     100.06,
                     100.07
                     110.26,
392-C.S. 12-20-83    110.32,
                     110.34,
                     110.53
                     35.050 -
397-C.S. 12-20-83    35.060,
                     35.999
393-C.S. 1-3-84      T.S.O.
394-C.S. 1-3-84      T.S.O.
                     110.01,
                     118.01 -
395-C.S. 1-3-84      118.03,
                     118.15,
                     118.16
399-C.S. 3-6-84      T.S.O.
                     35.071,
400-C.S. 3-6-84      35.072,
                     35.074,
                     35.075
401-C.S. 3-20-84     T.S.O.
404-C.S. 5-15-84     T.S.O.
405-C.S. 5-15-84     T.S.O.
407-C.S. 7-3-84      T.S.O.
408-C.S. 7-3-84      T.S.O.
413-C.S. 8-7-84      T.S.O.
411-C.S. 8-21-84     150.015
412-C.S. 8-21-84     53.10
414-C.S. 10-2-84     35.015,
                     35.016
415-C.S. 11-6-84     T.S.O.
420-C.S. 12-4-84     T.S.O.
                     154.001 -
                     154.007,
                     154.020 -
                     154.022,
                     154.035 -
                     154.047,
                     154.060 -
                     154.073,
                     154.105 -
                     154.109,
416-C.S. 12-6-84     154.120 -
                     154.127,
                     154.140 -
                     154.149,
                     154.160 -
                     154.165,
                     154.175 -
                     154.179,
                     154.190 -
                     154.193,
                     154.205 -
                     154.208
                     156.001 -
                     156.012,
                     156.014 -
                     156.020,
                     156.031 -
                     156.040,
                     156.050 -
                     156.056,
417-C.S. 12-6-84     156.065 -
                     156.082,
                     156.095 -
                     156.097,
                     156.101 -
                     156.104,
                     156.106,
                     156.109 -
                     156.113
423-C.S. 1-2-85      T.S.O.
421-C.S. 2-1-85      93.56
419-C.S. 2-2-85      73.01,
                     73.06
426-C.S. 5-7-85      T.S.O.
431-C.S. 6-12-85     T.S.O.
429-C.S. 6-20-85     10.21
430-C.S. 7-4-85      94.45
432-C.S. 7-4-85      98.91,
                     98.92
433-C.S. 7-18-85     154.191
437-C.S. 10-17-85    31.02
434-C.S. 12-3-85     T.S.O.
440-C.S. 1-16-86     154.146
441-C.S. 1-16-86     154.042
445-C.S. 3-18-86     T.S.O.
444-C.S. 4-17-86     154.006,
                     154.146
449-C.S. 5-20-86     T.S.O.
446-C.S. 7-16-86     113.31
                     39.35 -
451-C.S. 9-15-86     39.37,
                     39.40,
                     39.42
454-C.S. 12-16-86    T.S.O.
455-C.S. 12-16-86    T.S.O.
456-C.S. 12-24-86    T.S.O.
457-C.S. 1-6-87      30.01
274-C.S. 5-17-87     53.43
462-C.S. 5-21-87     71.11
461-C.S. 6-2-87      T.S.O.
                     53.35 -
465-C.S. 12-31-87    53.44,
                     53.99
464-C.S. 1-14-88     152.15 -
                     152.18
468-C.S. 3-3-88      39.18
469-C.S. 5-5-88      53.55 -
                     53.63
471-C.S. 5-19-88     30.01
472-C.S. 6-23-88     T.S.O.
473-C.S. 6-23-88     T.S.O.
474-C.S. 6-23-88     T.S.O.
477-C.S. 10-20-88    118.01,
                     118.15
479-C.S. 11-3-88     150.015
467-C.S. 12-8-88     T.S.O.
482-C.S. 12-17-88    110.20
486-C.S. 12-20-88    T.S.O.
487-C.S. 12-20-88    T.S.O.
                     72.025 -
488-C.S. 1-19-89     72.028,
                     72.051
490-C.S. 3-11-89     121.05
489-C.S. 3-12-89     156.077
491-C.S. 3-21-89     T.S.O.
                     154.006,
492-C.S. 4-20-89     154.085 -
                     154.093
494-C.S. 4-20-89     53.06
496-C.S. 7-20-89     152.01
497-C.S. 7-20-89     92.01
499-C.S. 7-23-89     Ch. 74, Sch. I
498-C.S. 8-10-89     30.01
350-C.S. 10-6-89     92.01
505-C.S. 11-4-89     99.01,
                     99.02
                     150.065,
504-C.S. 11-21-89    150.066,
                     150.068 -
                     150.074
510-C.S. 12-19-89    T.S.O.
507-C.S. 2-1-90      30.01
                     156.006,
                     156.030,
                     156.033,
512-C.S. 3-8-90      156.034,
                     156.037 -
                     156.039,
                     156.071
511-C.S. 5-3-90      150.015
517-C.S. 7-3-90      T.S.O.
516-C.S. 7-19-90     92.01
                     156.006,
518-C.S. 8-26-90     156.068 -
                     156.071
                     156.006,
                     156.010 -
                     156.021,
                     156.030,
                     156.032,
                     156.051 -
                     156.056,
519-C.S. 8-26-90     156.069,
                     156.097 -
                     156.101,
                     156.104,
                     156.107 -
                     156.109,
                     156.112,
                     156.114 -
                     156.116
521-C.S. 11-8-90     T.S.O.
522-C.S. 11-20-90    T.S.O.
523-C.S. 2-14-91     73.06
                     156.006,
                     156.068 -
526-C.S. 6-20-91     156.070,
                     156.074,
                     156.077
528-C.S. 6-20-91     98.31,
                     98.32
532-C.S. 9-19-91     72.035
536-C.S. 12-17-91    T.S.O.
                     110.01,
                     110.24 -
                     110.26,
533-C.S. 12-21-91    110.50,
                     110.53 -
                     110.55,
                     110.59
534-C.S. 12-21-91    35.110,
                     35.117
540-C.S. 2-20-92     T.S.O.
541-C.S. 3-3-92      T.S.O.
                     90.01 -
                     90.03,
542-C.S. 4-2-92      90.15,
                     90.30 -
                     90.39,
                     90.99
545-C.S. 6-18-92     30.09
546-C.S. 7-2-92      35.072
547-C.S. 7-7-92      113.35
550-C.S. 9-1-92      T.S.O.
549-C.S. 9-3-92      150.015
551-C.S. 12-17-92    156.077
554-C.S. 5-8-93      94.15 -
                     94.25
555-C.S. 5-20-93     39.42
556-C.S. 8-19-93     39.15
560-C.S. 10-7-93     150.015
562-C.S. 10-12-93    T.S.O.
563-C.S. 10-12-93    T.S.O.
                     150.070,
564-C.S. 1-6-94      150.073,
                     150.075
567-C.S. 3-22-94     T.S.O.
568-C.S. 3-22-94     T.S.O.
569-C.S. 4-5-94      T.S.O.
                     50.001 -
                     50.006,
                     50.020 -
                     50.025,
                     50.035 -
                     50.039,
                     50.050 -
571-C.S. 6-2-94      50.059,
                     50.070 -
                     50.081,
                     50.090 -
                     50.093,
                     50.105 -
                     50.109,
                     50.120 -
                     50.127
572-C.S. 8-4-94      90.16
573-C.S. 8-4-94      93.02
575-C.S. 8-4-94      132.15 -
                     132.18
580-C.S. 10-20-94    30.15
582-C.S. 12-6-94     T.S.O.
583-C.S. 12-6-94     T.S.O.
584-C.S. 12-6-94     T.S.O.
586      2-7-95      150.999
586-C.S. 2-7-95      150.085 -
                     150.091
                     151.06,
587-C.S. 2-21-95     151.08,
                     151.10
                     154.006,
588-C.S. 2-21-95     154.106,
                     154.144
                     156.006,
                     156.013,
                     156.014,
                     156.016 -
589-C.S. 2-21-95     156.019,
                     156.021,
                     156.032,
                     156.040,
                     156.056
591-C.S. 5-22-95     T.S.O.
594-C.S. 8-15-95     T.S.O.
595-C.S. 8-15-95     150.105 -
                     150.122
597-C.S. 11-7-95     T.S.O.
599      11-7-95     130.04
600      11-7-95     130.05
601-C.S. 11-21-95    100.14
602-C.S. 12-5-95     130.07
598-C.S. 12-19-95    93.02
603-C.S. 1-16-96     150.015
604-C.S. 1-16-96     92.01,
                     92.02
605-C.S. 3-5-96      150.015
607-C.S. 3-19-96     157.01 -
                     157.08
                     150.067,
                     150.068,
                     150.074,
608-C.S. 6-18-96     150.108 -
                     150.110,
                     150.112,
                     150.116
                     34.02 -
                     34.08,
                     34.10,
                     34.11,
                     34.13,
                     34.18,
609-C.S. 9-3-96      34.19,
                     34.31,
                     34.33,
                     34.34,
                     34.37,
                     34.38,
                     34.40
611-C.S. 9-17-96     130.08,
                     130.99
613-C.S. 1-23-97     T.S.O.
614-C.S. 5-6-97      Adopting Ordinance
615-C.S. 5-20-97     130.05
616-C.S. 5-20-97     30.09
617-C.S. 6-3-97      150.015
620-C.S. 12-16-97    31.04
621-C.S. 11-25-97    156.083
622-C.S. 11-25-97    T.S.O.
623-C.S. 1-20-98     T.S.O.
624-C.S. 2-3-98      T.S.O.
626-C.S. 6-2-98      T.S.O.
627-C.S. 9-1-98      156.040
628-C.S. 3-2-99      155.181
629-C.S. 3-2-99      30.01
630-C.S. 6-15-99     150.015
                     156.006,
                     156.041,
631-C.S. 9-7-99      156.074,
                     156.077,
                     156.078
632-C.S. 11-2-99     40.01 -
                     40.03
633-C.S. 12-7-99     T.S.O.
                     113.31,
634-C.S. 11-10-99    113.32,
                     113.35
635-C.S. 9-17-00     122.01 -
                     122.13
636-C.S. 10-17-00    T.S.O.
637-C.S  12-19-00    T.S.O.
637-C.S. 11-21-00    113.32
638-C.S. 2-6-01      10.35 -
                     10.59
639-C.S. 2-6-01      131.10 -
                     131.25
640-C.S. 3-6-01      150.015
642-C.S. 4-3-01      T.S.O.
643-C.S. 6-5-01      T.S.O.
645-C.S. 6-19-01     T.S.O.
646-C.S. 8-21-01     156.083
647-C.S. 9-4-01      113.35
648-C.S. 9-18-01     122.07,
                     122.11
649-C.S. 10-2-01     T.S.O.
650-C.S. 11-20-01    T.S.O.
                     150.069,
                     150.070,
                     150.073,
651-C.S. 2-5-02      150.075,
                     150.076,
                     150.077,
                     150.078,
                     150.079
                     154.002,
                     154.007,
                     154.021,
652-C.S. 2-5-02      154.035,
                     154.038,
                     154.039,
                     154.061
653-C.S. 2-5-02      120.01 -
                     120.27
654-C.S. 12-7-01     T.S.O.
655-C.S. 12-7-01     T.S.O.
656-C.S. 6-4-02      T.S.O.
657-C.S. 6-4-02      T.S.O.
658-C.S. 6-4-02      T.S.O.
659-C.S. 6-18-02     T.S.O.
660-C.S. 6-18-02     152.16
661-C.S. 10-1-02     T.S.O.
662-C.S. 10-15-02    150.015
                     156.006,
663-C.S. 11-19-02    156.072 -
                     156.074
664-C.S. 1-7-03      157.02
666-C.S. 3-4-03      92.01,
                     92.02
667-C.S. 5-20-03     92.08 -
                     92.083
670-C.S. 7-1-03      101.01 -
                     101.05
671-C.S. 8-19-03     72.024
673-C.S. 11-18-03    96.02 -
                     96.06
674-C.S. 11-18-03    31.02
675-C.S. 1-7-04      T.S.O.
676-C.S. 2-24-04     156.108
677-C.S. 2-25-04     T.S.O.
                     114.01 -
                     114.22,
                     114.30 -
678-C.S. 4-20-04     114.38,
                     114.40 -
                     114.47,
                     114.50 -
                     114.56
679-C.S. 6-1-04      53.06
                     150.140 ,
                     150.141,
680-C.S. 6-17-04     150.143 -
                     150.146,
                     150.148 -
                     150.187
681-C.S. 7-6-04      50.122
682-C.S. 7-6-04      30.13
683-C.S. 10-20-04    T.S.O.
685-C.S. 2-2-05      150.015
686-C.S. 3-1-05      92.08,
                     92.082
687-C.S. 5-3-05      150.070
689-C.S. 5-3-05      31.02
690-C.S. 5-17-05     39.36,
                     39.40
692-C.S. 7-7-05      150.168
693-C.S. 7-19-05     130.07
694-C.S. 7-19-05     T.S.O.
695-C.S. 7-19-05     T.S.O.
696-C.S. 7-19-05     T.S.O.
697-C.S. 8-2-05      132.02
698-C.S. 8-2-05      T.S.O.
699-C.S. 8-16-05     150.015
700-C.S. 9-20-05     T.S.O.
701-C.S. 10-18-05    70.01,
                     71.11
702-C.S. 11-1-05     31.02
703-C.S. 12-20-05    T.S.O.
                     33.027,
                     33.115,
                     33.117,
704-C.S. 1-17-06     33.118,
                     33.130,
                     33.131,
                     100.02
                     54.020 -
                     54.022,
                     54.030 -
                     54.034,
705-C.S. 1-17-06     54.040 -
                     54.044,
                     54.050 -
                     54.055,
                     54.060 -
                     54.066
706-C.S. 2-21-06     T.S.O.
708-C.S. 9-19-06     T.S.O.
                     150.146,
                     150.153,
709-C.S. 3-6-07      150.154,
                     150.161,
                     150.162,
                     150.166
                     154.002,
                     154.003,
                     154.005,
                     154.006,
                     154.007,
                     154.021,
                     154.038,
                     154.040,
                     154.042 -
                     154.044,
                     154.046 -
                     154.048,
                     154.061,
                     154.064,
710-C.S. 3-20-07     154.065,
                     154.067,
                     154.068,
                     154.072,
                     154.073,
                     154.122 -
                     154.124,
                     154.140 -
                     154.142,
                     154.144 -
                     154.149,
                     154.165,
                     154.175,
                     154.177,
                     154.178,
                     154.192
712-C.S. 10-16-07    T.S.O.
713-C.S. 10-16-07    T.S.O.
714-C.S. 10-16-07    T.S.O.
715-C.S. 11-27-07    157.00 -
                     157.07
716-C.S. 11-27-07    T.S.O.
718-C.S. 12-20-07    113.32,
                     113.35 
719-C.S. 1-15-08     150.015 -
                     150.024
720-C.S. 1-15-08     92.01 -
                     92.06
722-C.S. 3-18-08     156.006,
                     156.076
                     98.70,
                     98.701,
723-C.S. 3-18-08     98.71,
                     98.73,
                     98.731
                     150.200 -
                     150.202,
                     150.203 -
724-C.S. 5-20-08     150.207,
                     150.209,
                     150.210,
                     150.212 -
                     150.218
                     53.08,
726-C.S. 6-3-08      53.11,
                     53.22
                     154.040,
727-C.S. 6-17-08     154.063,
                     157.05
729-C.S. 7-1-08      T.S.O.
733-C.S. 12-16-08    35.072
734-C.S. 12-16-08    35.160 -
                     35.173
735-C.S. 1-6-09      113.35
736-C.S. 2-3-09      150.025
                     50.002,
                     50.020,
                     50.022,
                     50.037 -
                     50.046,
                     50.050,
                     50.052,
737-C.S. 2-3-09      50.055,
                     50.058,
                     50.070,
                     50.078,
                     50.080,
                     50.092,
                     50.093,
                     50.122,
                     50.123
                     90.01,
739-C.S. 3-17-09     90.16,
                     90.17
740-C.S. 4-7-09      113.35
741-C.S. 5-19-09     30.01
                     53.36 -
742-C.S. 6-2-09      53.40,
                     53.43,
                     53.44
743-C.S. 9-1-09      50.107
744-C.S. 10-20-09    35.079
                     93.70 -
745-C.S. 11-17-09    93.74,
                     93.99
                     10.43,
746-C.S. 11-17-09    10.56,
                     10.57
752-C.S. 6-15-10     37.52,
                     37.53
753-C.S. 7-20-10     97.01 -
                     97.08
754-C.S. 8-3-10      157.006
                     156.006,
                     156.037,
                     156.068 -
                     156.080,
757-C.S. 10-19-10    159.001 -
                     159.006,
                     159.011 -
                     159.015,
                     159.021 -
                     159.028
760-C.S. 12-7-10     97.01,
                     97.02
761-C.S. 1-4-11      150.015 -
                     150.029
762-C.S. 1-4-11      114.57 -
                     114.64
763-C.S. 1-18-11     92.01 -
                     92.06
766-C.S. 3-1-11      35.082 -
                     35.084 
767-C.S. 4-19-11     153.001 -
                     153.028
                     156.068,
768-C.S. 5-3-11      156.074,
                     156.077,
                     156.078
774-C.S. 12-20-11    37.52,
                     37.53
                     50.001 -
                     50.007,
                     50.020 -
                     50.025,
                     50.035 -
                     50.046,
                     50.050 -
775-C.S. 12-20-11    50.059,
                     50.070 -
                     50.081,
                     50.090 -
                     50.093,
                     50.105 -
                     50.109,
                     50.120 -
                     50.127
784-C.S. 7-17-12     102.001 -
                     102.005
                     93.57,
785-C.S. 7-17-12     130.01,
                     130.99
                     156.031,
786-C.S. 8-21-12     156.068 -
                     156.079
789-C.S. 10-16-12    130.12,
                     130.13
                     152.01,
791-C.S. 12-4-12     157.000 -
                     157.008
796-C.S. 4-16-13     30.09
                     150.300 -
798-C.S. 10-1-13     150.312,
                     150.999
800-C.S. 12-3-13     92.01 -
                     92.07
                     150.002,
                     150.015 -
801-C.S. 12-3-13     150.021,
                     150.023 -
                     150.030
805-C.S. 9-16-14     130.30
806-C.S. 11-4-14     39.51
807-C.S. 11-4-14     130.09
808-C.S. 12-16-14    35.175 -
                     35.191
809-C.S. 3-17-15     Ch. 74, Sch. I
810-C.S. 5-19-15     156.006,
                     156.072
812-C.S. 6-2-15      30.13,
                     30.99
                     39.10,
815-C.S. 8-4-15      39.15 -
                     39.19,
                     39.21
817-C.S. 10-20-15    134.01 -
                     134.13
818-C.S. 11-3-15     156.100,
                     156.108
822-C.S. 11-3-12     39.40,
                     39.42
823-C.S. 11-17-15    115.05,
                     130.01
824-C.S. 11-17-15    130.14
825-C.S. 11-17-15    30.09
826-C.S. 11-17-15    114.63
827-C.S. 12-1-15     93.53
                     154.040,
                     154.041,
                     154.043,
                     154.063,
                     156.101 -
834-C.S. 6-7-16      156.104,
                     156.108,
                     156.109,
                     156.111,
                     156.112,
                     157.005
838-C.S. 6-21-16     55.01 -
                     55.03
840-C.S. 7-5-16      35.072,
                     156.069
                     72.010,
                     75.01 -
                     75.03,
                     118.01 -
842-C.S. 7-19-16     118.03,
                     118.15,
                     118.16,
                     156.071 -
                     156.080
844-C.S. 8-2-16      130.14
                     156.068,
                     156.071 -
847-C.S. 9-20-16     156.074,
                     156.077,
                     156.078
849-C.S. 11-1-16     92.10
                     10.57,
850-C.S. 11-1-16     150.186,
                     150.187
851-C.S. 1-17-17     T.S.O.
                     150.002,
                     150.015 -
852-C.S. 1-17-17     150.021,
                     150.023 -
                     150.030
853-C.S. 1-17-17     92.01 -
                     92.07
856-C.S. 5-16-17     30.00 -
                     30.02
860-C.S. 9-19-17     96.01 -
                     96.10
861-C.S. 9-19-17     39.35 -
                     39.42
865-C.S. 10-17-17    150.162
866-C.S. 11-7-17     37.02
871-C.S. 3-20-18     94.50 -
                     94.55
872-C.S. 4-17-18     92.10
                     118.01 -
                     118.08,
881-C.S. 12-4-18     118.15 -
                     118.21,
                     118.99
882-C.S. 12-4-18     93.56
883-C.S. 12-4-18     131.30
884-C.S. 4-16-19     97.01,
                     97.02
                     92.05,
                     150.161,
                     150.302,
                     154.040,
                     154.041,
                     154.043,
                     154.063,
                     155.104,
                     155.108,
                     155.112,
                     155.116,
                     155.204,
                     155.208,
                     155.212,
                     155.216,
                     155.220,
                     155.224,
                     155.304,
                     155.308,
                     155.312,
                     155.316,
885-C.S. 5-21-19     155.320,
                     155.324,
                     155.328,
                     155.332,
                     155.336,
                     155.336,
                     155.340,
                     155.404,
                     155.408,
                     155.412,
                     155.416,
                     155.420,
                     155.424,
                     155.428,
                     155.432,
                     155.504,
                     155.508,
                     157.004,
                     157.005,
                     157.006,
                     159.012,
                     159.024
886-C.S. 6-4-19      121.01 -
                     121.14
                     56.01,
                     56.10 -
887-C.S. 8-6-19      56.15,
                     56.30 -
                     56.37
                     150.002,
890-C.S. 12-3-19     150.015 -
                     150.030
891-C.S. 12-3-19     92.01 -
                     92.07
                     39.35 -
892-C.S. 12-17-19    39.42,
                     39.51
                     50.002,
                     50.037,
                     50.073,
                     50.074,
                     50.091,
                     50.093,
893-C.S. 12-17-19    50.105,
                     50.108,
                     50.109,
                     50.123,
                     50.124,
                     50.201 -
                     50.212
897-C.S. 1-21-20     130.11
899-C.S. 3-17-20     39.38
                     155.108,
                     155.112,
                     155.204,
                     155.208,
                     155.304,
                     155.308,
                     155.312,
                     155.316,
                     155.320,
                     155.324,
902-C.S. 8-18-20     155.328,
                     155.336,
                     155.340,
                     155.344,
                     155.404,
                     155.408,
                     155.412,
                     155.416,
                     155.420,
                     155.424,
                     155.504,
                     155.508
904-C.S. 10-6-20     150.140 -
                     150.190
905-C.S. 11-3-20     150.401 -
                     150.405
906-C.S. 10-20-20    150.016,
                     150.017
911-C.S. 12-15-20    155.304.140
912-C.S. 12-15-20    35.175 -
                     35.191
913-C.S. 2-16-21     93.02
                     91.101 -
                     91.108,
                     91.201 -
                     91.205,
                     91.208,
                     91.209,
                     91.301 -
                     91.305,
                     91.401 -
                     91.412,
                     91.501,
914-C.S. 4-20-21     91.502,
                     91.601 -
                     91.604,
                     91.701 -
                     91.705,
                     91.801 -
                     91.809,
                     91.901,
                     91.902,
                     91.1001 -
                     91.1004,
                     91.1101 -
                     91.1105
                     155.104.060,
                     155.112.050,
                     155.116.020,
                     155.204.030,
                     155.208.030,
                     155.208.040,
                     155.304.020,
                     155.304.110,
                     155.304.140,
                     155.308.030,
                     155.308.040,
                     155.312.020,
                     155.312.040,
                     155.316.060,
916-C.S. 7-6-21   155.320.060,
                     155.324.020,
                     155.324.060,
                     155.324.080,
                     155.328.050,
                     155.340.060,
                     155.340.070,
                     155.340.090,
                     155.412.040,
                     155.420.090,
                     155.424.010 -
                     155.424.070,
                     155.504.030,
                     155.508.020,
                     155.508.040
918-C.S. 8-17-21     93.02
                     32.001,
                     32.010 -
                     32.013,
                     32.020,
                     32.030 -
                     32.032,
                     32.040 -
                     32.042,
919-C.S. 9-7-21      32.050,
                     32.051,
                     32.060 -
                     32.063,
                     32.070,
                     32.071,
                     32.080 -
                     32.084,
                     32.090 -
                     32.092
                     33.001 -
                     33.006,
                     33.008 -
                     33.013,
                     33.025 -
                     33.027,
                     33.035 -
920-C.S. 9-7-21      33.038,
                     33.045,
                     33.046,
                     33.055 -
                     33.057,
                     33.065 -
                     33.068,
                     33.075 -
                     33.077
921-C.S. 9-7-21      103.01 -
                     103.22
922-C.S. 4-19-22     33.200 -
                     33.209
924-C.S. 9-7-21      100.14
925-C.S. 9-7-21      155.208.020,
                     155.304.110
926-C.S. 10-5-21     114.63
927-C.S. 12-7-21     37.02
928-C.S. 12-7-21     37.20 -
                     37.23
929-C.S. 12-7-21     130.30
                     155.204.010 -
                     155.204.030,
                     155.208.020,
                     155.208.030,
                     155.216.020,
                     155.304.130,
                     155.304.140,
                     155.308.030,
                     155.316.050,
931-C.S. 2-15-22     155.324.020,
                     155.324.060,
                     155.332.010 -
                     155.332.040,
                     155.336.040,
                     155.412.060,
                     155.424.030,
                     155.504.030,
                     155.508.020,
                     155.508.040
932-C.S. 2-15-22     39.11
                     158.001 -
                     158.005,
                     158.010,
933-C.S. 7-19-22     158.011,
                     158.020 -
                     158.022,
                     158.030 -
                     158.032
935-C.S. 9-20-22     T.S.O.
                     155.204.020,
                     155.208.030,
                     155.304.130 -
                     155.304.150,
                     155.308.050,
                     155.312.040,
                     155.312.050,
                     155.316.010,
                     155.324.050 -
                     155.324.070,
                     155.336.050,
                     155.340.040,
938-C.S. 11-1-22     155.340.070,
                     155.340.080,
                     155.408.020,
                     155.408.090,
                     155.412.040,
                     155.412.060,
                     155.412.100 -
                     155.412.150,
                     155.424.020 -
                     155.424.050,
                     155.504.030,
                     155.508.020,
                     155.508.040
                     50.092,
939 C.S. 12-6-22     50.201 -
                     50.212
                     150.002,
                     150.015 -
940 C.S. 12-6-22     150.021,
                     150.023 -
                     150.026
941 C.S. 12-6-22     92.01 -
                     92.07
943-C.S. 2-21-23     51.01 -
                     51.31
944-C.S. 3-21-23     30.13
945-C.S. 4-4-23      150.016
946-C.S. 6-6-23      150.029
                     70.01,
                     72.025 -
                     72.029,
                     72.050,
947-C.S. 8-1-23      72.051,
                     72.071,
                     72.073,
                     72.079,
                     72.081
948-C.S. 9-5-23      33.009
                     34.02,
                     34.04 -
                     34.11,
950-C.S. 9-5-23      34.13,
                     34.15 -
                     34.20,
                     34.30 -
                     34.44
                     155.108.050,
                     155.204.020,
                     155.204.030,
                     155.208.020 -
                     155.208.040,
                     155.212.020,
                     155.216.020,
                     155.304.020,
                     155.304.030,
                     155.304.050 -
                     155.304.070,
                     155.304.110,
                     155.304.130,
                     155.304.140,
                     155.308.030 -
                     155.308.050,
                     155.308.070,
                     155.312.020,
                     155.312.040,
                     155.312.060,
                     155.312.080,
                     155.316.010 -
                     155.316.070,
                     155.320.040 -
                     155.320.060,
                     155.324.020,
951-C.S. 10-17-23    155.324.040 -
                     155.324.080,
                     155.328.030 -
                     155.328.050,
                     155.332.040,
                     155.340.030 -
                     155.340.080,
                     155.344.010,
                     155.344.080,
                     155.404.030 -
                     155.404.050,
                     155.408.020,
                     155.408.050,
                     155.408.080,
                     155.412.020 -
                     155.412.040,
                     155.412.060,
                     155.412.120,
                     155.412.140,
                     155.412.150,
                     155.416.020,
                     155.420.090 -
                     155.420.120,
                     155.424.010 -
                     155.424.070,
                     155.504.030,
                     155.508.020,
                     155.508.040
952-C.S. 1-16-24     104.01 -
                     104.08
953-C.S. 4-2-24      33.045,
                     33.046
955-C.S. 7-16-24     37.20 -
                     37.23
956-C.S. 9-3-24      150.095 -
                     150.100
957-C.S. 11-5-24     51.29
958-C.S. 12-17-24    T.S.O.
959-C.S. 1-21-25     50.209
960-C.S. 1-21-25     Ch. 74, Sch. I
961-C.S. 7-15-25     155.224.050
                     150.200 -
                     150.218,
                     155.116.020,
                     155.304.140,
962-C.S. 7-15-25     155.328.010 -
                     155.328.070,
                     155.404.030,
                     155.412.045,
                     155.412.110,
                     155.508.020
963-C.S. 8-19-25     130.30
                     150.105,
                     150.108 -
                     150.113,
964-C.S. 8-19-25     150.115 -
                     150.118,
                     150.120,
                     150.121
                     155.204.010 -
                     155.204.040,
965-C.S. 8-19-25     155.316.010 -
                     155.316.070,
                     155.332.030
                    
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
97-02    1-7-97      T.S.O.
97-13    3-18-97     T.S.O.
                    
 
