FAIRFAX, CALIFORNIA
MUNICIPAL CODE OF ORDINANCES
Contains 2025 S-20 Supplement, including
Local legislation through Ord. No. 898, passed 6-4-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 714
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE TOWN OF FAIRFAX, CALIFORNIA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING THE
TOWN OF FAIRFAX, CALIFORNIA, MUNICIPAL CODE, AND REPLACING THE PRIOR MUNICIPAL
CODE
   THE TOWN COUNCIL OF THE TOWN OF FAIRFAX, CALIFORNIA, DOES HEREBY ORDAIN AS
FOLLOWS:
   Section 1.   The "Town of Fairfax, California, Municipal Code of Ordinances"
published in 2006 by American Legal Publishing Corporation, consisting of
titles 1 through 19, each inclusive, is adopted.
   Section 2.    This Code shall be known as the “Town of Fairfax, California,
Municipal Code of Ordinances,” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said Code
as the “Fairfax Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any
provision of this Code or in any proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient
to designate any Ordinance adding to, amending, correcting, or repealing all or
any part or portion of this Code as an addition to, amendment to, correction or
repeal of the “Fairfax Municipal Code.” References may be made to the titles,
chapters, sections, and subsections of the “Fairfax Municipal Code” and such
references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections, or subsections as
they appear in the Code. The “Fairfax Municipal Code” may also be referred to
as the “FMC.”
   Section 3.    Any ordinances, title, chapter, and section headings,
including but not limited to the polystyrene ordinance and the sidewalk
ordinance (Ordinance No. 713), contained in this publication of the Code shall
not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner address the
effectiveness, scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any existing
ordinance, title, chapter, or section of this publication of the Code, or the
previous publication of the code.
   Section 4.   The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, Ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the
corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
   Section 5.   The adoption of this Code does not affect prosecutions for
Ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this Code, does
not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of the Code,
and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed, or
deposited pursuant to the requirements of any Ordinance.
   Section 6.   References in Town forms, documents, and regulations to the
chapters and sections of the former Town Code shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.
   Section 7.    Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form
as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of the
Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the
Code includes the additions and amendments.
   Section 8.   The prior Fairfax Town Code is hereby replaced with the "Town
of Fairfax, California, Municipal Code of Ordinances" published in 2006, hereby
enacted through the adoption of this ordinance.
   Section 9.    This ordinance shall take effect and be in force on the
thirtieth day from and after its final passage.
   Section 10.   If any section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause,
phrase, or portion of this Ordinance is, for any reason, held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Ordinance. The Town Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this
Ordinance and each section, subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase,
or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more section,
subsection, subdivision, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof be
declared invalid or unconstitutional.
   Section 11.   The Town Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this Ordinance
and cause copies of the same to be posted, within fifteen (15) days after its
final passage and adoption, in three public places in the Town of Fairfax, to
wit: (a) Bulletin Board, Fairfax Town Offices, Town Hall; (b) Bulletin Board,
Fairfax Post Office; and (c) Bulletin Board, Fairfax Women's Club Building,
which said places are hereby designated for that purpose.
   The foregoing ordinance was duly and regularly introduced at a regular
meeting of the Town Council of the Town of Fairfax held in said town on the 7th
day of June, 2006, and thereafter adopted on the 2nd day of August, 2006 by the
following vote, to wit:
AYES:      Bragman, Brandborg, Tremaine, Weinsoff
NOES:      None
ABSENT:   Maggiore
___________________________________
SUSAN BRANDBORG, MAYOR
Attest:
_____________________________________
Town Clerk
TITLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
1.04.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
      
1.08.   GENERAL PENALTY
      
1.10.   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION AND HEARING PROCESS ENFORCEMENT
      
1.12.   NUISANCES
      
1.16.   ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS
      
1.20.   CLAIMS AGAINST TOWN
CHAPTER 1.04: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
1.04.010   Title of code
   
1.04.020   Interpretation
   
1.04.030   Application to future ordinances
   
1.04.040   Captions
   
1.04.050   Definitions
   
1.04.060   Rules of interpretation
   
1.04.070   Severability
   
1.04.080   Reference to other sections
   
1.04.090   Reference to offices
   
1.04.100   Errors and omissions
   
1.04.110   Official time
   
1.04.120   Reasonable time
   
1.04.130   Ordinances repealed
   
1.04.140   Ordinances unaffected
   
1.04.150   Effective date of ordinances
   
1.04.160   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
1.04.170   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
1.04.180   Section histories; statutory references
   
1.04.190   Notice; proof of service
   
1.04.200   Maintenance of code
   
1.04.210   Violations; imposition and determination of penalty
   
1.04.220   Place of confinement
§ 1.04.010 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Fairfax, California,
shall be designated as the Fairfax Town Code and may be so cited.
§ 1.04.020 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 1.04.030 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title 1, compatible with future legislation, shall apply
to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1.04.040 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 1.04.050 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule.
      (1)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense.
      (2)   However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical
import.
   (B)   Specific definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CALENDAR YEAR. From January 1 through December 31 of any given year.
      COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Fairfax.
      COUNTY. Marin County, California.
      DAY. A calendar day unless otherwise expressed.
      FISCAL YEAR. From July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the
following year.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the town unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to a building or land, the term shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common or joint tenant of whole or part
of the building or land.
      PERSON.
         (a)   Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver.
         (b)   Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences
of debt.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Both real and personal property.
      QUARTERLY. When used to designate a period of time, the first three
calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three calendar
months.
      REAL PROPERTY. Lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of California.
      STREET. All streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts,
places, squares or other public ways in the town which have been or may
hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so
designated in any law of the state.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land, the terms shall
include any person who occupies the whole or part of the building or land,
whether alone or with others.
      TOWN CODE, CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal
code, as modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters
or sections.
      TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Fairfax,
California.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed.
§ 1.04.060 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the town shall be by the following
rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   “And” or “or.” Either conjunction shall include the other as if
written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 1.04.070 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code, as now or later amended, or its application
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 1.04.080 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever, in one section, reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 1.04.090 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 1.04.100 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 1.04.110 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the town for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 1.04.120 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be a Saturday or Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 1.04.130 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 1.04.140 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 1.04.150 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Ordinances take effect 30 days after their final passage.
   (B)   An ordinance takes effect immediately, if it is an ordinance:
      (1)   Relating to an election;
      (2)   For immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety,
containing a declaration of the facts constituting the urgency, and is passed
by a four-fifths vote of the Town Council;
      (3)   Relating to street improvement proceedings;
      (4)   Relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the town;
or
      (5)   Covered by particular provisions of law prescribing the manner of
its passage and adoption.
(Cal. Gov't Code § 36937)
§ 1.04.160 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or
modifying it becomes effective unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision unless it is expressly provided.
§ 1.04.170 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place. Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of the chapter or section.
   (B)   In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of
the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above
the ordinance.
§ 1.04.180 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and all subsequent amending ordinances, if any,
are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-
13-1960; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Am. Ord.
25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Cal. Penal Code § 1212) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Am. Ord. 20,
passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 3.08.010 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This town shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 6250 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in a prior year and subsequently amended, the
Prior Code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(Prior Code, §
).”
§ 1.04.190 NOTICE; PROOF OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless
different provisions are otherwise specifically made in the code, the notice
may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified
or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid,
addressed to the person to be notified at his or her last known business or
residence address as the same appears in the public records of the town or
other records pertaining to the matter to which the notice is directed. Service
by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the
Postal Service.
   (B)   Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any
officer or employee of the town or by affidavit of any person over the age of
18 years, which affidavit shows service in conformity with this code or other
provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.
§ 1.04.200 MAINTENANCE OF CODE.
   (A)   (1)   Not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for use
and examination by the public in the office of the Town Clerk.
      (2)   At least three additional copies, duly certified by the Town Clerk,
shall be maintained on file in his or her office as the official copies of the
code.
      (3)   Additional copies of the code shall be distributed to the
departments and divisions of the town as shall be prescribed by the Town
Manager.
   (B)   Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code, or upon
the repeal of any of its provisions, the Town Clerk shall certify thereto and
shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this code of the
taking of the action, noting the number and date of the ordinance pursuant to
which the action is taken.
   (C)   Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in the code
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk in books for such purpose, duly
indexed for ready reference.
   (D)   At least quarterly, the Town Clerk shall cause the loose leaf pages of
this code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including the
notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which the change is
adopted, and distributed in order that the loose leaf copies of the code,
prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the town
and the general public, may be brought up-to-date.
§ 1.04.210 VIOLATIONS; IMPOSITION AND DETERMINATION OF PENALTY.
   (A)   Prohibited acts. Whenever, in this code, any act or omission is made
unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or
concealing the fact of the act or omission.
   (B)   Imposition of penalty. The provisions of this code which declare
certain crimes to be punishable as therein mentioned devolve a duty upon the
court authorized to pass sentence to determine and impose the punishment
described.
   (C)   Determination of punishment. Whenever, in this code, the punishment
for a crime is left undetermined between certain limits, the punishment to be
inflicted in a particular case shall be determined by the court authorized to
pass sentence, within the limits as may be prescribed by this code.
§ 1.04.220 PLACE OF CONFINEMENT.
   Every person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this code
and sentenced to imprisonment shall be imprisoned in the County Jail or other
authorized facility.
CHAPTER 1.08: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
1.08.010   General penalty
   
1.08.020   Infractions
   
1.08.030   Repeated infractions; misdemeanor
   
1.08.040   Separate offenses
   
1.08.050   Additional remedies
   
1.08.060   Enforcement authority
§ 1.08.010 GENERAL PENALTY.
    Except as set forth in §§
1.08.020,
1.08.030,
1.08.040 or
1.08.050, the violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed either an
infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of the enforcing authority. Where
the violation is charged as an infraction, the penalties shall be as set forth
in §1.08.020(A) below. Where the violation is charged as a misdemeanor and no
specific penalty is provided for elsewhere in the code, the violation shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.010) (Ord. 516, passed --1983; Am. Ord. 575, passed --1988;
Am. Ord. 719, passed 1-3-2007)
§ 1.08.020 INFRACTIONS.
   (A)   Violations designated infractions. Any person, firm, partnership,
corporation or any other organization or group of persons acting in concert,
whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating or causing the
violation of the following chapters and ordinances or any other ordinance so
providing, is guilty of an infraction:
      (1)   Chapters
5.04,
5.08,
5.12,
5.16,
5.20,
5.24,
5.28,
5.40 and
5.44 of Title 5, Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations;
      (2)   Title 6, Animals;
      (3)   Chapters
8.08,
8.12 and
8.20 of Title 8, Health and Safety;
      (4)   Chapters
12.04,
12.08,
12.12,
12.20,
12.24,
12.32,
12.36, 12.40 and
12.44 of Title 12, Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places;
      (5)   Chapter
13.04 of Title 13, Public Services;
      (6)   Chapters
15.04,
15.08,
15.12,
15.16, 15.20, 15.24, 15.28, 15.36 and 15.40 of Title 15, Buildings and
Construction;
      (7)   Title 17, Zoning;
      (8)   Chapter
10.28, Skateboards;
      (9)   Chapter
3.32, Transient Occupancy Tax; and
      (10)   
Chapter 8.74, Gasoline Powered Landscape Equipment.
   (B)   Penalties. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 36900 and 36901, the penalty
for infractions shall be as follows:
      (1)   A fine of $100 for a first violation;
      (2)   A fine of $200 for a second commission of the same offense within
one year; and
      (3)   A fine of $500 for each additional commission of the same offense
within one year.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.020) (Ord. 516, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 528, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 575, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 593, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 641,
passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 655, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 1.08.030 REPEATED INFRACTIONS; MISDEMEANOR.
   Unless otherwise specified, upon a fourth or subsequent conviction for
violation of the same section of this code or any city ordinance designated
punishable as an infraction committed within a period of one year, the fourth
violation may, at the discretion of the Town Attorney, be charged as a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in
the County Jail not to exceed six months or by both the fine and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.030) (Ord. 516, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 575, passed - -
1988)
§ 1.08.040 SEPARATE OFFENSES.
   Each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted shall be deemed a
separate offense and may be punished accordingly.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.040) (Ord. 516, passed - -1983)
§ 1.08.050 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   In addition to any of the remedies provided in this chapter, any violation
of this code or any town ordinance may be enforced by civil action.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.050) (Ord. 516, passed - -1983)
§ 1.08.060 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   In addition and supplementary to the provisions of the Penal Code
relating to public offenses and the authority of peace officers, the Town
Council designates the Town Manager and the following employees who are
classified (or who may hereafter be classified by some other appropriate
designation with substantially the same duties) as enforcement authorities for
violations of town ordinances: Building Inspector, Town Clerk, Planning
Director, Fire Chief and Public Works Director. The public officers or
employees may issue a citation and notice to appear in the manner prescribed by
Cal. Penal Code Title 3, Chapter 5C, Part 2 or as the same may hereafter be
amended.
   (B)    It is the intent of the Town Council that the immunities prescribed
in Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 be applicable to public officers or employees acting
in the course and scope of employment pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 1.08.060) (Ord. 516, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 1.10: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION AND HEARING PROCESS ENFORCEMENT
Section:
   
1.10.010   Purpose and intent
   
1.10.020   Definitions
   
1.10.030   General enforcement authority
   
1.10.040   Authority to inspect
   
1.10.050   Notice of pending administrative enforcement
   
1.10.060   Notice of violation
   
1.10.070   Issuance of notice of violation
   
1.10.080   Administrative citations
   
1.10.090   Contents of administrative citation
   
1.10.100   Administrative fines and penalties
   
1.10.110   Issuance of administrative citations
   
1.10.120   Amount of administrative fines and penalties
   
1.10.130   Payment of fines
   
1.10.140   Collection of delinquent fines and penalties and other remedies
   
1.10.150   Preliminary review
   
1.10.160   Administrative hearing
   
1.10.170   Hearing process
   
1.10.180   Consideration in other proceedings
   
1.10.190   Appeal to Town Council; judicial review
§ 1.10.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Town Council has determined that the enforcement of this code, any code
it adopts by reference, and applicable state codes, is an important public
service and is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety, and
quality of life. The Town Council has determined that there is a need for
alternative methods of code enforcement and that a comprehensive code
enforcement system uses a combination of criminal, civil, and administrative
remedies to gain compliance with code regulations.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.020 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION. A notice issued by an enforcement officer pursuant
to this chapter that there has been a violation of the code and that an
administrative fine is imposed.
   CODE VIOLATION. Any violation of this code, any code it adopts by reference,
any other ordinance of the town, or applicable law or legally enforceable
standard.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An individual designated by the Town Manager to enforce
the provisions of the code or other applicable law.
     HEARING AUTHORITY. Shall consist of any town staff person or consultant
appointed by the Town Manager as a hearing officer.
   ISSUANCE DATE. The day an administrative citation is personally served on a
responsible person,  is mailed to a responsible person, or is posted on real
property where a property-related violation occurred.
   ISSUE. To give, mail, or post an administrative citation.
   NOTICE OF DECISION. A notice that informs a responsible person of a decision
made by a hearing authority pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Any notice that informs a person that a violation of
the code, any code it adopts by reference, or other applicable law, occurred.
   PRELIMINARY REVIEWING AUTHORITY. The department head of the issuing
enforcement officer.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   An individual or legal entity that, by action or inaction, causes
or maintains a code violation, or permits or allows a code violation.
      (2)   An individual or legal entity whose agent, employee, or independent
contractor, by action or inaction, causes or maintains a code violation, or
permits or allows a code violation.
      (3)   An owner, lessee or sub-lessee with current right of possession of
real property on which a code violation occurs.
      (4)   An individual or legal entity that uses the property where the
violation occurs.
      (5)   An on-site manager of a business normally working at the site when
the business is open and responsible for the activities at such business.
      (6)   The owners, majority stockholders, controlling owners, corporate
officers, trustees, and/or general partners of a legal entity that is a
responsible person under divisions (1) through (5) above.
      (7)   If any of the above persons are minors, the parents or guardians of
such minors shall be deemed the responsible person.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Manager of the Town of Fairfax, or his or her designee.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.030 GENERAL ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   For purposes of this chapter, the Town Manager and his or her designated
enforcement officers shall have the power to issue notices of violation and
field citations, inspect public and private property, and use whatever judicial
and administrative remedies are available under this code or other law. More
specific provisions regarding alternative administrative or other enforcement
authority and procedures for particular violations may exist in this code; the
town reserves the right to use any applicable enforcement mechanism in a
particular situation.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.040 AUTHORITY TO INSPECT.
   Enforcement officers are authorized to enter upon any property or premises
within the town to ascertain whether the provisions of the Municipal Code are
being obeyed, and to make any examination and surveys as may be necessary in
the performance of their enforcement duties. These inspections may include the
taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence. All inspection,
entries, examinations and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner and in
accordance with law. If an owner, occupant, or agent refuses permission to
enter or inspect, the enforcement officer may seek an administrative inspection
warrant pursuant to law.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.050 NOTICE OF PENDING ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the enforcement officer may record with the
Registrar-Recorder/County Clerk/County Recorder a notice against a property
that is the subject of an administrative enforcement action pending with the
town. A notice of pending administrative action shall be on a form approved by
the town manager and shall describe the nature of the administrative action and
refer to the code provision governing the pending administrative action.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.060 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a violation exists, the
enforcement officer may issue a notice of violation to any responsible persons.
The notice of violation must include the following information:
   (A)   The code section(s) violated.
   (B)   A description of the condition creating the violation(s).
   (C)   The address where the violation(s) occurs.
   (D)   The name of the responsible person and any other involved persons.
   (E)   The date and, if relevant, time at which the violation was observed.
   (F)   If applicable, a list of any corrections to bring the property into
compliance.
   (G)   A deadline or specific date to correct the violations.
   (H)   The signature of the enforcement officer issuing the notice of
violation.
   (I)   The date of issuance of the notice of violation.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.070 ISSUANCE OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   A notice of violation may be issued as follows:
   (A)   An enforcement officer may personally serve the notice of violation on
the responsible person; or
   (B)   An enforcement officer may mail the notice of violation to the
responsible person by first class mail; or
   (C)   An enforcement officer may post a copy of the notice of violation on
the subject property in a conspicuous place for a property-related code
violation and, in which case, the enforcement officer shall also mail a copy of
the notice of violation to the responsible person at the address where the
violation occurred.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.080 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   When correction of a noticed violation is not effected within the time
prescribed in the notice, an enforcement officer may issue an administrative
citation to each and every responsible party previously notified of such
violation(s). The administrative citation shall give notice of the
administrative fines or penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.090 CONTENTS OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION.
   An administrative citation shall include the following:
   (A)   A description of the condition creating the violations(s).
   (B)   The address where the violation(s) exists.
   (C)   The name of the responsible person(s) and any other involved persons.
   (D)   The date and, if relevant, time at which the violation was observed.
   (E)   The amount and due date of the fine or penalty.
   (F)   A description of the procedure to pay the fine.
   (G)   A description of the procedure for requesting the preliminary review,
waiver of fine deposit, and hearing to contest the administrative citation.
   (H)   If applicable, a list of any corrections to bring the property into
compliance.
   (I)   A statement that any unpaid fines or penalties may be placed as a
special assessment or lien against the property where a violation occurs.
   (J)   Signature of the enforcement officer issuing the administrative
citation.
   (K)   The date of issuance.
   (L)   Any other information deemed necessary for enforcement or collection
of the administrative fines.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.100 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any violation of a provision of this code, any code it adopts by
reference, or other applicable law, may be subject to an administrative fine or
penalty pursuant to this chapter. (This also includes any violation of any
condition imposed upon the issuance of any permit, license, conditional use
permit, or other approval (e.g., subdivision map, special use permit, variance,
zoning clearance) pursuant to this code.
   (B)   Each and every responsible person noticed regarding a code violation
(s) is joint and severally liable, in accordance with notice and procedures of
this chapter, for all fines or penalties imposed for the violation(s).
   (C)   A violation that exists for more than one day shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation for each day that it exists. Each daily
violation may be subject to the maximum fine or penalty permitted under this
chapter.
   (D)   An administrative citation may charge a code violation for one or more
days on which a violation exists and for violation of one or more code
sections.
   (E)   The administrative fines and penalties delineated in this chapter are
in addition to, and do not preclude imposition of, any other remedies,
criminal, civil, or administrative, available to the town. Imposition of
administrative fines or penalties shall be at the sole discretion of the town.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.110 ISSUANCE OF ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS.
   An administrative citation may be issued in one or more of the following
ways:
   (A)   An enforcement officer may personally serve the citation on the
responsible person. The responsible person is required to sign a copy of the
administrative citation showing his or her receipt, but his or her failure to
do so shall have no effect on the enforcement of the citation; or
   (B)   An enforcement officer may mail the administrative citation to the
responsible person by first class mail; or
   (C)   An enforcement officer may post a copy of the administrative citation
on the subject property in a conspicuous place for a property-related code
violation and, in which case, the enforcement officer shall also mail a copy of
the administrative violation to the responsible person at the address where the
violation occurred.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.120 AMOUNT OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The administrative fines for violations of this code, as specified in
this chapter, shall be established by resolution of the Town Council; provided,
however, that the amount of the fines shall not exceed the limits of Government
Code Section 36901. The schedule of fines may include escalating fine amounts
for repeated code violations within specific periods of time.
   (B)   Administrative fines not paid prior to their due date shall result in
the imposition of a penalty and interest for every day of delinquency, as set
forth by resolution.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.130 PAYMENT OF FINES.
   (A)   All fines are due on the day specified in the administrative citation.
   (B)   Fines shall be paid to the town. Payments shall be made in accordance
with procedures established by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (C)   Payment of a fine or penalty pursuant to this chapter shall not excuse
or discharge any continued or repeated violation of this code.
   (D)   Pending a hearing by the hearing authority, payment of a fine may be
stayed if the preliminary reviewing authority determines, pursuant to §
1.10.150(H), that a responsible person is unable to pay the fine.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.140 COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT FINES AND PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES.
   (A)   Failure to pay a fine or penalty before the time set forth in the
administrative citation shall result in the imposition of interest and
penalties, as established by resolution.
   (B)   The town may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the
collection of fines, including interest and penalties.
   (C)   Delinquent fines, interest, and penalties may be recorded as a lien or
special assessment against the property on which the code violation occurred.
Prior to recording a lien or special assessment, the town shall prepare a cost
report itemizing the amount owed by the responsible person. The town shall
comply with the State Franchise Tax Board or any other state or county law
pertaining to the recording of any delinquent fines, interest, and penalties as
a lien on the property, or as a special assessment.
   (D)   The administrative citation process described in this chapter does not
preclude the town from recovering any code violation abatement cost incurred by
the town in performing its code enforcement efforts.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.150 PRELIMINARY REVIEW.
   (A)   A person that received an administrative citation may request a
preliminary review. Such request must be made within seven calendar days of the
date that the administrative citation is issued, or prior to the due date
specified on the administrative citation, which ever is earlier. Failure to
request a preliminary review before the deadline constitutes a waiver of any
preliminary review.
   (B)   A request for a preliminary review shall be made in writing and filed
with the Town Clerk and shall include all information that the responsible
person desires the preliminary reviewing authority to consider in his or her
preliminary review of the citation. A request for preliminary review may
include a request for waiver of the fine deposit. A responsible person
requesting a waiver of fine deposit bears the burden to establish by
substantial evidence, including sworn affidavit, that he or she is unable to
deposit the fine imposed by the administrative citation.
   (C)   The preliminary review shall be conducted by the preliminary reviewing
authority.
   (D)   The preliminary review shall include a review of the notice of
violation, the administrative citation, the written request for a preliminary
review, and any evidence the responsible person may submit with the written
request.
   (E)   The cited person shall be notified of the results of the preliminary
review within seven calendar days of filing a written request for preliminary
review. The decision on a preliminary review is not a final disposition and
therefore is not subject to judicial review.
   (F)   A request for preliminary review shall not extend any time period for
compliance, the due date of any fine imposed, or the time to request an
administrative hearing.
   (G)   If the preliminary reviewing authority concludes that no code
violation occurred or that the responsible person was not responsible for the
code violation, then he or she shall dismiss the notice of violation and/or
administrative citation, without prejudice to the issuance of a further notice
of violation and/or administrative citation should additional evidence be
developed.
   (H)   The preliminary reviewing authority shall also rule whether the
responsible person qualifies for waiver of the fine deposit, if such a request
has been made.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.160 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   (A)   A cited person may request an administrative hearing. Such request
must be filed within 20 calendar days of the issuance of the first
administrative citation. Failure to request a hearing before the deadline, or
failure to comply with all the terms for requesting a hearing, constitutes an
abandonment of such request and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
   (B)   A request for an administrative hearing shall be made in writing and
filed with the Town Clerk, and shall include any grounds which the responsible
person wishes the town to consider. Unless waived upon preliminary review, the
request shall be accompanied by a deposit of the full amount of the fine, plus
any penalties imposed by the administrative citation in the event the fine has
not yet been paid.
   (C)   A cited person may request one continuance of a hearing provided he or
she does so in writing before the date of the hearing and states a reasonable
basis for the request. Unless the town issues a written notice of continuance,
the hearing shall take place on the date, time and location specified in the
notice of hearing transmitted to the cited person. A cited person's failure to
attend a hearing shall constitute an abandonment of the request for the hearing
and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.170 HEARING PROCESS.
   (A)   The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing authority on the date,
time, and location specified in the notice of hearing transmitted to the cited
person.
   (B)   The notice of violation, the administrative citation, and other
reports prepared by an enforcement officer concerning a code violation shall be
accepted by the hearing authority as prima facie evidence of the facts stated
in such documents.
   (C)   The hearing authority shall allow the cited person an opportunity to
testify at the hearing and to present evidence about any code violation
specified in the notice of violation or administrative citation.
   (D)   The enforcement officer or other representatives of the town may, but
are not required, to attend the hearing.
   (E)   The hearing authority may continue a hearing from time to time and may
allow a responsible person additional time to remedy a violation. In addition,
the hearing authority may request additional information or evidence from the
cited person.
   (F)   All hearings shall be recorded on a video or audio device, unless the
Town elects to use a court reporter. If a court reporter is not used, the town
need not provide transcripts of any hearings, but, within 15 calendar days
after payment of reasonable duplication fee, shall make the video and/or audio
recordings available to the responsible person. If a court reporter is used, a
recipient of the administrative citation may obtain a copy of the transcript
upon payment of any applicable fees or costs.
   (G)   A hearing need not be conducted in accordance with the technical rules
of evidence. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is evidence on which
reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs,
regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might
consider such admission improper in a civil action. Irrelevant or unduly
repetitious evidence shall be excluded.
   (H)   After considering all testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing,
the hearing authority shall issue a written decision to affirm, modify or
dismiss the administrative citation. The decision shall include the hearing
authority's findings, as well as information regarding the cited person's right
to seek judicial review of the decision and the time in which to do so. The
town shall issue the cited person a copy of the hearing authority's written
decision (the "notice of decision"). The decision of the hearing authority
shall be final.
   (I)   If the hearing authority determines that the administrative citation
should be affirmed, the fine and/or penalty amount of deposit with the town
shall be retained by the town.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.180 CONSIDERATION IN OTHER PROCEEDINGS.
   The Town Council, Planning Commission or other similar body, or town staff
may consider the fact that a person has been issued an administrative citation
when determining whether to grant, suspend, revoke, or deny to that person any
permit, license, or other approval, regarding a matter related to the condition
causing the code violation, and may consider such administrative citation to be
evidence that the person has committed acts that threaten the health, safety,
and welfare of the general public.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
§ 1.10.190 APPEAL TO TOWN COUNCIL; JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   A person whose administrative citation is affirmed by the hearing
officer pursuant to §
1.10.180 may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the Town Council in
accordance with
Chapter 2.44 of the Town Code.
   (B)   A person who loses on appeal to the Town Council may file a petition
for review with the Superior Court, pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4
within 20 calendar days after service of a copy of the notice of decision. In
any such action, the prevailing party shall have the right to recover
reasonable attorney fees and cost.
(Ord. 745, passed 9-2-2009)
CHAPTER 1.12: NUISANCES
Section
   
1.12.005   Definitions
   
1.12.010   Emission of noxious fumes or odors
   
1.12.015   Depositing waste on any park or other public place
   
1.12.020   Depositing glass, nails, etc., in streets, etc.
   
1.12.025   Discharge of pollutants
   
1.12.030   Disturbing the peace
   
1.12.035   Obstruction of streets
   
1.12.040   Encroachments
   
1.12.045   Substandard or dangerous property conditions
   
1.12.050   Power to declare a public nuisance
   
1.12.055   Property owner responsibilities
   
1.12.057   Initial staff investigation
   
1.12.060   Attorneys’ fees
   
1.12.065   Notice to abate nuisance conditions
   
1.12.070   Methods of service
   
1.12.075   Manner of conducting abatement hearing
   
1.12.080   Issuance of decision, findings and order
   
1.12.085   Abatement by enforcement officer if nuisance is not abated
   
1.12.090   Abatement by owner/responsible party
   
1.12.095   Liability for abatement costs
   
1.12.100   Lien procedure
   
1.12.105   Special assessment procedure
   
1.12.110   Order for treble costs of abatement
   
1.12.115   Summary abatement
   
1.12.120   Right of judicial review
   
1.12.125   Violations and penalties
   
1.12.130   Remedies
§ 1.12.005 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the following words, terms and phrases used in
this chapter are defined as set forth in this section.
   ABATE. ABATE means, but is not limited to, modifying, repairing, replacing,
removing, securing, locking, demolishing, or otherwise remedying the condition
in question by such means and to such extent as necessary.
   BUILDING. Any structure, (including but not limited to, any house, garage,
duplex, apartment, condominium, stock cooperative, mobile home or other
residential buildings or associated accessory structures) and any commercial,
industrial or other establishment,  warehouse, kiosk, sign or other structure
affixed to or upon real property used as a dwelling or for the purpose of
conducting a business, storage or any other activity.
   CODE. The Fairfax Municipal Code.
   DAY. Calendar day.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Town Manager, or the Building Official, Fire Chief,
Director of Public Works or Police Chief of the town, or their designees, when
such persons have been delegated in writing the authority to enforce and
administer the particular provisions of this chapter or of this code at issue
in a particular matter.
   HEARING OFFICER. The hearing officer appointed by the Town Councilor, if no
officer is appointed, the Town Council. The hearing officer may be a town
employee, but in that event the hearing officer shall not have had any
responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of this
chapter and shall not have had any personal involvement in the proceeding to be
heard within the past 12 months or possess any disqualifying interest in the
outcome of the proceeding.
   OWNER. Any person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or assigns,
agent, firm, partnership or corporation having or claiming any legal or
equitable interest in the property in question, including all persons listed as
owners on the last available equalized tax assessment roll for Marin County.
   PROPERTY. All residential, industrial, commercial, agricultural, open space
and other real property, including but not limited to, front yards, side yards,
driveways, walkways, alleys and sidewalks, and shall include any building or
other structure, whether fixed or moveable, located on such property.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE or NUISANCE. Anything injurious to health, indecent or
offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property by a
neighborhood or by a considerable number of persons in the town. In addition,
any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of
this code shall be deemed a public nuisance.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Any individual or legal entity who is the owner, tenant,
cotenant, lessee, sub-lessee, occupant or other person with any right to
possession of the real property, owner or authorized agent of any business,
company or entity, or the parent or the legal guardian of any person under the
age of 18 years, who causes, permits or maintains a violation of this code, its
adopted codes or applicable state codes.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008; Am. Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.010 EMISSION OF NOXIOUS FUMES OR ODORS.
   No person shall operate or maintain in the town any equipment or device, or
store or process any raw or manufactured material or commodity in such a manner
as to cause noxious fumes or odors to be emitted which are prejudicial to
health or offensive to the senses, or so as to interfere with the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property by a neighborhood or by any considerable number
of persons.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.015 DEPOSITING WASTE ON ANY PARK OR OTHER PUBLIC PLACE.
   No person shall throw, discharge, deposit or leave, or cause, suffer or
permit to be thrown, discharged, deposited or left, any litter, refuse or
rubbish (as such terms are defined in §
8.12.010 of this Code), or any other waste matter whatsoever in or upon any
park or any public place within the town except in waste receptacles designated
for such purposes.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.020 DEPOSITING GLASS, NAILS, ETC., IN STREETS, ETC.
   No person shall scatter, deposit, place, leave or otherwise cause or permit
the presence about any premises or public place in the town, or along the
sidewalks, streets or alleys adjacent thereto, any glass, nails, tacks, or any
other object, substance or material whose presence at such location might
result in injury to any person.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.025 DISCHARGE OF POLLUTANTS.
   No person shall cause or permit any pollutant (as defined in §
8.32.010 of this Code), oil or any other petroleum matter to be discharged upon
or to remain on the surface of any street, alley, or sidewalk in the town, or
on any private or public property in the town, nor shall any person discharge
or permit to be discharged any pollutant, oil or any other petroleum matter
into a watercourse.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.030 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall willfully disturb the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or
person in the town by emitting or causing to be emitted any loud or unusual
noises, or by offensive conduct, or by threatening or challenging to fight or
by fighting.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.035 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS.
   No person shall obstruct the use of streets, alleys, sidewalks, roads,
trails, public ways or places or buildings in the town by causing or permitting
to be placed, erected or otherwise set in position any fence, barrier, or other
obstruction protruding past the nearest property line adjoining the public
sidewalk or public walkway, nor shall any person obstruct the flow of any
creek, tributary or any other watercourse with any objects or materials that
interfere with or redirect the natural course of the water, except pursuant to
permits issued by appropriate regulatory agencies.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.040 ENCROACHMENTS.
   No person shall erect, maintain or construct any building or other
structure, in whole or in part, on or upon any sidewalk, alley, street, lane,
court, park or other public place which encroaches upon or obstructs in any
manner the free and open use thereof, except pursuant to a permit therefore
issued by the town.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.045 SUBSTANDARD OR DANGEROUS PROPERTY CONDITIONS.
   No occupant shall cause or allow any condition on its property, or on an
adjacent sidewalk, which unreasonably increases the risks to public safety or
public health, or which results in substantial detriment to the property of
others in the immediate vicinity thereof. Such conditions include but are not
limited to the following:
   (A)   A building or structure which is structurally unsafe, partially
destroyed, remains in an unreasonable state of partial construction for an
unreasonable period of time, a fire hazard or otherwise dangerous.
   (B)   A building or structure having dry rot, warping or termite infestation
or one on which the paint or finish has become so deteriorated as to permit dry
rot, warping or termite or similar infestation as to render the building or
structure in a state of disrepair.
   (C)   A building exterior, wall, fence, driveway, sidewalk or walkway which
is so defective or deteriorated that it poses a hazard or is otherwise
materially detrimental to nearby properties.
   (D)   A property maintained so poorly that it is out of conformity with
community maintenance standards as set forth in this Code or otherwise by the
town, and which substantially diminishes the use of neighboring properties.
   (E)   A building or structure which because of obsolescence, dilapidated
condition, deterioration, damage, electrical wiring, gas connections or other
cause is in such a condition as to constitute a fire hazard.
   (F)   An accumulation of litter, refuse, rubbish, lumber, debris, salvage
materials which are visible from public or private property or otherwise in
violation of this Code.
   (G)   Abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, bedding, appliances, sinks,
machinery, toilets, cabinets, or other fixtures or equipment stored in a place
visible from public or private property.
   (H)   An attractive nuisance to children, including but not limited to
equipment, machinery, pools, ponds or excavations which may be hazardous to
children.
   (I)   Dead, decayed, diseased or hazardous trees, weeds or overgrown
vegetation which is likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests, or which
protrudes over or across a city street or sidewalk so as to substantially
obstruct the clear passage of vehicles or pedestrians.
   (J)   Pooled oil or hazardous or toxic material or substance, as so defined
by any federal, state or local law, stored or accumulated in an unapproved
container or in violation of any federal, state, or local law; or a substance
other than clear water flowing onto a public right-of-way or adjacent
properties; or excessive accumulation of grease or oil on paved surfaces,
buildings, walls, fences or other structures.
   (K)   The presence of abandoned, dismantled, wrecked or inoperable motor
vehicles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, boats or parts
thereof, except when such vehicles are completely enclosed within a building in
a lawful manner where they are not visible from the street or other public or
private property.
   (L)   Parking of a vehicle, trailer, camper, or storage of other personal
property on private property for an unreasonable period of time on other than a
surface of asphalt, concrete, inter-locking paving stones, brick, flagstone or
other similar all-weather material which would prevent the accumulation of
weeds and other conditions which constitute a hazard.
   (M)   Maintenance of any premises in any manner which is unsightly or
unsanitary because of the presence of animal excrement.
   (N)   Maintenance of any premises in any manner which is unsightly or
unsanitary because of the presence of stagnant water which acts as a mosquito
or other insect or disease breeding ground; rotting produce; or a substance
which produces a noxious odor; provided, however, that this section shall not
be construed to prohibit composting of reasonable amounts of yard waste.
   (O)   The presence of stagnant water, unrefilled excavations, eroded or
eroding earth or sand which flows onto adjoining sidewalks or street, or eroded
or eroding earth or sand which in normal weather conditions can be carried off
or blown from the property as dust.
   (P)   The accumulation of any kind of combustible material.
   (Q)   Any defective wiring, switches, gas lines, valves, pipes or any other
component parts of the electric, gas, water, or plumbing systems.
   (R)   Violation of any provision of the Fairfax Town Code.
   (S)   Any condition recognized in law or in equity as constituting a public
nuisance.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.050 POWER TO DECLARE A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The Town Council shall have the power to declare by resolution that any of
the foregoing, or any particular act or condition in addition to the foregoing,
constitutes a public nuisance.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.055 PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, and of the responsible party occupying or
having charge or control of any parcel of land, improved or unimproved, to
maintain such parcel of land free of any nuisance and/or nuisance conditions at
all times. The same responsibility extends to the public rights-of-way or
public land, related to any vehicle, vessel, structure, machinery, container,
refuse, debris or other item found to be or having been under the charge or
control of a property owner, responsible party, or last registered or
documented owner. Any owner or responsible party shall be responsible for the
removal or correction of any nuisance or nuisance conditions and the costs for
such removal or correction.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.057 INITIAL STAFF INVESTIGATION.
   When the Director of Public Works (“Director”) or Building Official becomes
aware of the possible existence of a nuisance in the town, where feasible the
Director or Building Official, or his or her designee, shall contact the owner
or occupant to confirm the existence of nuisance conditions and to request
voluntary compliance with this code.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008; Am. Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.060 ATTORNEYS’ FEES.
   Notwithstanding anything in this code to the contrary, the town may only
recover its attorneys’ fees in any action, administrative proceeding or special
proceeding commenced by the town to abate a public nuisance, to enjoin
violation of any provision of this code, including its adopted codes, or to
collect a civil debt owing to the town, if the town elects, at the initiation
of that individual action or proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorneys’
fees. In these cases, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover all
costs incurred therein, including reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs of suit.
In no action, administrative proceeding or special proceeding shall an award of
attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable
attorneys’ fees incurred by the town in the action or proceeding. The town is
the prevailing party if any portion of the notice to abate is upheld.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.065 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   When the enforcement officer finds that a nuisance condition exists
upon any property in the town, he or she may, or upon the direction of the Town
Council shall, serve a notice to abate upon all owners and all responsible
parties, directing them to abate or cause the nuisance condition(s) upon the
premises to be abated on or before a specified compliance date. When ordering
abatement of a nuisance, the enforcement officer may order a condition to be
abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or termination. The
notice shall also state that any owner or responsible party may file a written
request for a hearing with the Town Clerk to dispute the alleged conditions
within ten days of service of the notice.
   (B)   All owners and responsible parties must be served with the notice to
abate in the manner required by §
1.12.070 (“Methods of Service”).
   (C)   The procedure in division (A) does not apply to public nuisances
constituting an imminent hazard. In such instances, the provisions in §
1.12.115 shall be followed.
   (D)   An owner or responsible party may appeal a notice to abate by filing a
written request for an appeal with the Town Clerk within ten days of service of
the notice to abate. The written appeal shall identify the property address,
specify the grounds for the appeal, list the date of the notice to abate being
appealed from and be signed by the appellant. In the event an owner or
responsible party files a timely request for hearing, the Town Clerk and
hearing officer shall schedule the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted no
later than 60 days of receipt of the request, unless otherwise agreed to in
writing by the parties. The Town Clerk shall send written notice of the
location, time and date of the hearing at least ten days in advance of the
hearing date.
   (E)   Failure of any owner or responsible party to timely appeal the notice
to abate constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal a notice to abate or seek
judicial review, and the nuisance conditions shall be deemed confirmed. Such
failure shall also constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative
remedies. If the owner or responsible party fails to appeal the notice and if
the nuisance condition has not been abated on or before the compliance date,
the enforcement officer may, without any administrative hearing, cause the
abatement of the nuisance condition upon the premises.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.070 METHODS OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Any notice or document required to be served under this chapter may be
served by certified mail with return receipt requested, by first class mail, or
by personal service. Service is deemed effective on the date it is personally
delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service receptacle.
   (B)   Any notice or document issued to an owner must be sent to the mailing
address on the last equalized assessment roll of the Marin County Assessor’s
Office, and the notice must be sent to the property address and posted at or
upon the main entrance of the building or structure or at another prominent
location on the real property.
   (C)   If there is no known address for any responsible party, the notice
must be sent to the property address and posted at or upon the main entrance of
the building or structure or at another prominent location on the real
property.
   (D)   Failure of any owner or responsible party to receive a document
properly served pursuant to this chapter does not affect the validity of the
notice or document, service, or any action or proceeding pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.075 MANNER OF CONDUCTING ABATEMENT HEARING.
   In the event a hearing is timely requested pursuant to §
1.12.065, the hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the following procedures:
   (A)   At the time and place designated in the notice of hearing, the hearing
officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, including but not
limited to, applicable staff reports, oral evidence, physical evidence and
documentary evidence regarding the alleged nuisance, and proposed method of
abatement. The hearing may be continued from time to time.
   (B)   Failure of the owner or responsible party to appear at the hearing
shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing and an admission by the
owner or responsible party of the existence of the nuisance condition charged.
In the event of such failure to appear, the hearing officer may order that the
nuisance condition be abated by the enforcement officer. Such failure to appear
shall also constitute a failure to exhaust available administrative remedies.
   (C)   The Town shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that a nuisance exists and that the proposed
mechanism for abatement is appropriate, if specified in the notice to abate.
The issuance of a notice to abate constitutes prima facie evidence of the
existence of a violation. The town need not demonstrate that the proposed
mechanism for abatement is either the most appropriate or least expensive.
   (D)   The hearing shall not be conducted according to the formal rules of
evidence. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the type of evidence
on which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious
affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which
might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil
actions in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. However, irrelevant
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
   (E)   Prior to conclusion of the hearing, if the owner or responsible party
is present, the hearing officer may request the owner or responsible party to
sign a consent to enter and perform work. The permission given shall be used
only if the nuisance condition is determined to exist and is not abated by the
schedule of correction specified in the hearing officer’s decision.
   (F)   If the owner or responsible party does not provide written consent,
entry onto the property may be made by obtaining verbal permission from the
owner or a responsible party, or by means of an inspection or abatement
warrant, or by any other lawful manner.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.080 ISSUANCE OF DECISION, FINDINGS AND ORDER.
   (A)   Within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision. The decision shall set forth the
factual findings made by the hearing officer, a conclusion as to whether a
nuisance condition exists, the manner of abatement, including an order that
such nuisance (if one is found to exist) be abated by the town and a schedule
of correction or the date by which the abatement shall be completed.
   (B)   If the hearing officer determines that a nuisance exists which has not
been corrected within the time period specified in the notice to abate nuisance
conditions, the hearing officer shall so find in the decision, and may include
in the decision any or all of the following:
      (1)   An order to correct, including a schedule of correction where
appropriate;
      (2)   An order to pay administrative costs as provided in §
1.12.095 of this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to issue a decision in ten days shall not affect the validity
of such decision.
   (D)   The decision shall be mailed by certified mail with a return receipt
requested to the owner and shall be mailed to the enforcement officer. A copy
of a summary of the decision and any order it contains shall also be posted on
the property by the enforcement officer in a conspicuous location.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.085 ABATEMENT BY ENFORCEMENT OFFICER IF NUISANCE IS NOT ABATED.
   (A)   In the event that the owner or responsible party fails to appeal the
notice to abate, or upon receipt of the hearing officer’s decision if: (i) no
schedule of correction has been issued; or (ii) upon the failure of the owner
and responsible part to comply with such schedule if a schedule was included,
and if the nuisance condition has not been abated the enforcement officer shall
forthwith abate, or cause to be abated, the nuisance condition upon the
premises. The enforcement officer is authorized to enter upon private property
for this purpose, consistent with the provisions of the U.S. Constitution.
   (B)   The cost of abatement shall become a personal obligation of the owner
and responsible party and may be collected in any legal manner, expressly
including as lien or special assessment pursuant to the procedures set forth in
this chapter. The cost of abatement of any public nuisance may include:
inspection costs; investigation costs; boundary determination and measurement
costs; attorneys’ fees and costs; clerical and associated administrative costs;
and costs to repair and eliminate all substandard conditions, including costs
of consultants and private contractors.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.090 ABATEMENT BY OWNER/RESPONSIBLE PARTY.
   (A)   Any owner or responsible party may, at his, her, or its own expense
and prior to the scheduled abatement hearing, abate a declared nuisance
condition in accordance with the provisions of the notice sent by the
enforcement officer; provided that all necessary permits are first obtained. If
the enforcement officer determines that the nuisance condition has been abated
prior to the hearing, the hearing proceedings shall be terminated. If any
abatement referenced in this section takes place after the specified compliance
date, but prior to date set for hearing, termination of the hearing shall only
take place upon the owner or responsible party’s payment of outstanding
penalties, administrative and/or abatement costs, including attorneys’ fees if
applicable.
   (B)   Any owner or responsible party may also request the town to abate a
declared nuisance condition on his, her or its property. However, the owner or
responsible party making the request shall be responsible for the payment of
all penalties, abatement costs and/or administrative costs, including
attorneys’ fees if applicable, incurred by the town. The request for the town
to perform the abatement shall be in writing and include a written consent to
enter and perform work. Any such request shall be deemed an agreement to pay
for the costs of such abatement, including but not limited to any penalties,
administrative costs, and an agreement that such costs may be collected as a
lien or special assessment upon the property. The abatement hearing proceedings
shall thereafter be terminated.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.095 LIABILITY FOR ABATEMENT COSTS.
   (A)   In addition to liability for the costs of abatement itself pursuant to
§
1.12.085 and this section of this chapter, the owner and responsible party
shall be jointly and severally liable for any expenses and administrative costs
incurred by the town, county or any related agency incurred after the initial
inspection and identification of the nuisance.
   (B)   The administrative costs may include any and all fees and costs
incurred by the town in connection with the matter before the hearing officer,
including but not limited to, costs of investigation, town staffing costs
incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, fees and
costs of the town’s consultants, and costs for all re-inspections necessary to
enforce the notice to abate nuisance conditions.
   (C)   In the event that the town is entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees
and costs pursuant to §
1.12.060, such fees and costs shall be collected at the same time and pursuant
to the same procedures as administrative costs pursuant to this section.
   (D)   The enforcement officer or other authorized town official shall keep
an itemized report of the costs incurred by the town in the abatement of any
public nuisance. The owner and responsible party shall be invoiced for the
total. If payment is not received, the itemized report shall be submitted in
writing to the Town Clerk no sooner than 20 days of the invoice date.
In the event the invoice is not paid within 30 days, the town may collect all
such abatement costs and interest through a lien or special assessment under §§
1.12.100 and
1.12.105.
   (E)   All abatement costs shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent per
annum from the date of abatement.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.100 LIEN PROCEDURE.
   In the event the town decides to collect abatement costs as a lien, it shall
impose such lien pursuant to this section:
   (A)   Upon receipt of the itemized report, the Town Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall serve notice of the lien upon all owners in the same manner as
summons in a civil action in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §
415.10 et seq. or otherwise as provided by Cal. Government Code § 38773.1, as
may be amended from time to time. If the owner of record, after diligent search
cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place upon the property for a period of ten days and publication
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in Marin County. The period of
notice commences upon the first day of publication and terminates at the end of
the tenth day, including therein the first day. Publication shall be made on
each day on which the newspaper is published during the ten-day period.
   (B)   The notice shall inform the owner of the pending lien and inform the
property owner of the public hearing where the Town Council will consider
imposing the itemized report as a lien against the property. The hearing shall
be conducted no less than ten days from service of the notice.
   (C)   At the hearing and after considering the relevant evidence, including
any evidence or objections of the owners as to the itemized report, the Town
Council may adopt a resolution confirming the itemized report and directing the
Town Clerk to record a lien against the property in the Marin County Recorder’s
office and, from the date of recording, shall have the force, effect and
priority of a judgment lien.
   (D)   The lien shall identify:
      (1)   The amount of the lien;
      (2)   The town as the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed;
      (3)   The date of the abatement order or citation;
      (4)   The street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number
of the parcel on which the lien is imposed; and
      (5)   The name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.
   (E)   In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied,
through either payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge, release, or
satisfaction containing the information specified in division (D) shall be
recorded by the Town Clerk.
   (F)   A lien may be foreclosed by an action brought by the town for a money
judgment.
   (G)   The town may recover from the property owner any costs incurred in the
processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner
as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.105 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURE.
   In the event the town decides to collect abatement costs as a special
assessment, it shall impose such special assessment pursuant to this section:
   (A)   Upon receipt of the itemized report, the Town Clerk shall provide
written notice of the special assessment to all owners by certified mail if the
property owner’s identity can be determined from the County Assessor’s or
County Recorder’s records, or as otherwise provided by Cal. Government Code §
38773.5, as may be amended from time to time. The notice shall inform the owner
of the pending special assessment, and the date, time and location of the
public hearing where the Town Council will consider imposing the itemized
report as a special assessment against the property, and that the property may
be sold after three years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent
assessments. The hearing shall be conducted no less than ten days from service
of the notice.
   (B)   At the hearing and after considering the relevant evidence, including
any evidence or objections of the owners as to the itemized report, the Town
Council may adopt a resolution confirming the itemized report and assessing the
report as a special assessment against the property. The Town Clerk shall then
provide all documentation necessary to the county to enter such assessment.
After entry, the assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the
same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes. The property may be sold after three
years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. The tax
collector’s power of sale shall not be affected by the failure of the property
owner to receive notice. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment.
However, if any real property to which the cost of abatement relates has been
transferred or conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a
bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior
to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would become
delinquent, then the cost of abatement shall not result in a lien against the
real property but instead transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.
   (C)   Subject to the requirements applicable to the sale of property
pursuant to Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 3691, the town may conduct a sale
of vacant residential developed property for which the payment of that
assessment is delinquent.
   (D)   Notices or instruments relating to the special assessment shall be
entitled to recordation with the Marin County Recorder’s Office. After
recordation, the special assessment may be foreclosed on as a lien in the
manner and means provided by law.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.110 ORDER FOR TREBLE COSTS OF ABATEMENT.
   Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a
two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
except for conditions abated pursuant to Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17980,
relating to abandoned buildings, the court may order the owner to pay treble
the costs of the abatement, as authorized by Cal. Government Code § 38773.7.
Costs of abatement shall include, without limitation by reason of enumeration,
all administrative costs of the town.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.115 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision of the code to the contrary, the Town
Manager, or his or her designee, may cause a public nuisance to be summarily
abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section if it is
determined that the nuisance is immediately or potentially dangerous to the
life, health or safety of the occupants of the property or to the public.
   (B)   Actions taken to abate immediately or potentially dangerous nuisances
may include, but are not limited to, repair or removal of the condition
creating the danger and/or the restriction from use or occupancy of the
property on which the condition exists or any other abatement action determined
by the enforcement officer to be necessary. Where a residential rental property
is involved, this may require the moving and relocation of the occupants by the
owner and/or responsible party to other habitable temporary or permanent
accommodations. Any temporary accommodations will be maintained by the owner
and/or responsible party, at his, her or its expense, until the corrections are
done to the vacated residential property so that it is habitable and the
occupants are returned.
   (C)   Within ten days following summary abatement, or as soon thereafter as
reasonable possible under the circumstances, notice of the summary abatement
must be provided to all owners and responsible parties in the manner required
by §
1.12.070. The notice shall describe the condition and the reason it was
immediately or potentially dangerous, and a brief description of the actions
town personnel took to abate the dangerous condition. Such notice shall include
a provision authorizing the owner or responsible party to dispute the existence
of the nuisance conditions or the town’s determination that the condition was
immediately or potentially dangerous before the hearing officer. Any request
for an appeal shall be filed in writing with the Town Clerk within ten days of
the notice and shall be conducted in the same manner as all applicable
procedures under §§
1.12.075 through
1.12.080.
   (D)   Omission of any of the foregoing provisions in a notice of summary
abatement, whether in whole or in part, or the failure of an owner or
responsible party to receive this document, does not render it defective or
render any proceeding or action pursuant to this chapter invalid.
   (E)   The enforcement officer shall keep an itemized report of the costs
incurred by the town in the summary abatement. The costs and expenses for
summary abatement, if not paid by the property owner within 30 days of the date
of the invoice, shall be collected pursuant to the procedures set forth in §§
1.12.100 through
1.12.105 of this chapter.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.120 RIGHT OF JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, any person aggrieved by any
administrative decision of a hearing officer pursuant to this chapter, may
obtain judicial review of the administrative decision in the superior court by
filing with the court a petition for writ of mandate pursuant to Cal. Code of
Civil Procedure § 1094.6.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.125 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   It is a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to allow, cause,
create, maintain, suffer, or permit others to maintain, any real property in
the town in such a manner that violates this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor offense
punishable in accordance with §
1.08.010 of this code, unless it is charged as an infraction in the discretion
of the Town Attorney or designated prosecuting attorney.
   (C)   Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day, or part thereof, during which a violation of this chapter is allowed,
caused, committed, continued, maintained, suffered, or permitted by such
person.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.130 REMEDIES.
   The remedies provided in this chapter are nonexclusive. The town may
prosecute any violation and abate any nuisance pursuant to any criminal, civil
or other administrative remedies available to the town.
(Ord. 831, passed 5-1-2019)
§ 1.12.135 COLLECTION OF COSTS.
   (A)   After confirmation of the report, the assessment shall be collected in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   The owner or occupant of the property described in the notice may
pay to the Town Treasurer the amount due on the abatement after the
confirmation of the report and until ten days before a copy of such report is
given to the County Assessor or, if certified copies were filed with the County
Auditor, until August 1 following the confirmation of the report.
      (2)   The County Assessor may collect the assessments by issuing separate
bills and receipts for the assessments, or the amount of the assessment may be
added to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for ordinary
municipal purposes and be collected therewith at the time and in the manner as
ordinary municipal taxes, subject to the same penalties and procedures of
foreclosure and sale for delinquencies.
      (3)   Foreclosure of a nuisance abatement lien on the property.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town Council may direct that the
assessment be collected in successive annual installments at the time and in
the manner of ordinary municipal taxes. Such installments would be subject to
the same penalties and procedures for foreclosure and sale for delinquencies
applicable to ordinary municipal taxes. An assessment payment made in
installments may include interest on the unpaid balance at a rate to be
determined by the Town Council.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.140 REFUNDS.
   The Town Council may order a refund of all or part of the assessment paid
pursuant to this chapter if it finds that all or part of the assessment had
been erroneously levied. An assessment or part thereof shall not be refunded
unless a claim is filed with the Town Clerk on or before six months after the
assessment became due and payable. Any claim shall be verified by the person
who paid the assessment, or his guardian, executor, or administrator.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.145 NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN.
   (A)   A nuisance abatement lien may be recorded in the Marin County
Recorder's office and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect,
and priority of a judgment lien.
   (B)   Prior to the recordation of the lien against the parcel of land on
which the nuisance is maintained, the owner of record of the parcel of land
shall receive notice. The notice of the recordation of the lien against the
parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained shall be served on the owner
of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance is maintained, based on
the last equalized assessment roll, or the supplemental roll, whichever is more
current. Such notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil
action in accordance with Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 415.10 et seq. The
date upon which service is made shall be entered on or affixed to the face of
the copy of the notice at the time of service. However, service of such notice
without such date shall be valid and effective.
   (C)   A nuisance abatement lien authorized by this section shall specify the
amount of the lien, the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien is imposed,
the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and
assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the
name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.
   (D)   In the event that the lien is discharged, released, or satisfied,
either through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the
information specified in division (C) of this section shall be recorded by the
town. A nuisance abatement lien and the release of the lien shall be indexed in
the grantor-grantee index.
   (E)   A nuisance abatement lien may be foreclosed by the town as a money
judgment. The town may recover from the property owner any costs incurred
regarding the processing and recording of the lien and providing notice to the
property owner as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien or as a
condition of removing the lien upon payment.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.150 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   If, in the opinion of the Town Manager or his or her designee, there exists
a condition on any premises which is of such a nature as to be imminently
dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare, which if abated according to
the generally applicable procedures of this chapter would, during pendency of
the proceedings, subject the public to potential harm of a serious nature, the
same may be abated summarily without compliance with the provisions of this
chapter. As an alternative to summary abatement, the Town Attorney may
institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the abatement of
any nuisance.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 1.12.155 INDEPENDENT PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter are to be supplementary and complementary to
all of the provisions of the Town Code, state law and any law cognizable at
common law or in equity, and nothing herein shall be read, interpreted or
construed in any manner so as to limit an existing right or power of the town
to abate any and all nuisances. Where another part of this Code provides an
alternative process for abatement of a particular type of nuisance, the town
shall have the discretion to proceed under either or both of the alternative
processes.
(Ord. 734, passed 6-18-2008)
CHAPTER 1.16: ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS
Section
   
1.16.010   Arrest and citation authority
   
1.16.020   Enforcement training program
   
1.16.030   Bail schedules
§ 1.16.010 ARREST AND CITATION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Officers and employees of the town who have discretionary duty to
enforce a statute or ordinance may, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 and
subject to the provisions of this chapter, arrest a person without a warrant
whenever any such officer or employee has reasonable cause to believe that the
person to be arrested has committed a misdemeanor or infraction in the
officer’s or employee’s presence which he or she has the discretionary duty to
enforce, and to issue a notice to appear in court, pursuant to Cal. Penal Code
Title 3, Chapter 5C, Part 2, commencing with § 853.5.
   (B)   No officer or employee shall be allowed by his or her supervisor to
exercise the arrest and citation authority conferred in this section unless the
officer or employee is within a classification of town officers and employees
designated by resolution of the Town Council to exercise the arrest and
citation authority as to specified misdemeanor or infraction violations.
(Prior Code, § 1.12.010) (Ord. 528, passed - -1984)
§ 1.16.020 ENFORCEMENT TRAINING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall establish and cause to be administered a
special enforcement training program designed to instruct each officer or
employee who will exercise the arrest and citation authority, regarding the
provisions of the statutes and ordinances to be enforced, the evidentiary
prerequisites to proper prosecution for violations thereof, the appropriate
procedures for making arrests or otherwise prudently exercising the arrest and
citation authority, and the legal and practical ramifications and limitations
attendant thereto.
   (B)   Any such officers or employees shall be appropriately instructed to
deposit executed citations or notices with the appropriate town department for
filing with the court, after review for legal sufficiency.
(Prior Code, § 1.12.020) (Ord. 528, passed - -1984)
§ 1.16.030 BAIL SCHEDULES.
   The Town Council shall, by resolution, adopt bail schedules applicable to
violations of specific ordinances, upon prior approval by the Marin County
Municipal  Court.
(Prior Code, § 1.12.030) (Ord. 528, passed - -1984)
CHAPTER 1.20: CLAIMS AGAINST TOWN
Section
   
1.20.010   Claims presentation procedures
   
1.20.020   Further claims presentation procedures
§ 1.20.010 CLAIMS PRESENTATION PROCEDURES.
   All claims for money or damages against the town shall be presented to the
Town Clerk or the Town Clerk’s designee.
(Prior Code, § 1.16.010)  (Ord. 626, passed - -1993)
§ 1.20.020 FURTHER CLAIMS PRESENTATION PROCEDURES.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 935, the following claims procedures are
established, to wit, all claims against the town for damages or money, when a
procedure for processing the claims is not otherwise provided by state law,
shall be presented within the time limitations and in the manner prescribed by
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 910 through 915.2, notwithstanding the exemptions set forth
in Cal. Gov’t Code § 905. The claims shall further be subject to the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code § 945.4 relating to the prohibition of suits in the absence
of the presentation of claims and action thereon by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 1.16.020)  (Ord. 626, passed - -1993)
TITLE 2: ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
   Chapter
      
2.04.   MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
      
2.08.   TOWN COUNCIL
      
2.12.   TOWN MANAGER
      
2.16.   DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
      
2.20.   BUILDING INSPECTOR
      
2.24.   OFFICERS’ BONDS
      
2.28.   PLANNING COMMISSION
      
2.32.   PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
      
2.36.   RESERVED
      
2.40.   RESERVED
      
2.44.   APPEALS PROCEDURE
      
2.48.   CONFLICT OF INTEREST
      
2.52.   EMERGENCY SERVICES
      
2.56.   PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
      
2.60.   PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
      
2.64.   RETIREMENT SYSTEM
      2.65.   ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES
CHAPTER 2.04: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Section
   
2.04.010   Municipal elections
   
2.04.020    Council vacancies
   
2.04.030   Electronic filing system
§ 2.04.010 MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Beginning with the November, 2020 election, all general municipal
elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November
of even-numbered years and shall be consolidated with the statewide general
election held on that day.
   (B)   When a municipal election is held in the town and the election is
consolidated with another election, the provisions contained in Cal. Elections
Code §§ 23300 et seq. shall govern the consolidation, and, if the County Clerk
is requested to conduct the municipal election, Cal. Elections Code § 22003
shall be applicable to that election.
(Prior Code, § 2.02.010) (Ord. 620, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 807, passed 5-3-
2017)
§ 2.04.020 COUNCIL VACANCIES.
   (A)   If a vacancy occurs on the Town Council, the Town Council shall,
within 60 days from the commencement of the vacancy, either fill the vacancy by
appointment or call a special election to fill the vacancy as provided by Cal.
Gov’t Code § 36512(b).
   (B)   If the Town Council fills the vacancy by appointment, the person
appointed shall hold office only until the date on which the town holds a
special election, which shall immediately be called to fill the remainder of
the term as permitted under Cal. Gov’t Code § 36512(c)(3). The special election
may be held either on the date of the next regularly established election or
regularly scheduled municipal election to be held throughout the town not less
than 114 days from the call of the special election, as provided by Cal. Gov’t
Code § 36512(c)(3).
(Ord. 769, passed 4-3-2013; Am. Ord. 807, passed 5-3-2017)
§ 2.04.030 ELECTRONIC FILING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Required use of electronic filing system.
      (1)   Except as set forth in division (B) of this section, any elected
officer, candidate, committee, other person required to file specified
statements, reports, forms, or other documents with the Town Clerk as required
by Chapter 4 (commencing with § 84100 of Title 9 of the California Government
Code, also known as the Political Reform Act), and that has received
contributions or made expenditures of $2,000 or more in a calendar year, may
electronically file such statements using the town's online system according to
procedures established by the Town Clerk. However, to ensure reporting
continuity, once a statement, report, form, or other document is filed
electronically on behalf of any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other
person, all future statements, reports, forms, and other documents filed on
behalf of that officer, candidate, committee, or other person must be filed
electronically.
      (2)   An elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person may
choose not to use the electronic filing system by filing all original
statements, reports, forms, or other documents in paper format with the Town
Clerk, until such time as the Town Council determines that electronic filing is
mandatory for all filers.
   (B)   Paper filing not required after electronic filing. Any elected
officer, candidate, committee, or other person who has electronically filed a
statement, report, form, or other document using the town's online system is
not also required to file a copy of that document in a paper format with the
Town Clerk.
   (C)   Filing options when a copy must be filed with Town Clerk. In any
instance in which an original statement, report, form, or other document must
be filed with the Secretary of State or other agency, and a copy of that
document is required to be filed with the Town Clerk, the filer may
electronically file a copy with the Town Clerk, or may file in a paper format.
   (D)   Paper filing when cannot file electronically. If, for technical
reasons, the town's system is not capable of accepting a particular type of
statement, report, form or other document, an elected officer, candidate,
committee, or other person shall timely file that document in paper format with
the Town Clerk.
   (E)   Internet posting of data. The Town Clerk shall ensure that the town's
system makes all electronically filed statements, reports, forms, or other
documents available on the internet in an easily understood format that
provides the greatest public access. The data shall be made available free of
charge and as soon as possible after receipt/deadline. The data made available
on the internet shall not contain the street name of the persons or entity
representatives listed on the electronically filed forms or any bank account
number required to be disclosed by the filer. The Town Clerk's office shall
also make a complete, unredacted copy of the statement, report, form, or other
document available to the Fair Political Practices Commission for Government
Code § 87200 filers.
   (F)   Records retention. The Town Clerk's office shall maintain records
according to the town's records retention schedule and applicable state law
commencing from the date filed, a secured, official version of each online or
electronic statement, report, form, or other document, which shall serve as the
official version of that record.
(Ord. 889, passed 6-5-2024)
CHAPTER 2.08: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
   
2.08.010   Council meetings
   
2.08.020   Minutes and journal
   
2.08.030   Rules of order
   
2.08.040   Reserved
   
2.08.050   Addressing Council
   
2.08.060   Suspension of order of business
   
2.08.070   Disorderly conduct at meetings
   
2.08.080   Compensation of Council members
   
2.08.090   Council public issue agenda policy
§ 2.08.010 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   All official meetings of the Town Council shall be held at the Council
Chambers, Fairfax Women's Club Building, 46 Park Road, in the town. Regular
meetings of the Town Council shall be held at 6:30 p.m. on the first Wednesday
of each calendar month, with the exceptions of the months of January and July,
which regular meeting dates may be changed to another day of the specified
month due to the holidays, and established by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.010) (Am. Ord. 682, passed 1-9-2001; Am. Ord. 710, passed
3-1-2005; Am. Ord. 755, passed 11-3-2010; Am. Ord. 817, passed 5-20-2018; Am.
Ord. 863, passed 6-1-2022)
§ 2.08.020 MINUTES AND JOURNAL.
   The minutes of the Council or journal of their proceedings required to be
kept by the Clerk shall be neatly typewritten in a special looseleaf journal
book, with each of the different kinds of business transacted set off by
paragraphs with proper subheads.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.020)
§ 2.08.030 RULES OF ORDER.
   The proceedings of the Council shall be governed under “Robert’s Rules of
Order” on all matters pertaining to parliamentary law; but no ordinance,
resolution, proceeding or other action of the Council shall be invalidated or
the legality thereof otherwise affected by the failure or omission to observe
or follow the rules.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.030)
§ 2.08.040 RESERVED.
§ 2.08.050 ADDRESSING COUNCIL.
   Any citizen may arise and address the Council on any business especially
concerning him or her or affecting his or her interests, but preference will be
given to those who have first presented matters in the form of written
communications or who have personally notified the Mayor of their desire to
speak.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.060)
§ 2.08.060 SUSPENSION OF ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The regular order of business may be suspended by a majority vote for the
accommodation of non- residents who may have business before the Council or for
any other purpose.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.070)
§ 2.08.070 DISORDERLY CONDUCT AT MEETINGS.
   Any member of the Council or any person using profane, vulgar, loud or
boisterous language at any meeting or otherwise interrupting the proceedings,
who refuses to be seated or keep quiet when ordered to do so by the Mayor or
President Pro Tempore of the Council, is guilty of a misdemeanor. It is the
duty of the Chief of Police, upon the order of the presiding officer, to eject
any such member of the Council or any other person from the Council chambers.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.080)
§ 2.08.080 COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   Each member of the Town Council shall receive the maximum salary permitted
by Cal. Gov’t Code § 36516, based upon the latest estimate of population for
the Town of Fairfax made by the state’s Department of Finance. The salary shall
be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the Council as
reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of
official duties of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.04.090) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 2.08.090 COUNCIL PUBLIC ISSUE AGENDA POLICY.
   (A)   The Council shall have all legislative power of a city granted by the
California Constitution and applicable California Supreme Court decisions which
recognize "that as representatives of local communities, boards of supervisors
and city councils have traditionally made declarations of policy on matters of
concern to the community whether or not they had the power to effectuate such
declarations by binding legislation. Indeed one of the purposes of local
government is to represent its citizens before the Congress, the Legislature,
and administrative agencies in matters over which the local government has no
power." Farley v. Healey, 67 Cal 2d 325, 329 (1967). In accordance with these
principles, the Town Council hereby adopts an agenda policy that encourages
consideration of a broad range of public issues.
   (B)   The Town Council, recognizing that the health and welfare of the town
is inextricably intertwined with that of regional, state, national and
international communities and economies, hereby adopts an agenda policy which
encourages discussion of a broad range of proposed resolutions on public
issues, including those of regional, state, national and international concern.
Such resolutions may be transmitted to county, state or federal elected or
administrative officials as determined by the Council in the exercise of its
discretion. The Council may hear such items on its regular agenda or consent
calendar, or set a duly noticed special meeting to hear the item.
   (C)   In conformity with the procedural rules and substantive authority
granted to the Council by state law and the Town Code, the Council may place on
the agenda during a duly noticed meeting the discussion and consideration of
any issues of public concern, including those of regional, state, national or
international concern presented to it by the usual methods (including but not
limited to a resident's request at open time, by a letter to the Council, or
other means). In addition, the Council shall place on the agenda during a duly
noticed meeting the public discussion and consideration of any such issue of
public concern if presented with a residents’ petition signed by 25 residents
of the town urging consideration of the issue. If a residents' petition is
timely presented, the issue shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
meeting of the Council. If such residents' petition is not presented in time to
be placed on the agenda for the next regular meeting, it shall be placed on the
next upcoming regular or special meeting agenda. The Council is authorized to
transmit resolutions passed under this section to the President, members of
Congress, the Governor, the California State Legislature and other governing
bodies and administrative agencies, as the Council deems appropriate in the
exercise of its discretion.
   (D)   In setting an issue on an agenda for consideration under this section,
the Council shall place the item after public hearings and agenda items of
exclusively local concern to Fairfax residents. This requirement does not,
however, diminish the authority of the Council to amend an agenda at a meeting
to advance, for public discussion, an issue of concern under this section.
(Ord. 733, passed 4-16-2008)
CHAPTER 2.12: TOWN MANAGER
Section
   
2.12.010   Office established
   
2.12.020   Appointment; term
   
2.12.030   Residency requirement
   
2.12.040   Eligibility of Council members
   
2.12.050   Pro Tempore Town Manager
   
2.12.060   Compensation
   
2.12.070   Powers and duties
   
2.12.080   Council Manager relations
   
2.12.090   Duty to assist Town Manager
   
2.12.100   Suspension; removal
   
2.12.110   Exclusion from civil service
§ 2.12.010 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   The Office of Town Manager of the town is created and established.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.010) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.020 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall be appointed by the Town Council solely on the
basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and ability.
   (B)   He or she shall hold office at and during the pleasure of the Town
Council, subject to the provisions of §
2.12.100.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.020) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.030 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   Residency in the Town of Fairfax, at the time of appointment of the Town
Manager, shall not be required as a condition of appointment or service.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.030) (Ord. 438, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-
2005; Am. Ord. 855, passed 7-7-2021)
§ 2.12.040 ELIGIBILITY OF COUNCIL MEMBERS.
   No person elected to membership on the Town Council shall, subsequent to the
election, be eligible for appointment to the Office of Town Manager until at
least one year has elapsed after he or she has ceased to be a member of the
Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.040) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.050 PRO TEMPORE TOWN MANAGER.
   The Town Manager shall designate, subject to the approval of the Town
Council, one of the other officers or department heads of the town to serve as
Town Manager Pro Tempore during the temporary absence or disability of the Town
Manager. In case of the absence or disability of the Town Manager and his or
her failure to so designate a Manager Pro Tempore, the Council may designate
some duly qualified person to perform the duties of the Town Manager during the
period of absence or disability of the Town Manager, subject, however, to the
person furnishing a corporate surety bond conditioned upon faithful performance
of the duties required to be performed as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.060) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.060 COMPENSATION.
   The Town Manager shall receive the compensation and expense allowances as
the Town Council shall, from time to time, fix and determine by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.070) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.070 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall be the administrative head of the government of
the town under the direction and control of the Town Council, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all the affairs of the town which are under his or
her control.
   (B)   In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and
not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall
have the powers set forth in the following divisions:
      (1)   Enforcement of laws. To see that all laws and ordinances of the
town are duly enforced and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted
by the town are faithfully observed;
      (2)   Control of officers and employees. To control, order and give
directions to all heads of departments, and to subordinate officers and
employees of the town through their department heads; transfer employees from
one department to another; and consolidate or combine offices, positions,
departments or units under his or her direction;
      (3)   Appointment and removal of certain officers. Subject to, and in
accordance with, civil service and town personnel ordinances and regulations,
to appoint, remove and demote any appointive officers and employees, except the
Town Attorney; provided, however, that the appointment of department heads
shall require ratification by the Town Council until the Town Manager has
served in that position for 12 months;
      (4)   Representation of town. To represent the town in its negotiations
and working relationships with the state, the county and other governmental
jurisdictions; provided that, any contracts negotiated for the exchange of
services from any such other governmental jurisdiction shall be subject to
approval by the Town Council;
      (5)   Attendance at Council meetings. To attend all meetings of the Town
Council unless excused therefrom by the Council;
      (6)   Recommend ordinances. To recommend to the Town Council, for
adoption, the measures or ordinances as he or she deems necessary or expedient;
      (7)   Advise as to finances. To keep the Town Council, at all times,
fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the town;
      (8)   Preparation of budget. To prepare and submit the proposed annual
budget and the proposed salary plan to the Town Council for its approval;
      (9)   Purchase of supplies. Subject to and in accordance with the town
purchasing ordinance, to direct and supervise the purchase and acquisition in
any lawful manner of all property, equipment, services, materials and supplies
for the town and for all departments and divisions thereof; provided, the
purchase or acquisition thereof has been approved by the Town Council or is
included in a budget which has been approved and adopted by the Town Council;
(No expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the Town Council, except
on report or approval of the Town Manager.)
      (10)   Investigation of town affairs. To make investigations into the
affairs of the town or any department or division thereof and any contract for
the proper performance of any obligations running to the town;
      (11)   Investigation of complaints. To investigate all complaints in
relation to matters concerning the administration of the town government and in
regard to services maintained by public utilities in the town and to see that
all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the town are faithfully
performed and observed;
      (12)   Supervision of public property. To exercise general supervision
over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is
under the control and jurisdiction of the Town Council;
      (13)   Devotion of entire time to duties. To devote full time to the
duties of his or her office and the interests of the town;
      (14)   Performance of delegated duties. To perform such other duties and
exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time
by ordinance or resolution or other action of the Town Council; and
      (15)   Attendance at commission and board meetings. To attend all
meetings of any commissions or boards heretofore or hereafter created by the
Town Council upon his or her own volition or upon direction of the Town
Council. At any such meetings which he or she attends, the Town Manager shall
be heard by the commissions and boards as to all matters upon which he or she
wishes to address them.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.080) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005 ; Am. Ord. 718, passed
11-1-2006; Am. Ord. 744, passed 7-1-2009; Am. Ord. 879, passed 6-7-2023)
§ 2.12.080 COUNCIL MANAGER RELATIONS.
   The Town Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services
of the town only through the Town Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry,
and neither the Town Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any
subordinates of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall take his or her orders
and instructions from the Town Council only when sitting in a duly held meeting
of the Town Council and no individual Council member shall give any orders or
instructions to the Town Manager. No individual Council member shall give any
orders or instructions to the Town Manager, except the Mayor or Vice Mayor, or
Acting Mayor in the case of emergency
(Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.090 DUTY TO ASSIST TOWN MANAGER.
   It is the duty of all subordinate officers and the Town Attorney to
cooperate with and assist the Town Manager in administering the affairs of the
town most efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be
consistent with their duties as prescribed by the laws and ordinances of the
town.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.100) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.100 SUSPENSION; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Removal or suspension of the Town Manager shall be only by the
affirmative votes of at least three members of the Town Council at a regular
meeting of the Council.
   (B)   The Town Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a
period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the
town at which election a member of the Town Council is elected. The purpose of
this provision is to allow any newly elected member to the Town Council, or a
reorganized Town Council, to observe the actions and ability of the Town
Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After
the expiration of the 90-day period aforementioned, the provisions of division
(A) above as to the removal of the Town Manager shall apply and be effective.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.110) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
§ 2.12.110 EXCLUSION FROM CIVIL SERVICE.
   The Office of the Town Manager is specifically excluded from the civil
service or personnel system of the town, and the Town Manager shall not be
entitled to the benefits, advantages or protection of the civil service or
personnel system of the town. He or she shall not be subject to the procedures
outlined or prevailing in the system.
(Prior Code, § 2.08.120) (Am. Ord. 712, passed 7-6-2005)
CHAPTER 2.16: DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Section
   
2.16.010   Office created
   
2.16.020   Accounting officer; maintenance of records
   
2.16.030   Annual statement to Council
   
2.16.040   Publication of financial statement
   
2.16.050   Transfer of financial duties from Town Clerk
   
2.16.060   Salary
Cross-reference:
   
Revenue and Finance, see Title 3
§ 2.16.010 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created in the town, pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 40805.5, the Office of Director of Finance.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.010)
§ 2.16.020 ACCOUNTING OFFICER; MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS.
   The Director of Finance shall be the accounting officer of the town and
shall maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.020)
§ 2.16.030 ANNUAL STATEMENT TO COUNCIL.
   At the end of each fiscal year, the Director of Finance shall prepare and
present to the Town Council a summary statement of receipts and disbursements,
including opening and closing fund balances in the treasury.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.030)
§ 2.16.040 PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENT.
   (A)   The Director of Finance shall cause a financial statement to be
published once in a newspaper of general circulation printed and published in
the town; provided that, if there is no such newspaper, the Director of Finance
shall cause copies of the statement to be posted in three public, places in the
town designated by ordinance as the places for posting all public notices.
   (B)   The financial statement shall be printed or posted not later than 120
days after the close of the fiscal year for which the report is compiled.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.040)
§ 2.16.050 TRANSFER OF FINANCIAL DUTIES FROM TOWN CLERK.
   There are transferred to the Office of the Director of Finance the financial
and accounting duties imposed upon the Town Clerk by Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 40802
through 40805.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.050)
§ 2.16.060 SALARY.
   The salary of the Director of Finance shall be fixed by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.12.060)
CHAPTER 2.20: BUILDING INSPECTOR
Section
   
2.20.010   Office created; powers and duties
   
2.20.020   Compensation
   
2.20.030   Disposition of fees
§ 2.20.010 OFFICE CREATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   There is created the Office of Building Inspector, who shall have the powers
and perform the duties prescribed for the Building Inspector delineated and
designated in the Building Code, adopted by §
15.04.010.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.010)
§ 2.20.020 COMPENSATION.
   The Building Inspector shall receive, as compensation for the performance of
his or her duties, such an amount as may be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.020)
§ 2.20.030 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
    All fees for permits issued by the Building Inspector shall be deposited
with the Town Treasurer at the end of each calendar month.
(Prior Code, § 2.16.030)
CHAPTER 2.24: OFFICERS’ BONDS
Section
   
2.24.010   Town Clerk
   
2.24.020   Town Treasurer
§ 2.24.010 TOWN CLERK.
   The penal sum of the bond required of the Town Clerk, to be executed in
favor of the town, as provided in the Government Code of the state, is fixed at
the sum of $5,000 or provided by insurance.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.010)
§ 2.24.020 TOWN TREASURER.
   The penal sum of the bond required of the Town Treasurer, to be executed in
favor of the town, as provided in the Government Code of the state, is fixed at
the sum of $10,000 or provided by insurance.
(Prior Code, § 2.20.020)
CHAPTER 2.28: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
2.28.010   Establishment
   
2.28.020   Powers and duties
   
2.28.030   Composition; appointment of members
   
2.28.040   Terms of office; filling of vacancies
   
2.28.050   Removal of members
   
2.28.060   Residency requirements
   
2.28.070   Compensation
   
2.28.080   Quorum
   
2.28.090   Meetings; generally
   
2.28.100   Special meetings
   
2.28.110   Records of proceedings
   
2.28.120   Chairperson
   
2.28.130   Expenses
§ 2.28.010 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Planning Commission is established in and for the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.010)
§ 2.28.020 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall perform all of the duties and obligations
required of it by the laws of the State of California and the provisions of
this code, and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to it by the
Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.020) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 2.28.030 COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by
the Town Council in accord with the general rules governing Council action.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.030)  (Ord. 575, passed --1988; Am. Ord. 659, passed --
1997)
§ 2.28.040 TERMS OF OFFICE; FILLING OF VACANCIES.
   (A)   Other than ex officio members, who will serve during their respective
terms of office, members of the Planning Commission shall serve for a period of
four years, which terms, fixed by resolution of the Town Council, shall be
staggered so that no more than two terms shall expire in any one calendar year.
   (B)   Successor Commissioners for a new term shall be appointed for a period
of four years.
   (C)   Vacancies which occur other than by expiration of term shall be filled
by appointment for the unexpired portion of the term vacated.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.040)
§ 2.28.050 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   Any appointed member of the Planning Commission may be removed by the Mayor,
with or without cause, with the concurrence of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.050)
§ 2.28.060 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
   Other than ex officio members, members of the Planning Commission must be
residents of the town in order to be eligible for appointment to the Planning
Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.060)
§ 2.28.070 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall not receive any compensation
for their services.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.070)
§ 2.28.080 QUORUM.
   Four members of the Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business and the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum
shall be sufficient for action by the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.080)
§ 2.28.090 MEETINGS; GENERALLY.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall meet at least once each
calendar month, at such times and places as may be fixed by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.090)
§ 2.28.100 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Planning Commission may be called at any time by the
Chairperson or by five members by written notice served upon each member of the
Commission at least three hours before the time specified for the proposed
special meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.100)
§ 2.28.110 RECORDS OF PROCEEDINGS.
    Action minutes and records shall be kept of the proceedings of the Planning
Commission so long as an electronic recording of the meeting is available. If
an electronic recording is not available detailed minutes and records shall be
kept.
(Ord. 735, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 2.28.120 CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   Planning Commissioners shall meet in regular session and elect a
chairperson and vice chairperson. The election shall be by a majority vote of
the Commission, to be held in December of each year. The term of service for
these offices shall be one year, beginning in January of each year. No
commissioner shall serve more than two consecutive full terms as chairperson of
the Commission.
   (B)   The chairperson shall preside over all Planning Commission meetings.
The vice chairperson shall preside in the absence of the chairperson.
   (C)   Should a mid-term vacancy occur in the Office of Chairperson, the vice
chair shall assume the role of chair for the remainder of the term and a new
vice chair shall be elected.
   (D)   Should chair and vice chair be absent members shall elect a chair pro
tem.
(Ord. 735, passed 6-18-2008)
§ 2.28.130 EXPENSES.
   The Town Council may, in making its annual tax levy and as a part thereof,
levy and collect a tax for the purpose of defraying the lawful expenses
incurred by the Planning Commission, not to exceed two mills on the dollar of
assessed valuation; provided that, no expense of any kind shall be incurred by
the Commission unless first authorized and approved by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.24.140)
CHAPTER 2.32: PARK AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
   
2.32.010   Establishment
   
2.32.020   Qualifications of members
   
2.32.030   Terms of office and vacancies
   
2.32.040   Appointment
   
2.32.050   Organization
   
2.32.060   Attendance
§ 2.32.010 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is created the Park and Recreation Commission composed of five
members.
(Prior Code, § 2.26.010) (Ord. 576, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 658, passed - -
1997)
§ 2.32.020 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   Commission members shall be qualified electors of the town. Commissioners
shall serve without compensation. The members of the Commission shall include
five members of the public who shall hold no other public office in the town. A
sixth seat on the Commission may be filled by a resident of the town or shared
by more than one resident, under the voting age, to be an advisory, non-voting
member. The youth Commissioner(s) shall be appointed for a two-year term.
(Prior Code, § 2.26.020) (Ord. 576, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 612, passed - -
1992; Am. Ord. 618, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 658, passed - -1997)
§ 2.32.030 TERMS OF OFFICE AND VACANCIES.
   Members of the Commission shall serve for a period of four years from the
date of appointment. Terms shall be staggered so that no more than two terms
shall expire in any one calendar year. Successor Commissioners for a new term
shall be appointed for a period of four years. Vacancies which occur other than
by expiration shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired portion of the
term vacated. All members shall serve at the pleasure of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.26.030) (Ord. 576, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 658, passed - -
1997)
§ 2.32.040 APPOINTMENT.
   Appointments for the Commission and the filling of vacancies shall be made
by the Town Council in accord with the general rules governing Council action.
(Prior Code, § 2.26.040) (Ord. 576, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 658, passed - -
1997)
§ 2.32.050 ORGANIZATION.
   At its first regular meeting of the calendar year, the members of the
Commission shall elect the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, who shall hold
office for one year. The Chairperson shall preside over meetings, appoint
appropriate committees and direct the affairs, including establishing the
meeting agenda of the Commission. In the absence of the Chairperson, the duties
of this office shall be performed by the Vice-Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 2.26.050) (Ord. 576, passed - -1988)
§ 2.32.060 ATTENDANCE.
   Members are expected to attend all scheduled meetings of the Commission.
Absence of a member from three consecutive regular meetings, or more than four
regular meetings in a six-month period, without prior consent of the
Chairperson, as noted in the Commission’s official minutes, constitutes the
voluntary resignation of the member and the position shall be declared vacant.
(Prior Code, § 2.26.060) (Ord. 576, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 2.36: RESERVED
CHAPTER 2.40: RESERVED
CHAPTER 2.44: APPEALS PROCEDURE
Section
   
2.44.010   Right of appeal
   
2.44.020   Procedure
§ 2.44.010 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any order, requirement, permit, decision or determination by any
administrative official, advisory body or commission, in the administration of
this code or any ordinance of the town, may be appealed to the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.40.010) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 2.44.020 PROCEDURE.
   Where the appellate procedure is not otherwise specified, the appeal shall
be made by filing a verified application with the Town Clerk and paying any
prescribed fee within ten calendar days of the action being appealed.
(Prior Code, § 2.40.020) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 2.48: CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Section
   
2.48.010   Purpose; findings
   
2.48.020   Circumstances requiring disqualification
   
2.48.030   Filing officer
§ 2.48.010 PURPOSE; FINDINGS.
   The Political Reform Act, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 81000 et seq., requires state
and local government agencies to adopt and promulgate conflict of interest
codes. The Fair Political Practices Commission has adopted a regulation, 2 Cal.
Code of Regs. § 18730, which contains the terms of a standard conflict of
interest code, which can be incorporated by reference and may be amended by the
Fair Political Practices Commission to conform to amendments in the Political
Reform Act. Therefore, the terms of 2 Cal. Code of Regs. § 18730 and any
amendments to it duly adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission are
hereby incorporated by reference, and along with Exhibit “A” of the ordinance
codified herein, in which officials and employees are designated and in which
disclosure categories are set forth, shall constitute the “Conflict of Interest
Code of the Town of Fairfax,” which is considered the “Agency” within the
purview of this code. Exhibit “A” may be subsequently amended by Resolution of
the Fairfax Town Council. The Conflict of Interest Code of the Town of Fairfax
as so adopted amends and replaces any Conflict of Interest Code of the Town of
Fairfax previously in effect to conform to this newly adopted code.
(Ord. 692, passed 7-23-2002)
§ 2.48.020 CIRCUMSTANCES REQUIRING DISQUALIFICATION.
   Any member of the Town Council or of a town board or commission and any town
employee must disqualify himself or herself from making or participating in the
making of any decision in which he or she has a reportable financial interest,
when it is reasonably foreseeable that the interest may be materially affected
by the decision. No such person shall be required to disqualify himself or
herself with respect to any matter which could not be legally acted upon or
decided without his or her participation.
(Ord. 692, passed 7-23-2002)
§ 2.48.030 FILING OFFICER.
   Designated employees shall file statements of economic interest with the
Town Clerk, who shall be and shall perform the duties of filing officer for the
town.
(Ord. 692, passed 7-23-2002)
CHAPTER 2.52: EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
   
2.52.010   Purpose
   
2.52.020   Definition
   
2.52.030   Disaster Council; creation; membership
   
2.52.040   Disaster Council; powers and duties
   
2.52.050   Disaster Council; meetings
   
2.52.060   Director and Assistant Director; offices
   
2.52.070   Director and Assistant Director; powers and duties
   
2.52.080   Emergency organization
   
2.52.090   Emergency plan
   
2.52.100   Expenditures
   
2.52.110   Violation; penalty
§ 2.52.010 PURPOSE.
   The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
town in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization;
and the coordination of the emergency functions of the town with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.010)
§ 2.52.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY. The actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or
of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the town caused
by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or
earthquake or other conditions, including conditions resulting from a labor
controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the town, requiring the
combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.020)
§ 2.52.030 DISASTER COUNCIL; CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   The Disaster Council is created and shall consist of the following:
   (A)   The Mayor, who shall be Chairperson;
   (B)   The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be Vice-Chairperson;
   (C)   The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;
   (D)   The chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current
emergency plan of the town, adopted pursuant to this chapter; and
   (E)   The representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional
or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be
appointed
by the Director with the advice and consent of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.030)
§ 2.52.040 DISASTER COUNCIL; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Disaster Council, and it is empowered, to
develop and recommend for adoption by the Town Council, emergency and mutual-
aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and
regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.040)
§ 2.52.050 DISASTER COUNCIL; MEETINGS.
   The Disaster Council shall meet upon call of the Chairperson or, in his or
her absence from the town or inability to call the meeting, upon call of the
Vice- Chairperson.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.050)
§ 2.52.060 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR; OFFICES.
   (A)   There is created the Office of Director of Emergency Services. The
Town Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.
   (B)   There is created the Office of Assistant Director of Emergency
Services, who shall be appointed by the Director.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.060)
§ 2.52.070 DIRECTOR AND ASSISTANT DIRECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Director is empowered to:
      (1)   Request the Town Council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a “local
emergency” if the Town Council is in session, or to issue the proclamation if
the Town Council is not in session; (Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed
by the Director, the Town Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation
within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or
effect.)
      (2)   In the event of the unavailability of a quorum of the Town Council,
request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of
the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the
emergency;
      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of the
town for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
      (4)   Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff
of the emergency organization of the town, and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them;
      (5)   Represent the town in all dealings with public or private agencies
on matters pertaining to emergencies, as defined in this chapter;
      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency,” as herein
provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the
director of the state’s Office of Emergency Services or the existence of a
“state of war emergency,” the Director is empowered to:
         (a)   Make and issue rules and regulations on matters of life and
property as affected by such emergency; provided that, the rules and
regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the Town
Council;
         (b)   Obtain vital supplies, equipment and other properties found
lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the town
for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately, to commandeer the same
for public use;
         (c)   Require emergency services of any town officer or employee and,
in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county or the
existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens
as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; the persons
shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by
state law for registered disaster service workers;
         (d)   Requisition necessary personnel or material of any town
department or agency; and
         (e)   Execute all of his or her ordinary power as Town Manager, all of
the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution
or emergency plan adopted pursuant to this chapter by the Town Council, all
powers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by
the Town Council and by any other lawful authority.
   (B)   The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of
succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director is
unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his or her duties during
an emergency. The order of succession shall be approved by the Town Council.
   (C)   The Assistant Director shall, under the supervision of the Director
and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans
and manage the emergency programs of the town, and shall have such other powers
and duties as may be assigned by the Director.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.070)
§ 2.52.080 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION.
   All officers and employees of the town, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and
persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed
into service under the provisions of §
2.52.070(A)(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life
and property in the town during the emergency, shall constitute the emergency
organization of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.080)
  § 2.52.090 EMERGENCY PLAN.
   The Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the town
emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all
of the resources of the town, both public and private, to meet any condition
constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency,
and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff
of the emergency organization. The plan shall take effect upon adoption by
resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.090)
§ 2.52.100 EXPENDITURES.
   Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including
mutual-aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct
protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.100)
§ 2.52.110 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500 or by
imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an
emergency, to:
   (A)   Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency
organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued
pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or
her by virtue of this chapter;
   (B)   Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant
to this chapter, if the act is of a nature as to give or be likely to give
assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of
the town or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense of protection thereof; or
   (C)   Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification
specified by the emergency agency of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2.52.110)
CHAPTER 2.56: PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
2.56.010   Applicability; classified service
   
2.56.020   Civil service system adopted
   
2.56.030   Personnel officer
   
2.56.040   Personnel rules
   
2.56.050   Appointments
   
2.56.060   Age limits
   
2.56.070   Probationary period
   
2.56.080   Applicability of certain personnel rules to full-time non-classified
positions
   
2.56.090   Employee discipline
   
2.56.100   Right of appeal
   
2.56.110   Abolishing positions
   
2.56.120   Political activities
   
2.56.130   Discrimination prohibited
   
2.56.140   Contracts for technical services
   
2.56.150   Appropriation of funds
§ 2.56.010 APPLICABILITY; CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter apply to all offices, positions and
employments in the service of the town, except:
      (1)   Elective officers; members of the Town Council, the Town Clerk and
the Town Treasurer;
      (2)   Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;
      (3)   The Town Manager, his or her secretary and assistants;
      (4)   Director of Public Works;
      (5)   Planning Director;
      (6)   Building Inspector;
      (7)   Town Attorney;
      (8)   Police Chief and Police Captain;
      (9)   Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief;
      (10)   Volunteer personnel, such as volunteer firefighters or police
reserves;
      (11)   Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional,
technical or other services;
      (12)   Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate
requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or
earthquake which threatens life or property;
      (13)   Employees, other than those listed in this section, who are
employed less than half-time, which is defined as employees who are expected to
or do work less than 1,000 hours in any fiscal year; and
      (14)   Casual or seasonal employees whose employment shall not continue
for a period longer than five months in any one fiscal year.
   (B)   All offices, positions and employments not exempted in division (A)
above shall constitute the classified service of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.010) (Ord. 542, passed - -1986)
§ 2.56.020 CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the authority granted to the legislative body of any city within
the state under the provisions of Chapter 48 of the Statutes of 1935, entitled
“An Act Authorizing the Creation of a Personnel System, Merit System or Civil
Service System in Cities; the Creation of the Office of Personnel Director, the
Appointment of a Civil Service Commission; the Delegation of Certain Authority
to Such Personnel Officer or Commission in Municipalities Within this State;
and Prohibiting Certain Political Activities and Providing Penalties for the
Violation of Such Provisions,” a civil service system is adopted for the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.020)
§ 2.56.030 PERSONNEL OFFICER.
   (A)   (1)   The Town Manager shall be the Personnel Officer.
      (2)   The Town Manager may delegate any of the powers and duties
conferred upon him or her as Personnel Officer under this chapter to any other
officer or employee of the town, or may recommend that the powers and duties be
performed under contract as provided in § 2.56.170.
   (B)   The Personnel Officer shall:
      (1)   Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel
rules not specifically reserved to the Town Council;
      (2)   Prepare and recommend to the Town Council personnel rules and
revisions and amendments to the rules; (The Town Attorney shall approve the
legality of the rules and amendments prior to their submission to the Town
Council.)
      (3)   Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan,
including class specifications and revisions of the plan; (The plan and any
revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the Town Council.)
      (4)   Prepare or cause to be prepared a plan of compensation and
revisions thereof, covering all classifications in the classified service; and
(The plan and any revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval by the
Town Council.)
      (5)   Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for
positions in the classified service; the receiving of applications therefor;
the conducting and grading of tests; the certification to the appointing power
of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position
in the classified service.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.030)
§ 2.56.040 PERSONNEL RULES.
   (A)   Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the Town Council
after notice of the proposed action has been publicly posted at least 15 days
prior to Town Council consideration.
   (B)   Amendments and revisions may be suggested by any interested party and
shall be processed as provided in the personnel rules.
   (C)   The rules shall establish regulations governing the personnel system,
including:
      (1)   Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position
classification plan covering all positions in the classified service, including
employment standards and qualifications for each class;
      (2)   Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for
employment;
      (3)   Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of
resulting eligible lists;
      (4)   Certification and appointment of persons from eligible lists and
the making of provisional, temporary and emergency appointments;
      (5)   Evaluation of employees;
      (6)   Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action
and layoff of employees in the classified service;
      (7)   Separation of employees from the town service; and
      (8)   Establishment of grievance and appeal procedures.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.070)
§ 2.56.050 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   Appointments to vacant positions in the classified service shall be
made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall
be based on merit and fitness, to be ascertained so far as practicable by
competitive examination. Examinations shall be used and conducted to aid in the
selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques
which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates, such as achievement
and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interview, performance tests,
physical agility tests, evaluation of daily work performance, work samples or
any combinations of these or other tests. Physical and medical tests may be
given as a part of any examination. In any examination, the Personnel Officer
may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests and
set minimum standards therefor.
   (B)   When appointment is to be made to a vacancy in the classified
services, the Personnel Officer shall transmit to the appointing power the
names of all persons on the appropriate certified eligible list, in the order
in which they appear on the list.
   (C)   In the absence of appropriate eligible lists, a provisional
appointment may be made not to exceed six months by the appointing authority of
a person meeting the minimum training and experience qualifications for the
position. A provisional employee may be removed at any time without the right
of appeal or hearing. During the suspension of an employee or pending final
action on proceedings to review suspension, demotion or discharge of an
employee, the vacancy may be filled by the appointing authority, subject to the
provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.080)
§ 2.56.060 AGE LIMITS.
   No maximum or minimum age limits shall be prescribed or established for any
civil service examination, and age shall not be a minimum qualification for any
employment in the classified service, and no person, otherwise qualified, shall
be denied employment in the service solely because of age; provided, however,
that, the Town Council reserves the right to fix minimum and maximum age limits
for the employment of policemen or firefighters by resolution.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.090)
§ 2.56.070 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (A)   All original and promotional appointments shall be for a probationary
period of not less than one year for employees assigned to the police and fire
departments and six months for employees assigned to other departments. During
the probationary period, the employee may be discharged at any time without the
right of appeal or hearing.
   (B)   (1)   An employee rejected during the probationary period from a
position to which he or she has been promoted or transferred shall be
reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted or
transferred unless he or she is discharged from the town service as provided in
this chapter and the rules.
      (2)   An employee in the classified service promoted or transferred to a
position not included in the classified service shall be reinstated to a
position in the class from which he or she was promoted or transferred if
action is taken to reject him or her, unless he or she is discharged in the
manner provided in this chapter and the personnel rules for positions in the
classified service. An employee transferred to a position in the classified
service may be required to serve the probationary period set forth in this
section.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.100)
§ 2.56.080 APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN PERSONNEL RULES TO FULL-TIME NON-CLASSIFIED
POSITIONS.
   The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves
shall apply to full-time non- classified positions.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.110)
§ 2.56.090 EMPLOYEE DISCIPLINE.
   Any appointing power shall have the right, for due cause, including without
limitation the reasons listed in Cal. Gov’t Code § 19572, to demote, dismiss,
reduce in pay or suspend without pay up to 30 calendar days any employee in the
classified service. Notice of the action must be in writing and served
personally on the employee within three working days of the action taken. The
notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or
reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.120)
§ 2.56.100 RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any employee in the classified service shall have the right to appeal any
disciplinary action as provided in the personnel rules and regulations.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.130)
§ 2.56.110 ABOLISHING POSITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever in the judgment of the Town Council it becomes
necessary, the Town Council may abolish any position or employment in the
classified service.
      (2)   Employees transferred, demoted or laid off because of the
abolishing of positions shall not be subject to written charges, nor shall they
have the right of appeal in such cases.
   (B)   Seniority shall be observed in effecting the reduction in personnel
and the order of layoff shall be in the reverse order of total cumulative time
served in permanent and probationary status in the classified service upon the
effective date of the layoff. Layoff shall be made within classes of positions
and all provisional employees in the affected class or classes shall be laid
off prior to the layoff of any probationary or permanent employee.
   (C)   For the purpose of determining order of layoff, total cumulative time
shall include time served on military leave of absence.
   (D)   The names of probationary and permanent employees laid off shall be
placed upon re- employment lists for classes which, in the opinion of the
Personnel Officer, require basically the same qualifications and duties and
responsibilities as those of the class of positions from which layoff was made.
   (E)   Names of persons laid off shall be placed upon re-employment lists in
order of total cumulative time served in probationary and permanent status and
shall remain on the lists for a period of one year unless re-employed sooner.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.140)
§ 2.56.120 POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
   The political activities of town employees shall conform to pertinent
provisions of state law.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.150)
§ 2.56.130 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No person in the classified service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be
employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or
discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because
of sex, race, color, ancestry, national origin or religious belief.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.160)
§ 2.56.140 CONTRACTS FOR TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall consider and make recommendations to the Town
Council regarding the extent to which the town should contract for the
performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or
operation of the personnel system.
   (B)   The Town Council may contract with any qualified person or agency for
the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties
imposed by this chapter:
      (1)   The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and
amendments thereof;
      (2)   The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent
revisions and amendments thereof;
      (3)   The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions
and amendments thereof;
      (4)   The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests; and
      (5)   The special and technical services of advisory or informational
character on matters relating to personnel administration.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.170)
§ 2.56.150 APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS.
   The Council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 2.56.180)
CHAPTER 2.60: PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
2.60.010   Short title
   
2.60.020   Applicability
   
2.60.030   Definitions
   
2.60.040   Classification of positions
   
2.60.050   Allocation of positions
   
2.60.060   Qualifications of employees
   
2.60.070   Use of class titles
   
2.60.080   Classification and compensation plan; holiday schedule
§ 2.60.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Personnel and
Salary Ordinance.”
(Prior Code, § 2.60.010)
§ 2.60.020 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter apply to all town employees, except those in
the exempt service.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.020)
§ 2.60.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOCATION. The official determination of the class in which a position
shall be deemed to exist and the assignment of an individual position to an
appropriate class.
   CLASS or CLASS OF POSITIONS. A definitely recognized kind of employment in
the town service, designed to embrace all positions having duties and
responsibilities sufficiently similar so that the same title may be used, the
same requirements as to education, experience, knowledge and ability may be
demanded of incumbents and the same schedule of compensation may be made to
apply with equity.
   CLASSIFIED SERVICE. All positions in the town service, except those
specifically placed in the exempt service.
   COMPENSATION. The salary, wage, allowances and all other forms of valuable
consideration earned by or paid to any employee by reason of service in any
position, but does not include any allowances authorized and incurred as
incidents to employment.
   CONTINUOUS SERVICE. Employment with the town without break or interruption
of full-time employment. In computing CONTINUOUS SERVICE for the purposes of
this chapter, neither vacation leave, military leave nor leaves of absence on
account of illness, whether with or without pay, shall be construed as a break
in employment or service. Other absences aggregating in excess of 90 days in
any period of 12 months, including layoffs on account of lack of work, lack of
funds or abolishing of positions shall be construed as breaking CONTINUOUS
SERVICE.
   EMPLOYEE. A person legally occupying a position in the town service.
   EXEMPT SERVICE. All positions of elective officials and those specifically
designated by the Town Council to be exempt from the classification plan.
   POSITION. Group of current duties and responsibilities assigned or delegated
by competent authority, requiring the full-time or part-time services of one
person.
   REALLOCATION. A reassignment or change in allocation of an individual
position by raising it to a higher class, reducing it to a lower class or
moving it to another class at the same level on the basis of substantial
changes in the kind, difficulty or responsibility of duties performed in such
position.
   TITLE, CLASS TITLE or TITLE OF CLASS. The designation given to or name
applied to a class or to each position allocated to the class, and to the
legally appointed incumbent of each position allocated to the class. Its
meaning is set forth in the corresponding class specification.
   TOWN SERVICE or SERVICE OF TOWN. All positions in all departments, as herein
defined, that are subject to control and regulation by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.030)
§ 2.60.040 CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS.
   (A)   The classification of positions for the purposes of this chapter shall
be as contained in the official book of class specifications.
   (B)   The classification of positions may hereafter be amended by the
addition, division, consolidation or abolishing of classes on adoption by the
Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.040)
§ 2.60.050 ALLOCATION OF POSITIONS.
   Each position shall be allocated to its appropriate class on the basis of
the duties and responsibilities assigned to the position.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.050)
§ 2.60.060 QUALIFICATIONS OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Officers and, employees holding positions upon the taking effect of
the ordinance codified in this chapter are deemed to be qualified for the
position to which they are allocated, subject to the right of the Town Council
to dismiss any employee in accordance with the civil service law.
   (B)   Persons hereafter employed in or appointed to any position requiring
full-time or part-time service and which position is included in the
classification plan and for which a class specification exists establishing
desirable qualifications should possess in full the desirable qualifications of
education and experience prescribed for that class; provided, however, if
qualified persons cannot be recruited, the town council may authorize the
appointment of persons having less than the desirable qualifications.
   (C)   In the event an employee entering upon town employment is found to
possess extraordinary qualifications for a position through former training or
experience or in the event of demonstrated inability to recruit at the first
step due to extreme scarcity of qualified personnel, the Town Council may
authorize the appointment at a higher salary step than the first step of the
appropriate salary range, but in no event higher than step C.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.060)
§ 2.60.070 USE OF CLASS TITLES.
   The title of the class to which any position is allocated shall be used in
all official personnel records and in all official personnel transactions of
the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.070)
§ 2.60.080 CLASSIFICATION AND COMPENSATION PLAN; HOLIDAY SCHEDULE.
   The Town Council, by resolution, shall establish a position classification
and compensation plan for the officers and employees of the town, and shall
provide for the observance of holidays by town offices and employees.
(Prior Code, § 2.60.080) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 2.64: RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Section
   
2.64.010   Contract with state system
   
2.64.020   Contract with state system; amendments
§ 2.64.010 CONTRACT WITH STATE SYSTEM.
   (A)   A contract between the Town Council and the Board of Administration of
the state’s Employees’ Retirement System is authorized.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized, empowered and directed to execute the
contract pursuant to division (A) above for and on behalf of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.64.010)
§ 2.64.020 CONTRACT WITH STATE SYSTEM; AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Ords. 302 and 382.
      (1)   Ord. 302; authorized. An amendment to the contract between the town
and Board of Administration of the state’s Employees’ Retirement System is
authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked “Exhibit A,” being attached to the
ordinance codified in this division (A)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though set
out in full.
      (2)   Ord. 382; authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town
Council and the Board of Administration of the State Public Employees’
Retirement System is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked “Exhibit A,”
being attached to the ordinance codified in this division (A)(2) and on file in
the office of the Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this
section as though set out in full.
      (3)   Execution. The Mayor of the town is authorized, empowered and
directed to execute the amendments set out in division (A)(1) and (2) above for
and on behalf of the town.
   (B)   Ord. 478.
      (1)   Authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town Council
and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System
is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked “Exhibit A,” being attached to
the ordinance codified in this division (B)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though
herein set out in full.
      (2)   Execution. The Town Manager is authorized, empowered and directed
to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the town.
   (C)   Ord. 497.
      (1)   Authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town Council
and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System
is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked “Exhibit A,” being attached to
the ordinance codified in this division (C)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though
herein set out in full.
      (2)   Execution. The Town Manager is authorized, empowered and directed
to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the town.
   (D)   Ord. 536.
      (1)   Authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town Council
and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System
is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked “Exhibit A,” being attached to
the ordinance codified in this division (D)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though
herein set out in full.
      (2)   Execution. The Town Manager is authorized, empowered and directed
to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the town.
   (E)   Ord. 694.
      (1)   Authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town Council
and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees’ Retirement System
is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked “Exhibit A,” being attached to
the ordinance codified in this division (E)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though
herein set out in full.
      (2)   Execution. The Town Manager is authorized, empowered and directed
to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the town.
   (F)   Ord. 702.
      (1)   Authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town Council
and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System
is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked "Exhibit A," being attached to
the ordinance codified in this division (F)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though
herein set out in full.
      (2)   Execution. The Town Manager is authorized, empowered and directed
to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the town.
   (G)   Ord. 741.
      (1)   Authorized. An amendment to the contract between the Town Council
and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System
is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked "Exhibit A," being attached to
the ordinance codified in this division (G)(1) and on file in the office of the
Town Clerk, and by this reference is made a part of this section as though
herein set out in full.
      (2)   Execution. The Town Manager is authorized, empowered and directed
to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the town.
(Prior Code, § 2.64.020) (Ord. 478, passed --1981; Am. Ord. 497, passed --1982;
Am. Ord. 536, passed --1985; Am. Ord. 694, passed 8-6-2002; Am. Ord. 702,
passed 11-5-2003; Am. Ord. 741, passed 2-4-2009)
CHAPTER 2.65: ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES
Section
   
2.65.010   Authority
   
2.65.020   Definitions
§ 2.65.010 AUTHORITY.
   For any town record that an individual is authorized to sign on behalf of
the town, that individual may affix his or her electronic signature to make an
electronically signed record.
(Ord. 880, passed 7-12-2023)
§ 2.65.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE. An electronic sound, symbol, or process, attached to
or logically associated with a contract or other record and executed or adopted
by a person with the intent to sign the record. It is the electronic equivalent
of a handwritten, wet, or manual signature on paper.
   ELECTRONICALLY SIGNED RECORD. A record, file, or document, including an
ordinance or resolution, that has been electronically signed by means of an
electronic signature and that is related to the conduct of the town's official
business.
(Ord. 880, passed 7-12-2023)
TITLE 3: REVENUE AND FINANCE
   Chapter
      
3.02.   SPECIAL TAX ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES
      
3.04.   TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
      
3.08.   SALES AND USE TAX
      
3.10.   TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
      
3.12.   TELEPHONE, GAS AND ELECTRICITY TAX
      
3.16.   REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
      
3.20.   MUNICIPAL SERVICES
      
3.24.   SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
      
3.28.   UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
      
3.32.   HOTEL USERS TAX
      
3.36.   PUBLIC BIDDING
      
3.40.   CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS OF FEES, TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
      
3.44.   PARAMEDIC AND/OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES TAX
CHAPTER 3.02: SPECIAL TAX ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES
Section
   
3.02.010   Special tax accountability measures
§ 3.02.010 SPECIAL TAX ACCOUNTABILITY MEASURES.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall annually file a special tax accountability
report with the Town Council.
   (B)   The annual report shall contain both of the following:
      (1)   The amount of funds collected and expended for each special tax
imposed by the town; and
      (2)   The status of any project required or authorized to be funded by
such special tax, as required by Cal. Gov’t Code § 50075.3, as such law is
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
CHAPTER 3.04: TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
Section
   
3.04.010   Town Assessor, Tax Collector; offices abolished; functions
transferred to Town Clerk
   
3.04.020   Transfer of tax functions to county
§ 3.04.010 TOWN ASSESSOR, TOWN COLLECTOR; OFFICES ABOLISHED; FUNCTIONS
TRANSFERRED TO TOWN CLERK.
   The Offices of Town Assessor and Town Tax Collector are abolished as of July
1, 1962. All duties performed by the Town Assessor, other than the assessing of
property in the town, and all duties performed by the town’s Tax Collector,
other than the collection of ad valorem taxes on property that becomes a lien
after December 28, 1969, and the collection of assessments for municipal
improvements becoming due and payable on and after July 1, 1962, are
transferred to and are to be performed by the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.010)
§ 3.04.020 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY.
   Under and pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 51500 to 51521 of
the state, the assessment and tax collection duties, and the collection of
assessments levied for municipal improvements, now performed by the Assessor
and the Tax Collector of the town, are transferred to the assessor and the Tax
Collector of the county for the purpose of assessment and collection of and for
ad valorem property taxes that become a lien after December 28, 1961, and the
collection of assessments for municipal improvements becoming due and payable
on and after July 1, 1962.
(Prior Code, § 3.04.020)
CHAPTER 3.08: SALES AND USE TAX
Section
   
3.08.010   Short title
   
3.08.020   Purpose
   
3.08.030   Operative date; contract with state
   
3.08.040   Place of sale
   
3.08.050   Sales tax; imposed; rate
   
3.08.060   Sales tax; state provisions adopted
   
3.08.070   Sales tax; adopted state provisions; language substitutions
   
3.08.080   Sales tax; seller’s permit
   
3.08.090   Sales tax; exclusions and exemptions
   
3.08.100   Use tax; imposed; rate
   
3.08.110   Use tax; state provisions adopted
   
3.08.120   Use tax; adopted state provisions; language substitutions
   
3.08.130   Use tax; exclusions and exemptions
   
3.08.140   Amendments to state provisions; effect
   
3.08.150   Enjoining collection prohibited
§ 3.08.010 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax
Regulations of the Town.”
(Prior Code, § 3.08.010)
§ 3.08.020 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this
chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (A)   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the
requirements and limitations contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
Division 2, Part 1.5;
   (B)   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate provisions
identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state, insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5;
   (C)   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a one percent tax
and provide a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the
state’s Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state’s Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes; and
   (D)   To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5, minimize the cost of collecting
town sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.020)
§ 3.08.030 OPERATIVE DATE; CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   This chapter shall become operative on April 1, 1957, and prior thereto the
town shall contract with the state’s Board of Equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax
regulations; provided that, if the town shall not have contracted with the
state’s Board of Equalization, as above set forth, prior to April 1, 1957, this
chapter shall not be operative until the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the execution of such a contract by the town and by the
state’s Board of Equalization; provided further that, this chapter shall not
become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and use
tax ordinance of the county.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.030)
§ 3.08.040 PLACE OF SALE.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at
the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property
sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state
destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination.
   (B)   The gross receipts from the sales shall include delivery charges when
the charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place
to which delivery is made.
   (C)   In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the
state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the
retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to
be prescribed and adopted by the state’s Board of Equalization.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.040)
§ 3.08.050 SALES TAX; IMPOSED; RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
imposed upon all retailers in the town at the rate of one percent of the gross
receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold
at retail in the town on and after the operative date of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.050)
§ 3.08.060 SALES TAX; STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5, all
of the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1, as
amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1957, applicable to sales taxes are
adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.060)
§ 3.08.070 SALES TAX; ADOPTED STATE PROVISIONS; LANGUAGE SUBSTITUTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
Division 2, Part 1, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
town shall be substituted therefor.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to require the substitution of
the name of the town for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the
title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the state’s Board of
Control, the state’s Board of Equalization, or the name of the State Treasury
or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the town be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the town or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the state’s Board of Equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have been made in
those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to
the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution
would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross
receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross
receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1; nor to impose this tax with
respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the
state under the provisions of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; and, in
addition, the name of the town shall not be substituted for that of the state
in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence
thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828, as adopted.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.070)
§ 3.08.080 SALES TAX; SELLER’S PERMIT.
   If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code § 6067, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by
reason of §§
3.08.040 through
3.08.070 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.080)
§ 3.08.090 SALES TAX; EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
   (A)   The amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (B)   Eighty percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally
outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in
the use of the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign
government;
   (C)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under
a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Division 2, Part I;
   (D)   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made, and directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the
laws of the state, the United States or any foreign government; and
   (E)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
the operators directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the
United States or any foreign government.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.090) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 3.08.100 USE TAX; IMPOSED; RATE.
   An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the
town of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the
operative date of this chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the
town at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales
price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state
sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.100)
§ 3.08.110 USE TAX; STATE PROVISIONS ADOPTED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent
with the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5, as
amended and in force and effect on April 1, 1957, applicable to use taxes are
adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.110)
§ 3.08.120 USE TAX; ADOPTED STATE PROVISIONS; LANGUAGE SUBSTITUTIONS.
   Wherever, and to the extent that, in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division
2, Part 1, the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the town
shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to
require the substitution of the name of the town for the word “state” when that
word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer,
the state’s Board of Control, the state’s Board of Equalization, or the name of
the State Treasury or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of
the town be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of
that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the town or
any agency thereof, rather than by or against the state’s Board of
Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be deemed to have
been made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections
referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the
substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to
certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while the storage, use or other
consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1, or to impose this tax with
respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal
property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
that code; and, in addition, the name of the town shall not be substituted for
that of the state in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6701, 6702 (except in
the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828, as adopted, and
the name of the town shall not be substituted for the word “state” in the
phrase “retailer engaged in business in this state” in Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code § 6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in § 6203.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.120)
§ 3.08.130 USE TAX; EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS.
   There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is
measured:
   (A)   The amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer;
   (B)   Eighty percent of the gross receipts from the sale of tangible
personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally
outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in
the use of the aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign
government;
   (C)   The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1;
   (D)   The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to
operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in
which the sale is made, and directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of
the state, the United States or any foreign government; and
   (E)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Cal. Revenue and Taxation
Code §§ 6366 and 6366.1, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by
the operators directly and exclusively in the use of the aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the
United States or any foreign government.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.130) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 3.08.140 AMENDMENTS TO STATE PROVISIONS; EFFECT.
   All amendments of the California Revenue and Taxation Code enacted
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter which relate to the sales and
use tax and which are not inconsistent with Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code
Division 2, Part 1.5 shall automatically become a part of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.140)
§ 3.08.150 ENJOINING COLLECTION PROHIBITED.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
town or against any officer of the state or of the town to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this chapter or Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2,
Part 1.5 of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Prior Code, § 3.08.150)
CHAPTER 3.10: TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Section
   
3.10.010   Title
   
3.10.020   Operative date
   
3.10.030   Purpose
   
3.10.040   Contract with state
   
3.10.050   Transactions tax rate
   
3.10.060   Place of sale
   
3.10.070   Use tax rate
   
3.10.080   Adoption of provisions of state law
   
3.10.090   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes
   
3.10.100   Permit not required
   
3.10.110   Exemptions and exclusions
   
3.10.120   Annual audit
   
3.10.130   Amendments
   
3.10.140   Enjoining collection forbidden
   
3.10.150   Severability
   
3.10.160   Termination date
§ 3.10.010 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Fairfax Transactions and Use Tax
Ordinance. The Town of Fairfax hereinafter shall be called "town." This chapter
shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the town.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.020 OPERATIVE DATE.
   OPERATIVE DATE means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing
more than 110 days after the effective date of this chapter, the effective date
being as set forth below.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.030 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   (A)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with § 7251) of Division 2 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code and § 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the town to adopt this tax chapter which shall be operative if a
majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition
of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
   (B)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (C)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that imposes a tax
and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the
State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes.
   (D)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax chapter that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use
taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.040 CONTRACT WITH STATE.
   Prior to the operative date, the town shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax chapter; provided, that if the town
shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the
operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of such a contract.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.050 TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the town at
the rate of three-fourths percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from
the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on
and after the operative date of this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.060 PLACE OF SALE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.070 USE TAX RATE.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the town of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of three-fourths percent of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is
made.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.080 ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW.
   Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they
are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with §
6001) of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.090 LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE TAXES.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and
Taxation Code:
   (A)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this town shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, Victim Compensation and Government Claims Board,
State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State
of California;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this town or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         (a)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, or;
         (b)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      (4)   In §§ 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715,
6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (B)   The word "town" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in § 6203 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code and in the definition of that phrase in § 6203.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.100 PERMIT NOT REQUIRED.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under § 6067 of the Cal.
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.110 EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (B)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the town which is shipped to a
point outside the town, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier
for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this division
(B)(2), delivery to a point outside the town shall be satisfied:
         (a)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of
Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with §
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840) of the Cal. Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-town address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         (b)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-town and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter.
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of division (B)(3) and (4) of this section, the
sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (C)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this town of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in §§ 6366
and 6366.1 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code.
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter.
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of divisions (C)(3) and (4) of this section,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (C)(7), a retailer engaged in
business in the town shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the town or participates within the town in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the town or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor,
subsidiary, or person in the town under the authority of the retailer.
      (7)   "A retailer engaged in business in the town" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with § 4000) of Division 3 of the Cal. Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with § 21411 of the Cal. Public Utilities Code,
or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with § 9840)
of the Cal. Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax
from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft
at an address in the town.
   (D)   Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the
sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of
which is subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.120 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   By no later than December 31 of each year, the town shall cause an
independent auditor to complete a "Fairfax Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance
Report." Such report shall review whether the tax revenues collected pursuant
to this ordinance are collected, managed, and expended in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.130 AMENDMENTS.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of
Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use
taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2
of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part
1.7 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically
become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall
operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.140 ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
town, or against any officer of the state or the town, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.150 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter and the application
of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected
thereby.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
§ 3.10.160 TERMINATION DATE.
   The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall automatically
expire on March 31, 2027, without further action by the Town Council or the
voters of the town. After said date, the tax imposed by this chapter can only
be continued or reestablished by a majority vote of Fairfax voters pursuant to
California Proposition 218.
(Ord. 763, passed 11-8-2011; Am. Ord. 805, passed 11-8-2016)
CHAPTER 3.12: TELEPHONE, GAS AND ELECTRICITY TAX
Section
   
3.12.010   Definitions
   
3.12.020   Exemptions
   
3.12.030   Telephone user tax
   
3.12.040   Electricity user tax
   
3.12.050   Gas user tax
   
3.12.060   Limit on amount of tax to be paid
   
3.12.070   Actions to collect
   
3.12.080   Duty to collect; procedures
   
3.12.090   Tax Administrator; additional powers and duties
   
3.12.100   Failure to pay tax; penalty
   
3.12.110   Refunds
   
3.12.120   Conflict with state agency
   
3.12.130   Duty to keep records
§ 3.12.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRICAL CORPORATION, GAS CORPORATION and TELEPHONE CORPORATION. The same
meanings as defined in Cal. Public Utilities Code §§ 218, 222 and 234,
respectively. ELECTRICAL CORPORATION shall be construed to include any
municipality or governmental agency engaged in selling or supplying of
electrical power to a service user.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   PERSON. All domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates,
joint stock companies, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, clubs,
Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies and individuals.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER. A person required to collect and remit a tax imposed under
the provisions of this chapter.
   SERVICE USER. A person required to pay a tax imposed under the provisions of
this chapter.
   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Town Manager of the town.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.010)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.020 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon the town
or any person when imposition of the tax upon that person would be in violation
of the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of
California. The Tax Administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt
from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a
copy thereof to each service supplier.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.020)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.030 TELEPHONE USER TAX.
   (A)    There is imposed a tax on the amounts paid for any intrastate
telephone services by every person in the town other than a telephone
corporation using the services. The tax imposed by this section shall not be
greater than five percent of the charges made for the service and shall be paid
by the person paying for the services.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHARGES. Shall not include charges for services paid for by inserting
coins in coin-operated telephones, except that where the coin-operated service
is furnished for a guaranteed amount, the amounts paid under the guarantee,
plus any fixed month or other periodic charge shall be included in the base for
computing the amount of tax due; nor shall the term CHARGES include charges for
any type of service equipment furnished by a service supplier subject to Public
Utility regulation during any period in which the same or similar services or
equipment are also available for sale or lease from persons other than a
service supplier subject to Public Utility regulation; nor shall the words
TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION SERVICES include land mobile services or maritime
mobile services as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 2.1, as the section existed on
January 1, 1970.
      TELEPHONE COMMUNICATION SERVICES. The service which provides access to a
telephone system and the privilege of telephonic quality communication with
substantially all persons having telephone stations which are part of such
telephone system. The telephone user tax is intended to, and does, apply to all
charges billed to a telephone account having a situs in the town, irrespective
of whether a particular communication service originates and/or terminates
within the town.
   (C)   (1)   The tax imposed by this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person providing the intrastate telephone communication
services, or the person receiving payment for the services.
      (2)   The amount of the tax collected in one month shall be remitted to
the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month; or at
the option of the person required to collect and remit the tax, an estimated
amount of tax collected, measured by the tax billed in the previous month,
shall be remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of each
month.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) above, the tax imposed
under this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using intrastate
telephone communication services to the extent that the amounts paid for the
services are exempt from or not subject to the tax imposed under Cal. Revenue
and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 20, or the tax imposed under I.R.C. § 4251.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.030)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.040 ELECTRICITY USER TAX.
   (A)   (1)   There is imposed a tax upon every person in the town, other than
an electrical corporation or a gas corporation, using electrical energy in the
town.
      (2)    The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate set by the
Town Council at the time of adoption of the annual budget, not to exceed five
percent of the charges made for the energy.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      USING ELECTRICAL ENERGY. Shall not be construed to mean the use of the
energy from a storage battery; provided however that, the term shall include
the receiving of the energy for the purpose of using it in the charging of
storage batteries.
      USING ELECTRICAL ENERGY. Shall not be construed to mean the receiving of
the energy by an electrical corporation or a governmental agency at a point
within the city for resale.
   (C)   (1)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the
service user by the person selling the electrical energy.
      (2)   The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the
Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following month.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.040)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.050 GAS USER TAX.
   (A)    There is imposed a tax upon every person in the town, other than a
gas corporation or an electrical corporation, using gas in the town which is
delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at
the rate not to exceed five percent of the charges made for such gas, and shall
be paid by the person paying for such gas.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CHARGES. Shall not include charges made for gas used in the generation of
electrical energy by a public utility or a governmental agency.
      USING GAS. Shall not be construed to mean the receiving of the gas by an
electrical corporation or governmental agency at a point within the town for
resale.
   (C)   The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service
user by the person selling the gas. The amount collected in one month shall be
remitted to the Tax Administrator on or before the last day of the following
month.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.050)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.060 LIMIT ON AMOUNT OF TAX TO BE PAID.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §§
3.12.030,
3.12.040 and
3.12.050, the total tax to be paid by any user under these sections shall not
exceed $360 annually on a fiscal year basis (July 1 through June 30). Persons
so affected shall present evidence of such to the town and a refund shall be
given by the town for the amount of tax paid in excess of $360.
   (B)    Notwithstanding the provisions of §
3.12.110, the requests for refunds shall be presented no later than 15 working
days following the conclusion of the fiscal year; (fiscal year ends on the last
day of June).
conclusion of the fiscal year; (fiscal year ends on the last day of June).
   (C)   Requests submitted later will be not be considered.
   (D)   Persons wishing to prepay the maximum tax will be exempted for that
fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.060)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986; Am. Ord. 554, passed - -
1986; Am. Ord. 614, passed 1-11-1993)
§ 3.12.070 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax and/or penalty required to be paid by a service user under the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to
the town. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been
remitted to the Tax Administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the town by
the person required to collect and remit. Any person owing money to the town
under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in
the name of the town for the recovery of the amount.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.070)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.080 DUTY TO COLLECT; PROCEDURES.
   The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be
performed as follows:
   (A)   The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as
and along with the charges made in accordance with regular billing practice of
the service supplier. Except in those cases where a service user pays the full
amount of the charges, but does not pay any portion of a tax imposed by this
chapter, if the amount paid by a service user is less than the full amount of
the charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, a proportionate
share of both the charge and the tax shall be deemed to have been paid.
   (B)   (1)   The duty to collect the tax from a service user shall commence
with the beginning of the first regular billing period applicable to that
person which starts on or after the operative date of this chapter.
      (2)   Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being
for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately
for each billing period.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.080)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.090 TAX ADMINISTRATOR; ADDITIONAL POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Tax Administrator shall have the power and duty and is directed to
enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)    The Tax Administrator shall have power to adopt rules and regulations
not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying
out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes imposed
in this chapter. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be on file in the
Tax Administrator’s office.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the
strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed
herein may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular
service supplier, so long as such agreements result in collection of the tax in
conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each
agreement shall be on file in the Tax Administrator’s office.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.090)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.100 FAILURE TO PAY TAX; PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever the Tax Administrator determines that a service user has
deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts
remitted to a person required to collect the tax for a period of four or more
billing periods, or that a service user has refused to pay the amount of the
tax to the person, or whenever the Tax Administrator deems it in the best
interest of the town, he or she may relieve the person of the obligation to
collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for
specific periods.
   (B)   The service supplier shall provide the town with a report of the
amounts refused along with the names and addresses of the service users
refusing to pay the tax.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator shall notify the service user that he or she has
assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and
demand payment of the taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by
handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United
States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the
address to which billing was made by the person required to collect the tax;
or, should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last
known address. If a service user fails to pay the tax to the Tax Administrator
within 15 days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her,
which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a
penalty of 25 percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be
imposed, but not less than $5. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein
required to be paid.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.100)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.110 REFUNDS.
   (A)    A service supplier who has collected any amount of tax illegally,
erroneously or more than once may refund the amount to the service user and
claim credit for the overpayment against the amount of the tax which is due
upon any other monthly returns, providing, the credit is claimed in a return
dated no later than three years from the date of overpayment.
   (B)   (1)    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been
overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected
or received by the town under this chapter, it may be refunded to a service
supplier or service user by the town, provided a claim, in writing, therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specified grounds upon which the claim is
founded, is filed with the Tax Administrator within three years of the date of
payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Administrator.
      (2)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his or her right thereto by written records, and, in
the case of a service user, that the service user has been unable to obtain a
refund or adjustment from the service supplier who collected the tax.
   (C)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service
supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or
a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges
for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the
amount of the refunded service charges may also be refunded to service users by
the service supplier, and the service supplier can claim credit for the
refunded taxes against the amount which is due upon any monthly returns. In the
event this chapter is repealed, amounts of any refundable taxes will be borne
by the town.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.110)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.120 CONFLICT WITH STATE AGENCY.
   Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to conflict with applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of any service supplier subject to the
jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. In the event of any
conflict, the provisions of said rules, regulations and tariffs shall control.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.120)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
§ 3.12.130 DUTY TO KEEP RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every service supplier required to collect and remit
to the town any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period
of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of the
tax the service supplier may have been required to collect and remit to the
town, which records the Tax Administrator shall have the right to inspect at
all reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 3.12.130)  (Ord. 552, passed 8-25-1986)
CHAPTER 3.16: REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Section
   
3.16.010   Short title
   
3.16.020   Imposed; rate
   
3.16.030   Payment
   
3.16.040   Exemptions; instruments to secure debts
   
3.16.050   Exemptions; public agencies
   
3.16.060   Exemptions; plans for reorganization or adjustment
   
3.16.070   Exemptions; orders of Securities and Exchange Commission
   
3.16.080   Partnerships
   
3.16.090   Foreclosures
   
3.16.100   Administration
   
3.16.110   Refunds
§ 3.16.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Real Property
Transfer Tax Ordinance of the Town of Fairfax.” It is adopted pursuant to the
authority contained in Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 11901 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.010)
§ 3.16.020 IMPOSED; RATE.
   There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands,
tenements or other realty sold within the town shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers
or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the
value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds $100, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500 or fractional part
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.020)
§ 3.16.030 PAYMENT.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to §
3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or
instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made,
signed or issued.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.030)
§ 3.16.040 EXEMPTIONS; INSTRUMENTS TO SECURE DEBTS.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument
in writing given to secure a debt.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.040)
§ 3.16.050 EXEMPTIONS; PUBLIC AGENCIES.
   Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a part, shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this chapter when
the exempt agency is acquiring title.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.040) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 3.16.060 EXEMPTIONS; PLANS FOR REORGANIZATION OR ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the
making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
      (1)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
      (2)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a railroad corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 205(m), as amended;
      (3)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving
a corporation, as defined in 11 U.S.C. § 506(3), as amended; or
      (4)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(1) through (4) shall apply only if the making, delivery
or filing of instruments or transfer or conveyances occurs within five years
from the date of the confirmation, approval or change.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.060)
§ 3.16.070 EXEMPTIONS; ORDERS OF SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in I.R.C. § 1083(a), but only if.
   (A)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of 15 U.S.C. § 79k, relating to the
Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (B)   The order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and
   (C)   The conveyance is made in obedience to the order.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.070)
§ 3.16.080 PARTNERSHIPS.
   (A)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise; if
      (1)   The partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing
partnership within the meaning of I.R.C. § 708; and
      (2)   The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
   (B)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
I.R.C. § 708, for purposes of this chapter, the partnership shall be treated as
having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value
(exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all
realty held by the partnership at the time of the termination.
   (C)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in division (B) above, and any transfer
pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by the partnership at the
time of the termination.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.080)
§ 3.16.090 FORECLOSURES.
   Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any
deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from
the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided
that, the tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the
unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration,
unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee
shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing, or stated in an affidavit or
declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.090) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 3.16.100 ADMINISTRATION.
   The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the
provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 6.7 and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.100)
§ 3.16.110 REFUNDS.
   Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be
governed by the provisions of Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 5096 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 3.16.110)
CHAPTER 3.20: MUNICIPAL SERVICES
Section
   
3.20.010   Findings; statement of purpose
   
3.20.020   Special services tax imposed; rate
   
3.20.030   Deposit and use of funds from special municipal services tax
   
3.20.040   Exemptions
   
3.20.050   Use of town and county records to determine assessments
   
3.20.060   Collection
   
3.20.070   Amendment
   
3.20.080   Termination of provisions
§ 3.20.010 FINDINGS; STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The Town Council determines that the cost to maintain certain municipal
services at a level required to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of its residents exceeds the amount of funds and revenues generated
from all other sources of income. The Town Council further determines that the
levy of a special municipal services tax on improved real property throughout
the town is necessary to maintain an adequate level of municipal services. It
is the sole purpose and intent of this chapter to impose a special tax to
maintain 24-hour, seven days per week staffing of the Fairfax Police Station,
maintain fire services, provide funding for public works safety projects, and
enhance youth and senior programs. A citizens’ oversight committee was
established by the Town Council in 2005 with the passage of Measure F for the
purpose of monitoring the use of the special tax revenues in accordance with
this section.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 3.20.020 SPECIAL SERVICES TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
    A special municipal services tax not exceeding the maximum amounts set
forth in this section is imposed on all improved real property within the
boundaries of the town:
   (A)   A special municipal services tax is levied and imposed upon improved
residential property at a rate of $195 in the first year and increasing $5
annually to a maximum of $250 per dwelling unit. As used herein the term
DWELLING UNIT means any building or portion thereof used and/or designed as a
separate dwelling accommodation, with cooking, living and sleeping facilities.
   (B)   A special municipal services tax is levied and imposed upon improved
business property at a rate of $195 in the first year and increasing $5
annually to a maximum of $250 for each business occupancy. As used herein, the
term BUSINESS OCCUPANCY means any portion of a building or structure or other
improved real property which is occupied or designed to be occupied by a
separate business establishment required to be licensed as such pursuant to
Title 5 of this code.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 839, passed 11-5-2019)
§ 3.20.030 DEPOSIT AND USE OF FUNDS FROM SPECIAL MUNICIPAL SERVICES TAX.
   All proceeds of the special municipal services tax levied and imposed under
§
3.20.020 of this chapter shall be paid into a special fund to be used
exclusively to maintain 24-hour, seven days per week staffing of the Fairfax
Police Station; maintain fire services; provide funding for public works safety
projects, and enhance youth and senior programs. The citizens’ oversight
committee to monitor use of the special tax revenues in accordance with this
section shall be continued.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 3.20.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   The special tax shall not be imposed upon any parcel that is exempt from the
special tax pursuant to any provision of the Constitution or any paramount law.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 3.20.050 USE OF TOWN AND COUNTY RECORDS TO DETERMINE ASSESSMENTS.
   The records of the County Assessor of the County of Marin as of March 1 each
year and the records of the town maintained pursuant to the provisions of Title
5 of this code may be used to determine the actual use of each parcel of real
property for purposes of determining the tax under this chapter.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 3.20.060 COLLECTION.
   The special tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected in the same
manner, on the same dates, and shall be subject to the same penalties and
interest as other charges and taxes fixed and collected by the county on behalf
of the town. Said special tax, together with all penalties and interest
thereon, shall constitute a lien upon the parcel upon which it is levied until
it has been paid, and said special tax, together with all penalties and
interest thereon, shall, until paid, constitute a personal obligation to the
town by the persons who own the parcel on the date the tax is due.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 3.20.070 AMENDMENT.
   The Town Council shall be empowered to amend this chapter by three
affirmative votes of its members to carry out the general purposes of this
chapter, to conform the provisions of this chapter to applicable state law, to
modify the methods of collection, or to assign the duties to public officials
under this chapter. In no event shall the Town Council amend this chapter to
increase the maximum amount of the special tax established in §
3.20.020, unless approved by two-thirds of the voters voting thereon.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014)
§ 3.20.080 TERMINATION OF PROVISIONS.
    This chapter shall be null and void as of 12:00 midnight, June 30, 2031,
and shall have no force and effect whatsoever after said time and date.
Notwithstanding the previous sentence, §
3.20.060, relating to collection and enforcement of liens or obligations for
the special tax previously levied hereunder, shall continue in effect until
such time as the collection and enforcement procedures have been completed.
(Ord. 786, passed 11-4-2014; Am. Ord. 839, passed 11-5-2019)
CHAPTER 3.24: SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Section
   
3.24.010   Created
   
3.24.020   Money to be paid into Fund
   
3.24.030   Expenditure of money in Fund
§ 3.24.010 CREATED.
   As required by the provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 2113,
there is created in the Town Treasury a special fund to be known as the
“Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”
(Prior Code, § 3.24.010) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 3.24.020 MONEY TO BE PAID INTO FUND.
   All money received by the town from the state under the provisions of the
Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests
therein for, or the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or
highways other than state highways shall be paid into the Special Gas Tax
Street Improvement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 3.24.020)
§ 3.24.030 EXPENDITURE OF MONEY IN FUND.
   All money in the Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund shall be expended
exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of the
Streets and Highways Code.
(Prior Code, § 3.24.030) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 3.28: UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Section
   
3.28.010   Procedure
§ 3.28.010 PROCEDURE.
   When the Police Department of the town has in its possession any personal
property, the ownership of which is unknown, the Department shall retain the
property in its possession for a minimum period of three months from the date
on which it came into possession of the Department, during which time the
members of the Department shall make reasonable effort to ascertain the
identity of the owner thereof, and, should the identity and address of the
owner be ascertained, shall give notice to the owner by registered mail of the
fact that the property is in the possession of the Department, and that the
owner, upon satisfactorily identifying himself or herself and his or her
ownership, will be entitled to receive the property. If, during the three-month
period, the Department is unable to ascertain the name and address of the owner
of the property, and no person or persons make claims thereto and prove their
ownership, then the Chief of Police shall cause the property to be sold, at
public auction, to the highest bidder, for cash, after having first given
notice of the time and place of the sale, for a minimum period of ten days
before the time fixed therefor, by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation printed in the county and distributed in the town. The notice shall
generally describe each specific item of property to be so sold. The cost of
the publication shall be a proper charge against the town and the proceeds from
the sale shall be deposited by the Chief of Police with the Town Treasurer as a
miscellaneous receipt.
(Prior Code, § 3.28.010) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 3.32: HOTEL USERS TAX
Section
   
3.32.010   Definitions
   
3.32.020   Tax imposed
   
3.32.030   Exemptions
   
3.32.040   Operator’s duties
   
3.32.050   Registration
   
3.32.060   Reporting and remitting
   
3.32.070   General tax
   
3.32.080   Penalties and interest
   
3.32.090   Failure to collect and report tax; determination of tax
   
3.32.100   Records
   
3.32.110   Refunds
   
3.32.120   Actions to collect
§ 3.32.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HOTEL. Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or
intended or designed for occupancy by hotel users for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, bed and breakfast inn, tourist
home or house, motel, mobile home or other lodging. HOTEL shall not include any
structure, or any portion of any structure, exempted by the provisions of the
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 7280 and 7281.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room or rooms, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or
sleeping purposes.
   OPERATOR. The person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the
capacity of owner, lessee, sub-lessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any
other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a
managing agent of any type or character, other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator and shall have the same duties and
liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this
chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be
considered to be compliance by both.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other entity.
   RENT. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy
of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and
services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   TRANSIENT. Changed to HOTEL USER. HOTEL USER means any person who exercises
occupancy, or is entitled to occupancy, by reason of concession, permit, right
of access, license or other agreement for a period of 30 consecutive calendar
days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such persons
occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a hotel user until the period
of 30 days has expired, unless there is an agreement in writing between the
operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In
determining whether a person is a hotel user, uninterrupted periods of time
extending both prior and
subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may
be considered.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.010) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
§ 3.32.020 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each hotel user is
subject to, and shall pay, a tax equal to the following percentage of the rent
charged by the operator:
      (1)   For the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1997, at the rate of seven
percent of the rent charged;
      (2)   For the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1998, at the rate of eight
percent of the rent charged;
      (3)   For the fiscal year commencing July 1, 1999, at the rate of nine
percent of the rent charged; and
      (4)   For the fiscal year commencing July 1, 2000, and for each fiscal
year thereafter at the rate of ten percent of the rent charged.
   (B)   (1)   The tax constitutes a debt owed by the hotel user to the town
which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the town. The hotel
user shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is
paid.
      (2)   If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the
tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the
hotel user’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel.
      (3)   If, for any reason, the tax due is not paid to the operator of the
hotel, the Town Manager may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the
Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.020) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
§ 3.32.030 EXEMPTIONS.
   In addition to the exemptions provided for in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 7280 and
7281, no tax shall be imposed upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as
to which, it is beyond the power of the town to impose the tax.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.030) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995)
§ 3.32.040 OPERATOR’S DUTIES.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same
extent, and at the same time, as the rent is collected from every hotel user.
The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent
charged and each hotel user shall receive a receipt for payment from the
operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner,
whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, will be
assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent,
or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.040) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
§ 3.32.050 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter, or within 30 days after commencing business, whichever is later,
the operator of any hotel renting occupancy to hotel users shall register the
hotel with the town and obtain from the town a hotel users registration
certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
   (B)   The certificate shall, among other things, contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the operator;
      (2)   The address of the hotel;
      (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued; and
      (4)   The following statement: “This Hotel User’s Registration
Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled
the requirements of Chapter 3.32 of the Fairfax Town Code by registering with
the Town Manager for the purpose of collecting from hotel users the hotel users
tax and remitting that tax to the Town Manager. This Certificate does not
authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful
business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly
complying with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to those
requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of the Town
of Fairfax.”
(Prior Code, § 3.32.050) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
§ 3.32.060 REPORTING AND REMITTING.
   (A)   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following
the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting
period which may be established by the Town Manager, make a return to the Town
Manager on forms provided by the town of the total rents charged and received
and the amount of tax collected for hotel user occupancies. The Town Manager
may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder, if
necessary, in order to insure collection of the tax and the Town Manager may
require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due
immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.
   (B)   All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be
held in trust for the account of the town until payment thereof is made to the
Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.060) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
§ 3.32.070 GENERAL TAX.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be a general tax and not a special
tax. The proceeds of the tax shall be deposited in the town’s general fund and
shall be available for all municipal purposes.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.070) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995)
§ 3.32.080 PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within
the required time shall pay an initial penalty of ten percent of the amount of
the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. Any operator who fails to remit
any delinquent remittance on or before a period of 30 days following the date
on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency
penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of
the tax and ten percent penalty first imposed.
   (B)   If the Town Manager determines that the non-payment of any remittance
due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount
of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the foregoing penalties. In
addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax
imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of 0.5 percent per
month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties,
from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. Every
penalty imposed and the interest as accrues under the provisions of this
section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.080) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995)
§ 3.32.090 FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX.
   (A)   If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make,
within the time required, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion
thereof, the Town Manager shall proceed in a manner as he or she may deem best
to obtain facts and information on which to base an estimate of the tax due. As
soon as the Town Manager shall procure the facts and information as he or she
is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this
chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the
same and to make the report and remittance, the Town Manager shall proceed to
determine and assess against the operator the tax, interest and penalties
provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   In case of the determination, the Town Manager shall give notice of
the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the U.S.
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his or her last
known place of business.
   (C)   The operator may, within ten days after the serving or mailing of the
notice, make application, in writing, to the Town Manager for a hearing on the
amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made
within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined
by the Town Manager shall become final and conclusive and shall be immediately
due and payable. If such application is made, the Town Manager shall give not
less than five days written notice, in the manner prescribed herein, to the
operator to show cause, at a time; and place fixed in the notice, why the
amount specified therein shall not be fixed for the tax, interest and
penalties.
   (D)   At the hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why the
specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After the
hearing, the Town Manager shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and
shall, thereafter, give written notice to the operator, in the manner
prescribed in this section, of the determination and the amount of the tax,
interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after
15 days.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.090) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995)
§ 3.32.100 RECORDS.
   It shall be the duty of every operator to keep and preserve, for a period of
three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax
as the operator may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the
town, which records the Town Manager shall have the right to inspect at all
reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.100) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995)
§ 3.32.110 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid,
or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the town under this chapter, it may be refunded as hereinafter set
forth provided a claim therefor, in writing, stating under penalty of perjury
the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the Town
Manager within 90 days of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms
furnished by the Town Manager.
   (B)   An operator may claim a refund, or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the Town Manager that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a hotel user. Neither a refund, nor a credit shall be allowed
unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the hotel
user or credited to rent subsequently payable by the hotel user to the
operator.
   (C)   A hotel user may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, or paid more than
once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town, by filing
a claim in the manner hereinabove set forth, but only when the tax was paid by
the hotel user directly to the Town Manager or when the hotel user, having paid
the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the Town Manager
that the hotel user has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who
collected the tax.
   (D)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes the right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.110) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
§ 3.32.120 ACTIONS TO COLLECT.
   Any tax required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a debt owed by the hotel user to the town. Any such tax collected by an
operator which has not been paid to the town shall be deemed a debt owed by the
operator to the town. Any person owing money to the town under the provisions
of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the town
for the recovery thereof.
(Prior Code, § 3.32.120) (Ord. 641, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 669, passed - -
1997)
CHAPTER 3.36: PUBLIC BIDDING
Section
   
3.36.010   Adoption of California uniform construction accounting procedures
   
3.36.020   Award of contract
   
3.36.030   Authority to award informal contracts
   
3.36.040   Maintenance and use of list of qualified contractors
   
3.36.050   Informal bidding procedure
   
3.36.060   Formal bidding procedure
§ 3.36.010 ADOPTION OF CALIFORNIA UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES.
   The Town Council does elect to become subject to the uniform construction
cost accounting procedures set forth in the Uniform Public Construction Cost
Accounting Act, Cal. Public Contract Code §§ 22000 et seq., except as otherwise
provided herein. The terms referred to herein shall have the meanings ascribed
to them in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act.
(Prior Code, § 3.36.010) (Ord. 644, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 795, passed 10-7-
2015; Am. Ord. 823, passed 11-7-2018)
§ 3.36.020 AWARD OF CONTRACT.
   (A)   Public projects of $60,000 or less may be performed by the employees
of the town by force account or by negotiated contract or purchase order
awarded by the Town Manager. The approval of contracts by the Town Manager is
subject to the town's administrative purchasing policies adopted by Council
Resolution 13-30.
   (B)   Public projects of $200,000 or less may be let to contract by informal
procedures as set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Public projects of more than $200,000 shall, except as otherwise
provided in the Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, be let to
contract by formal bidding procedures.
(Prior Code, § 3.36.020) (Ord. 644, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 795, passed 10-7-
2015; Am. Ord. 823, passed 11-7-2018)
§ 3.36.030 AUTHORITY TO AWARD INFORMAL CONTRACTS.
   The Town Council does delegate to the Town Manager the authority to solicit
and receive bids for informal contracts in accordance with this chapter and the
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act; provided, however, that, the
award of any such contracts shall be made by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 3.36.030) (Ord. 644, passed - -1995)
§ 3.36.040 MAINTENANCE AND USE OF LIST OF QUALIFIED CONTRACTORS.
   The Town Manager may maintain a list of qualified contractors identified
according to categories of work. The list shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the criteria determined by the California Uniform Construction
Cost Accounting Commission.
(Prior Code, § 3.36.040) (Ord. 644, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 823, passed 11-7-
2018)
§ 3.36.050 INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All contractors on the list for the category of work being bid, or all
construction trade journals specified for the County of Marin by the California
Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission, or both all such contractors
and all such construction trade journals, shall be mailed a notice inviting
informal bids unless the product or service is proprietary.
   (B)   All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals
pursuant to division (A) above shall be completed not less than ten calendar
days before bids are due.
   (C)   The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in
general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and
state the time and place for the submission of bids.
(Prior Code, § 3.36.050) (Ord. 644, passed - -1995)
§ 3.36.060 FORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURE.
   Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving
and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. The notice
shall be published at least 14 calendar days before the date of opening the
bids in a newspaper of general circulation circulated within the town. The
notice inviting formal bids shall be mailed pursuant to the requirements of the
California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Act.
(Prior Code, § 3.36.060) (Ord. 644, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 795, passed 10-7-
2015)
CHAPTER 3.40: CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS OF FEES, TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
Section
   
3.40.010   Claims for refunds of fees, taxes and assessments
   
3.40.020   Action on claim
§ 3.40.010 CLAIMS FOR REFUNDS OF FEES, TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS.
   Except as may otherwise be required by state law, no fee, tax or assessment
imposed or levied by the town shall be refunded, except upon a written claim
for refund complying with all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   (1)   The claim for refund shall be verified by the person who paid
the fee, tax or assessment, his or her guardian or conservator, executor or
administrator.
      (2)   The claim for refund shall not be honored if verified by any other
person.
      (3)   Class claims shall not be permitted.
   (B)   The claim for refund shall be filed with the Town Clerk not later than
90 days after the payment of the fee, tax or assessment.
   (C)   The claim for refund shall state the specific grounds upon which it is
founded.
   (D)   The claim for refund must specify whether it seeks a refund of the
whole fee, tax or assessment or, if only a part, what part.
   (E)   The claim for refund shall set forth the address to which
communications relating to the claim shall be directed.
(Prior Code, § 3.40.010) (Ord. 652, passed - -1996)
§ 3.40.020 ACTION ON CLAIM.
   Within 60 days following receipt of claim for refund by the Town Clerk, the
Town Council shall act upon the claim. If the Town Council fails to act upon
the claim within 60 days, the claim shall be deemed rejected. If the claim is
rejected in whole or in part, the person who paid the fee, tax or assessment,
his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator may bring an action
in court to recover the fee, tax or assessment. No other person may bring such
an action and a class action shall not be permitted; but if another should
bring such an action, judgment shall not be rendered for the plaintiff. Any
such action shall be filed and service of the summons and complaint shall be
made on the town not more than six months after rejection of the claim.
(Prior Code, § 3.40.020) (Ord. 652, passed - -1996)
Statutory reference:
   Filing claim, see Cal. Gov’t Code § 945.6
CHAPTER 3.44: PARAMEDIC AND/OR EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES TAX
Section
   
3.44.010   Findings; statement of purpose
   
3.44.020   Definitions
   
3.44.030   Tax imposed
   
3.44.040   Use of tax proceeds; appropriations limit
   
3.44.050   Method of collection; accountability report
   
3.44.060   Delinquency; refunds
   
3.44.070   Amendment of chapter
   
3.44.080   Severability
   
3.44.090   Two-thirds voter approval; effective date
   
3.44.100   Sunset provision
   
3.44.110   Execution
§ 3.44.010 FINDINGS; STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the sole purpose and intent of this chapter, pursuant to Articles
XIIIA and XIIIC of the California Constitution, to impose a special parcel tax
on residential and nonresidential property within the Town of Fairfax, the
proceeds of which shall be used exclusively to fund paramedic and/or emergency
medical services. This parcel tax is neither an ad valorem tax on real property
nor a transaction or sales tax on the sale of property. It is a special tax and
requires two-thirds voter approval.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FLOOR AREA. The total area of all floors in all buildings, including
accessory structures, on a lot, as measured to the outside surface of exterior
walls or to the centerline of common walls. FLOOR AREA excludes any crawl
space, basement area, attic without floor, and any open porch, deck, balcony or
terrace.
   NONRESIDENTIAL USE. Any building which is zoned, designed, intended, or used
for any purpose other than a residential use, including, but not limited to,
commercial, industrial, and office uses. A hotel, motel, and all residential
units contained therein, as defined below, shall be treated as a nonresidential
use.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any building, or portion thereof, containing one or more
rooms, a separate bathroom, and a single kitchen, designed for or occupied by
one family or by one or more individuals. This shall include all residential
units in those areas designated as residential zones by § 17.012.010 of this
Code.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.030 TAX IMPOSED.
   A special tax for the purpose outlined in §
3.44.040 shall be imposed on nonresidential uses and on residential units in
the amount specified below for each fiscal year from 2023 to 2027:
   (A)   Nonresidential uses. For each 1,500 square feet of floor area of
nonresidential uses, the tax amount shall be:
      (1)   $94.50 for fiscal year 2023-2024;
      (2)   $97.50 for fiscal year 2024-2025;
      (3)   $100.50 for fiscal year 2025-2026; and
      (4)   $103.50 for fiscal year 2026-2027.
   (B)   Residential units. For each residential unit, the tax amount shall be:
      (1)   $94.50 for fiscal year 2023-2024;
      (2)   $97.50 for fiscal year 2024-2025;
      (3)   $100.50 for fiscal year 2025-2026; and
      (4)   $103.50 for fiscal year 2026-2027.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.040 USE OF TAX PROCEEDS; APPROPRIATIONS LIMIT.
   (A)   The proceeds of the special tax imposed by this chapter shall be
deposited into a special fund in the Town Treasury and used specifically and
solely for the purpose of providing paramedic and/or emergency medical
services. This limitation on the use of the proceeds shall be legally binding
and enforceable.
   (B)   The appropriations limit of the town shall be increased by the
proceeds received from this special tax for each of the four years of this
special tax to permit the expenditure of the proceeds of the tax imposed by
this chapter for the specific and limited purposes set forth in this section.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.050 METHOD OF COLLECTION; ACCOUNTABILITY REPORT.
   (A)   The special tax imposed by this chapter shall be due from every person
who owns real property within the town on which is located a residential unit
(s) and/or a nonresidential use(s) and as reflected upon the tax rolls of the
Marin County Assessor at the same time ad valorem tax is due. This special tax
shall be collected by the Marin County Tax Collector at the same time, in the
same manner, and subject to the same terms and conditions, including penalties
and interest, as the ad valorem tax. The full amount due under this chapter
shall constitute a debt to the town. An action for the collection of any tax
due hereunder may be commenced in the name of the town, or its assignee, in any
court having jurisdiction of the cause.
   (B)   The Town Treasurer shall prepare and file with the Town Council a
report by August 1 of each year stating: (1) the amounts collected and spent by
the town in the previous fiscal year; (2) the status of services authorized to
be funded by the proceeds of this tax; and (3) the funds carried over from
previous years and to be carried over to future years. Such report shall be
available for inspection without charge to any property owner in the town.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.060 DELINQUENCY; REFUNDS.
   (A)   To any amount of the tax created by this chapter which becomes
delinquent, the Marin County Tax Collector shall add a penalty in an amount
equal to any penalty owing for delinquencies in the ad valorem property tax.
The tax and penalty shall bear interest at the same rate as the rate for unpaid
ad valorem tax until paid.
   (B)   Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty, or interest imposed by this
chapter has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the town, it may be refunded provided a verified claim
in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which such claim is
founded, is filed with the Treasurer within one year of the date of payment.
The claim shall be filed by the person who paid the tax or such person's
guardian, conservator, or the executor of her or his estate and shall contain
the information required by Cal. Gov't Code § 910 for claims to which that
section applies. No claim may be filed on behalf of other taxpayers or a class
of taxpayers. If a claim is approved by the Town Council, the excess may be
refunded or may be credited against any amounts then due and payable from the
person from whom it was collected, and the balance may be refunded to such
person, his/her administrators or executors. Filing a timely and sufficient
claim shall be a condition precedent to legal action against the town for a
refund of the tax.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.070 AMENDMENT OF CHAPTER.
   The Town Council is hereby authorized to amend this chapter by three
affirmative votes of its members for the sole and limited purposes of carrying
out the general purposes of this chapter, to conform the provisions of this
chapter to applicable state law, to permit the County Tax Collector to collect
the special tax levied by this chapter, or to re-assign the duties of public
officials under this chapter. In no event, however, may the Town Council
increase the tax amount specified in §
3.44.030 or modify the specific and limited purposes for which the tax may be
utilized as provided for in §
3.44.040 without the approval of two-thirds of the voters of the town voting on
the question.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.080 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, or part thereof, of this chapter is held invalid or
unenforceable by any court and such judgment becomes final, then that section,
or part thereof, may be amended by this Council, by a majority vote, to conform
with the judgment of such court, provided such amendment is consistent with the
purpose and intent of this chapter. If any section, subsection, sentence,
phrase or clause of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this
chapter. The people of the Town of Fairfax hereby declare that they would have
adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, phrase or clause
thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, phrases, or clauses may be declared invalid.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.090 TWO-THIRDS VOTER APPROVAL; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   An election to confirm and approve this chapter has been set for November 8,
2022. This chapter shall be effective only if approved by two-thirds of the
voters voting upon this chapter and shall go into effect ten days after the
vote is declared by the Town Council.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.100 SUNSET PROVISION.
   This chapter and the special parcel tax established herein shall expire and
be of no further force or effect after midnight, June 30, 2027.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
§ 3.44.110 EXECUTION.
   The Town Mayor is hereby authorized to attest to the adoption of this
chapter by signing where indicated below.
(Ord. 874, passed 11-8-2022)
TITLE 4: RESERVED
 
TITLE 5: BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
   Chapter
DIVISION I.   BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
      
5.04.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
5.08.   BUSINESS LICENSES REQUIRED
      
5.12.   ISSUANCE OF LICENSES
      
5.16.   LICENSE FEES
      
5.20.   EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS
      
5.24.   ENFORCEMENT
DIVISION II.   SPECIFIC BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      
5.28.   BILLPOSTING AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
      
5.32.   BINGO
      
5.36.   GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
      
5.40.   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
      
5.44.   PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
      
5.48.   TAXICABS
      
5.52.   INCOME-BASED RENTAL HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
      
5.54.   JUST CAUSE EVICTIONS
      
5.55.   MANDATORY MEDIATION FOR RENTAL INCREASES
      
5.56.   CANNABIS BUSINESSES
      
5.57.   SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROGRAM
      
5.58.   PARKLETS
DIVISION I: BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
CHAPTER 5.04: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
5.04.010   Definitions
   
5.04.020   Purpose of division
   
5.04.030   Other fees unimpaired
   
5.04.040   Effect of division on past actions and obligations
§ 5.04.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. Professions, trades, occupations and all and every kind of calling
whether or not carried on for profit and livelihood.
   CANVASSER, PEDDLER or SOLICITOR. Any person going from place to place, from
house to house or from street to street, doing business at any place other than
in a fixed place of business; selling, taking orders for, or soliciting orders
for goods, wares or merchandise, contributions, sales, opinions, subscriptions
or anything in relation thereto, for present or future delivery.
   COIN MACHINE. Any machine or device operated by the deposit of a coin or
token which plays or renders music, computer entertainment or computer-related
devices operated by coin or token.
   COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Fairfax.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business,
whether paid by salary or commission, whether as owner, any member of the
owner’s family, partner, agent, manager or solicitor, and any and all other
persons employed or working in the business.
   FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS. The location or premises at or from which a
business is conducted, and may include the residence of the licensee where the
business is conducted from the residence; provided, however, that, the conduct
of business from the residence is not in conflict with any zoning ordinance or
law.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total amounts actually received from sales and the total
amounts actually received for the performance of any act or service, of
whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed,
whether or not the act or service is done as a part of or in connection with
the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise. Included in GROSS RECEIPTS
shall be all receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature,
without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold,
the cost of the materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or
payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from GROSS RECEIPTS
shall be cash discounts allowed and taken on sales; credit allowed on property
accepted as part of the purchase price and which property may later be sold;
any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and
collected from the consumer or purchaser; the part of the sale price of
property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sales as is
refunded either in cash or by credit; amounts collected for others where the
business is acting as an agent or trustee to the extent that the amounts are
paid to those for whom collected; that portion of the receipts of a general
contractor which represent payments to subcontractors, provided that, the
subcontractors are licensed under this Division I, and provided that the
general contractor furnishes the collector with the names and addresses of the
subcontractors and the amounts paid each subcontractor.
   LICENSEE. All persons subject to be licensed under the terms of this
Division I, whether or not the license has actually been procured.
   LICENSE YEAR. The period from January 1 to December 31 of each calendar
year.
   MANUFACTURING. Any person conducting or carrying on a business consisting of
manufacturing, packaging or processing any goods, wares, merchandise or
commodities at a fixed place of business within the town or conducting or
carrying on a business of storage of goods, wares, merchandise or commodities
at a fixed place of business within the town.
   MULTIPLE HOUSING. A group of three or more attached, detached or semi-
detached, rentable or leasable units, occupying a parcel of land in one
ownership and having a yard or court in common, and wherein cooking facilities
are available to each respective unit.
   NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES. The average number of employees employed during the
license year.
   PERSON. Any foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock
corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts business or
common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any
business in the town, other than as an employee.
   PREMISES. All lands, structures and places and the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business. PREMISES also
includes any personal property which is either affixed to or otherwise used in
connection with any such business conducted on the premises.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax, California.
   VEHICLE OPERATOR LICENSEE. Any person not having a fixed place of business
in the town, and not otherwise licensed under this Division I, who operates a
vehicle over the streets of the town for the purpose of delivering personal
property into the town, or removing personal property from the town, or who
uses the vehicle for any other purpose in connection with the transaction of
any business of the person, where the place of business of the person is
located outside the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.010) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.04.020 PURPOSE OF DIVISION.
   This Division I is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes
and is not intended for regulation.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.020) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.04.030 OTHER FEES UNIMPAIRED.
   Persons required to pay a license fee for transacting and carrying on any
business under this Division I shall not be relieved from the payment of any
license fee for the privilege of doing the business required under any other
enactment of the town and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of
other enactments.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.030) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.04.040 EFFECT OF DIVISION ON PAST ACTIONS AND OBLIGATIONS.
   Neither the adoption of this Division I nor its superseding of any portion
of any other enactment of the town shall, in any manner, be construed to affect
prosecution for violation of any other enactment committed prior to the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this Division I; nor be construed
as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such
violation; nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit
required by any enactment to be posted, filed or deposited; and all rights and
obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
(Prior Code, § 5.04.040) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 5.08: BUSINESS LICENSES REQUIRED
Section
   
5.08.010   Generally
   
5.08.020   Evidence of doing business
   
5.08.030   Debtor licenses
   
5.08.040   License does not permit business otherwise prohibited
   
5.08.050   Branch establishments
   
5.08.060   Multiple businesses at same location and under same name
   
5.08.070   Posting and keeping of licenses
§ 5.08.010 GENERALLY.
   (A)   There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings
and occupations specified in this Division I license fees in amounts set by the
Town Council. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any
business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the town without first
having procured a license from the town to do so, or without complying with any
and all applicable provisions of this Division I.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a
license prior to doing business within the town if the requirement conflicts
with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state.
   (C)   Persons not required to obtain a license prior to doing business
within the town because of conflict with applicable statutes of the United
States or of the state shall be liable for payment of the fee imposed by this
Division I.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.010) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.08.020 EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS.
   When any person, by use of signs, circulators, cards, telephone book or
newspapers, advertises, holds out or represents that he or she is in business
in the town, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a
governmental agency indicating that he or she is in business in the town, or
when any person makes a sale, takes an order, renders a commercial service or
performs any other similar act within the town, and the person fails to deny by
a sworn statement given to the Town Clerk that he or she is conducting a
business in the town, after being requested to do so by the Town Clerk, then
these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he or she is
conducting a business in the town.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.020) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.08.030 DEBTOR LICENSES.
   No license for any ensuing, current or unexpired license period shall
knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for
any license, is indebted to the town for any unpaid license fee required to be
paid under the provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.030) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.08.040 LICENSE DOES NOT PERMIT BUSINESS OTHERWISE PROHIBITED.
   The issuance of a license under this Division I shall not entitle the
licensee to engage in any business which for any reason is in violation of any
law, and shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless
he or she has complied with all the requirements of this code and all other
applicable laws; nor shall it entitle the licensee to carry on any business in
any building or on any premises designated in the license in the event that the
business or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of
the business is in violation of any law, or if the building does not meet the
requirements of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Electrical Code and the Fire
Prevention Code of the town.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.040) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.08.050 BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS.
   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type
of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee
to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or
in the manner designated in the license; provided that, warehouses and
distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business
licensed under the provisions of this Division I shall not be deemed to be
separate places of business or branch establishments.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.050) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.08.060 MULTIPLE BUSINESSES AT SAME LOCATION AND UNDER SAME NAME.
   Whenever any person is engaged in two or more businesses at the same
location and doing business under the same name, such as providing a service
and, at the same time, selling items at retail, the person or persons shall be
required to pay a fee on the gross receipts of the two or more such businesses
engaged in.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.060) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.08.070 POSTING AND KEEPING OF LICENSES.
   All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner.
   (A)   Fixed place of business. The license must be posted in a conspicuous
place upon the premises where the business is carried on.
   (B)   No fixed place of business. The license must be kept upon the person
at all times while transacting business in the town.
(Prior Code, § 5.08.070) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 5.12: ISSUANCE OF LICENSES
Section
   
5.12.010   Application; contents of license
   
5.12.020   First license
   
5.12.030   Renewal license
   
5.12.040   Statements not conclusive; verification; confidentiality
   
5.12.050   Failure to file statement or corrected statement
   
5.12.060   Additional power of Town Clerk
   
5.12.070   Appeal
   
5.12.080   License tax; payment
   
5.12.090   License tax; notice or bill not required
   
5.12.100   License tax; proration
   
5.12.110   License tax; penalty for non-payment
   
5.12.120   Litigation
   
5.12.130   Duplicate or transfer of license
§ 5.12.010 APPLICATION; CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this
Division I shall make application for the same to the Town Clerk and, upon the
payment of the prescribed license fee, the Town Clerk shall issue to the person
a license which shall contain:
   (A)   The name of the person to whom the license is issued;
   (B)   The business licensed;
   (C)   The place where the business is to be transacted and carried on;
   (D)   The date of the expiration of the license; and
   (E)   Other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the
provisions of this Division I.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.010) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.020 FIRST LICENSE.
   Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued
hereunder or for a newly established business, in all cases where the amount of
the license is measured by gross receipts, the base fee only will be required
the first year as prior gross receipts would be non-existent in the case of a
new business.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.020) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.030 RENEWAL LICENSE.
   The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the Town Clerk,
for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be
paid by the applicant, a written, signed statement, upon the form provided by
the town, under penalty of perjury, setting forth the information concerning
the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required by the
Town Clerk to enable him or her to ascertain the amount of the license tax to
be paid by the applicant pursuant to the provisions of this Division I.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.030) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.040 STATEMENTS NOT CONCLUSIVE; VERIFICATION; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein,
nor shall the filing of the same preclude the town from collecting, by
appropriate action, such sum as is actually due and payable under this Division
I. The statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be
subject to audit and verification by the Town Clerk, his or her deputies,
authorized employees of the town or authorized agents, who are authorized to
examine, audit and inspect the books and records of any licensee or applicant
for license as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the
amount of license fee due.
   (B)   All licenses, applicants for licenses and persons engaged in the town
are required to permit an examination of the books and records for the purposes
aforesaid.
   (C)   The information furnished or secured pursuant to this section or §§
5.12.020 and
5.12.030 shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of the
information by any officer or employee of the town shall constitute a
misdemeanor and the officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of this Division I, in addition to any other penalties provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.040) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.050 FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENT OR CORRECTED STATEMENT.
   (A)   If any person fails to file any required statement within the time
prescribed, or if, after demand therefor made by the Town Clerk, he or she
fails to file a corrected statement, the Town Clerk may determine the amount of
license tax due from the person by means of the information as he or she may be
able to obtain.
   (B)   If such a determination is made, the Town Clerk shall give notice of
the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States Post Office at Fairfax, California, postage prepaid, addressed to
the person so assessed at his or her last known address. The person may, within
15 calendar days after the mailing or serving of the notice, make application
in writing to the Town Clerk for a hearing on the amount of the license tax.
   (C)   If the application is made, the Town Clerk shall cause the matter to
be set for hearing at the next Town Council meeting.
   (D)   The Town Clerk shall give notice to the person of the time and place
of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment.
   (E)   The Town Council shall consider all evidence produced and shall make
findings thereon, which shall be final.
   (F)   Notice of the findings shall be served upon the applicant in the
manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.050) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.060 ADDITIONAL POWER OF TOWN CLERK.
   In addition to all other powers conferred upon the Town Clerk, the Town
Clerk shall have the power, for good cause shown, to extend the time for filing
any required sworn statement for a period not to exceed 30 calendar days, and
in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall
have the further power, with the consent of the Town Council, to compromise any
claim as to amount of license tax due.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.060) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.070 APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Town Clerk with
respect to the issuance of or refusal to issue the license may appeal to the
Town Council by filing a notice of appeal with the Clerk of the Council.
      (2)   The Town Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing
the appeal. The Clerk of the Council shall give notice to the person of the
time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the
United States Post Office at Fairfax, California, postage prepaid, addressed to
the person at his or her last known address.
   (B)   The Town Council shall have authority to determine all questions
raised on the appeal.
   (C)   No determination shall conflict with any substantive provision of this
Division I.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.070) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.080 LICENSE TAX; PAYMENT.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes under the
provisions of this Division I shall be due and payable in advance on January 1
of each calendar year and shall become delinquent on February 1 of each
calendar year.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.080) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.090 LICENSE TAX; NOTICE OR BILL NOT REQUIRED.
   The Town Clerk is not required to send a notice or bill to any person
subject to the provisions of this Division I, and failure to send the notice or
bill shall not affect the validity of any license fee due hereunder.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.090) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.100 LICENSE TAX; PRORATION.
   In the case of a newly established fixed place of business in the town, the
tax may be prorated as follows.
   (A)   If application is made during the quarter beginning January 1, 100
percent of the tax shall be paid.
   (B)   If application is made during the quarter beginning April 1, 75
percent of the tax shall be paid.
   (C)   If application is made during the quarter beginning July 1, 50 percent
of the tax shall be paid.
   (D)   If application is made during the quarter beginning October 1, 25
percent of the tax shall be paid.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.100) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.110 LICENSE TAX; PENALTY FOR NON-PAYMENT.
   Should any license fee remain unpaid for a period of 30 calendar days after
the due date thereof, a penalty of ten percent of the total license fee shall
be added for each calendar month, or part thereof, during which the license fee
remains unpaid, and the penalty or penalties shall be collected by the Town
Clerk, or the Town Clerk’s deputies, along with the delinquent license fee.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.110) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.120 LITIGATION.
   In the event legal action is brought by the town to enforce collection of
any amount due under the terms of this Division I, the person liable shall pay
all costs of suit incurred by the town, or its assignee, including reasonable
attorney fees.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.120) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.12.130 DUPLICATE OR TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
    The Town Clerk, in the event of loss or destruction of a license
certificate, or when a business is moved into a new or different location, or
ownership is transferred, shall issue a duplicate license certificate upon the
payment of an amount to be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.12.130) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 5.16: LICENSE FEES
Section
   
5.16.010   Minimum license fee
   
5.16.020   Retail, service, wholesale, manufacturing and miscellaneous
   
5.16.030   Professions, semi-professional and trade businesses
   
5.16.040   Contractors
   
5.16.050   Fire, wreck or bankruptcy sales
   
5.16.060   Home occupations
   
5.16.070   Christmas tree sales
   
5.16.080   Canvassers, peddlers and solicitors
   
5.16.090   Delivery vehicles; no fixed place of business
   
5.16.100   Multiple housing
   
5.16.110   Coin-operated vending machines
   
5.16.120   Public dances
   
5.16.130   Realtors
   
5.16.140   Commercial filming
   
5.16.150   Passenger vehicles for hire
   
5.16.160   Fire/burglar alarm installation
   
5.16.170   Street vendors
   
5.16.180   Theaters
§ 5.16.010 MINIMUM LICENSE FEE.
   The minimum annual license tax for every person carrying on, conducting or
managing a business from a fixed place of business within the town shall be as
set by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.010) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.020 RETAIL, SERVICE, WHOLESALE, MANUFACTURING AND MISCELLANEOUS.
   (A)   (1)   Every person conducting, carrying on or maintaining a business
consisting of selling at retail any goods, wares, merchandise or commodities,
and any person conducting, carrying on or managing any of the following named
businesses considered to be of a service nature, and other businesses or
persons not listed which are considered to be of a service nature, and any
person selling at wholesale, or by mail order, any goods, wares, merchandise or
commodities, and any business conducting manufacturing, as defined in this
Division I, and any business not specifically licensed by other provisions of
this Division I shall pay an annual base license fee to be set by resolution of
the Town Council, plus a fee based on the previous year’s gross receipts, which
would include a combination of any or all of the titled businesses at a rate to
be set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   Service professions are considered to be the following:
      (1)   Alterations;
      (2)   Appliance repair;
      (3)   Artist;
      (4)   Auto painting;
      (5)   Auto repair service;
      (6)   Auto towing;
      (7)   Auto upholstering;
      (8)   Barber shop;
      (9)   Beauty shop;
      (10)   Bookkeeper or stenographer;
      (11)   Catering;
      (12)   Ceramics;
      (13)   Dressmaking;
      (14)   Janitorial service;
      (15)   Laundry;
      (16)   Machine shop;
      (17)   Music teachers;
      (18)   Newspapers;
      (19)   Tailors;
      (20)   Tree trimmers;
      (21)   Upholstering;
      (22)   Window cleaners; and
      (23)   Locksmith.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.020) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 532, passed - -
1984)
§ 5.16.030 PROFESSIONS, SEMI- PROFESSIONAL AND TRADE BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Every person conducting, carrying on or managing any of the following
named professions, semi-professions or trade businesses from a fixed place of
business within the town, and other businesses or persons not listed which are
considered to be of a professional or semi-professional nature, shall pay an
annual license fee for each person practicing his or her profession or trade.
Such fee shall be set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   Plus, he or she shall pay a fee per annum for each employee, also to
be set by resolution of the Town Council.
      (1)   Accountant;
      (2)   Appraiser;
      (3)   Architect;
      (4)   Attorney;
      (5)   Auctioneer;
      (6)   Bacteriologist;
      (7)   Broker;
      (8)   Chemist;
      (9)   Chiropodist;
      (10)   Chiropractor;
      (11)   Collection agency;
      (12)   Credit bureau;
      (13)   Auditor;
      (14)   Dentist;
      (15)   Detective agency;
      (16)   Draftsperson;
      (17)   Doctor;
      (18)   Employment agency;
      (19)   Engineer;
      (20)   Finance company;
      (21)   Geologist;
      (22)   Income tax expert;
      (23)   Interior decorator;
      (24)   Laboratory;
      (25)   Lapidary;
      (26)   Optometrist;
      (27)   Orthopedist;
      (28)   Osteopath;
      (29)   Pathologist;
      (30)   Physician;
      (31)   Physiotherapist;
      (32)   Stone cutter;
      (33)   Surveyor;
      (34)   Title company;
      (35)   Urologist;
      (36)   Veterinarian;
      (37)   X-ray technician;
      (38)   Miscellaneous professions; and
      (39)   Family therapy.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.030) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.040 CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Every person conducting, carrying on or engaging in business as a
contractor not having a fixed place of business within the town shall pay a
base annual license fee to be set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   Subcontractors shall pay the base fee only unless a permit to do work
is taken out in their name.
   (C)   Contractors who maintain a fixed place of business within the town
shall pay a base fee per year, plus a set amount for each $1,000 of valuation
for each construction job undertaken. The base fee for the businesses which
commence after July l of any license year shall be prorated according to the
provisions of §
5.12.100.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.040) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.050 FIRE, WRECK OR BANKRUPTCY SALES.
   (A)   Every person conducting, carrying on or managing a fire sale, wreck
sale or bankruptcy sale shall pay a license tax in an amount to be set by
resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         BANKRUPTCY SALE. The sale of goods, wares and merchandise which have
been previously purchased from a trustee or receiver in bankruptcy, or trustee
or receiver in insolvency, or trustee for the benefit of creditors.
         FIRE SALE or WRECK SALE. The sale of goods, wares and merchandise
salvaged from a fire, wreck or other calamity.
      (2)   No license shall be required for the sale of merchandise salvaged
from any fire, wreck or other calamity occurring in the town.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.070) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.060 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Any person engaged in a home occupation, defined as a business conducted
entirely within a dwelling and carried on exclusively and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes which does not change the character
thereof, and in connection with which there is no display, no stock in trade,
no outside storage of equipment and no commodity sold upon the premises, shall
pay a business license fee to be set by resolution of the Town Council. Such
uses as barbershop, animal hospital, beauty parlor and dancing school shall not
be deemed to be home occupations.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.080) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.070 CHRISTMAS TREE SALES.
    Every person conducting, carrying on or managing a business of selling
Christmas trees, except where the business is conducted in connection with
another regularly established place of business for which a license has been
issued, shall pay an annual business license fee, in advance, for each
location, to be set by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.090) (Ord. 518, passed --1983)
§ 5.16.080 CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.
   Any person who does not maintain a fixed place of business within the town,
who conducts, carries on or manages a business of canvassing, peddling or
soliciting, shall pay a business license fee per day or an annual fee to be set
by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.100) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.090 DELIVERY VEHICLES; NO FIXED PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Every person not having a fixed place of business within the town who
delivers goods, wares or merchandise by vehicle, or who provides any services
by the use of vehicles in the town, shall pay an annual license fee as set by
resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.110) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.100 MULTIPLE HOUSING.
   (A)   Every person owning, operating, leasing or otherwise in the business
of multiple housing shall pay an annual business license fee as set by
resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   The unit occupied by the owner, in multiple residential units of less
than five, is exempt from this provision.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.120) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 532, passed - -
1984)
§ 5.16.110 COIN-OPERATED VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   Every person conducting, managing or carrying on a business of
distributing, renting, leasing or placing of coin machines for public patronage
in the town shall pay an annual license base fee, plus an amount for each
machine over one, at rates set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   Payment of individual license fee is the responsibility of the owner
or operator of the business where the machine is installed; provided, however,
the distributor of machines may pay all individual license fees for all
machines installed in the town, if prior arrangements are made with the Town
Clerk.
   (C)   Each coin machine placed, distributed or located in the town shall
have affixed thereto, in printing, plainly visible to the public, the name,
address and telephone number of the owner of the machine.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.130) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.120 PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   Every person or organization operating or carrying on public dances
for which admission is charged, collected or received shall pay a license fee
to be set by resolution of the Town Council, plus ten percent of gross receipts
received.
   (B)   The above fee applies to every public dance held during the taxable
year.
   (C)   (1)   Any incidents requiring intervention of the Police Department
will be sufficient cause to cancel dances and revoke licenses issued under this
section.
      (2)   Any damage caused by the public dances shall be paid for by the
person(s) operating or carrying on the public dances.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.140) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.130 REALTORS.
   Every real estate broker conducting, carrying on or managing business
consisting of the buying or selling or real estate within the town shall pay a
license fee to be fixed from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.160) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 631, passed - -
1994; Am. Ord. 762, passed 7-13-2011)
§ 5.16.140 COMMERCIAL FILMING.
   (A)   The fees for commercial filming are to be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the Council.
   (B)   Traffic control costs or any additional costs, as required by the
Chief of Police, or any damages incurred to the town, shall be paid entirely by
the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.170) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.150 PASSENGER VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   Every person engaged in the business of operating or conducting a taxicab,
auto or bus for transportation of passengers shall pay a fee to be set from
time to time by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.180) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.160 FIRE/BURGLAR ALARM INSTALLATION.
   The license fee for fire/burglar alarm installation shall be set from time
to time by resolution of the Town Council. In addition to certification by the
Chief of Police, contractors installing fire alarm systems shall obtain a
certification from the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.190) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.170 STREET VENDORS.
   (A)   STREET VENDOR. Any person, whether or not having a fixed place of
business For the conducting of which a license is required pursuant to other
provisions of this title, engaging in the business of vending, selling or
offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise from any portable stand
within the town.
   (B)   This requires a use permit.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.210) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.16.180 THEATERS.
   Theaters maintaining a fixed place of business within the town shall pay an
annual license fee, plus a fee on gross receipts in §
5.16.020 of this chapter, as set by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 5.16.220) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 5.20: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS
Section
   
5.20.010   Exemptions
   
5.20.020   Exclusions
§ 5.20.010 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this Division I shall not be deemed or construed to
require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage or carry on the
following businesses or occupations.
   (A)   Charitable institutions.
      (1)   From any institution or organization which is conducted, managed or
carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes, or from which profit
is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person; nor shall any
license be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert,
exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral
subjects, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition
or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school, or to any religious
or benevolent purpose within the town; nor shall any license be required for
the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by
any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or
municipal organization or association whenever the receipts of any such
entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for
the purposes and objects for which the association or organization was formed,
and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any
person.
      (2)   Nothing in this division (A) contained shall be deemed to exempt
any such institution or organization from obtaining a permit from the proper
board or officer to conduct, manage or carry on any profession, trade, calling
or occupation; and provided that, the institution or organization files with
the Town Clerk satisfactory proof by affidavit that the receipts of the
business are to be used for the purpose herein specified.
   (B)   Interstate commerce.
      (1)   In any case where the payment of a license tax would cast an undue
burden upon the right to engage in commerce with foreign nations or among the
several states, or conflicts with the regulations of the United States Congress
respecting interstate commerce; but any applicant claiming exemption upon that
ground shall file a verified statement with the Town Clerk, disclosing the
interstate or other character of his or her business entitling it to the
exemption, which statement shall contain the name and location of the company
or firm for which orders are to be solicited or secured, the name and address
of the nearest local or state manager, the kind of goods, wares and merchandise
to be delivered, the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded,
the method of solicitation or taking orders, the location of any warehouse,
factory or plant within the state, the method of delivery, the name and
location of the residence of the applicant and any other facts necessary to
establish the claim of exemption.
      (2)   A copy of the order blank, contract form or other papers used by
the person in taking orders shall be attached to the affidavit for the
information of the Town Clerk.
      (3)   If it appears that the applicant is entitled to the exemption, the
Town Clerk shall forthwith issue a free license.
   (C)   Disabled veterans. Any disabled veteran who is physically unable to
obtain a livelihood by manual labor and having honorable discharge or release
papers showing disability incurred while in service in the armed forces of the
United States shall have the right to distribute circulars and peddle any
goods, wares or merchandise owned by him or her without the payment of any
license or tax upon the following terms and conditions: the applicant shall
furnish evidence satisfactory to the Town Clerk that he or she is physically
unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, is an honorably discharged or
released member of the armed forces of the United States, and that he or she
sustained disability while serving in the Armed Forces of the United States
during a war or military campaign in which the United States was engaged.
   (D)   Blind. Any business conducted, carried on or managed solely by a
totally blind person.
(Prior Code, § 5.20.010) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.20.020 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Except as may be otherwise specifically provided in this section, the
terms of this section shall not be deemed or construed to apply to any of the
following persons:
      (1)   Any public utility which pays to the town a tax under a franchise
or similar agreement or any publicly-owned public utility;
      (2)   Banks, including national banking associations, to the extent that
a city may not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Art. XIII,
§ 27, of the state’s Constitution;
      (3)   Insurance companies and associations, to the extent that a city may
not levy a license tax upon them under the provisions of Art. XIII, § 28, of
the state’s Constitution; and
      (4)   Any person whom the town is not authorized to license under any law
or constitution of the United States or the state.
   (B)   The Town Clerk may require the filing of a verified statement from any
person claiming to be excluded by the provisions of this section, which
statement shall set forth all facts upon which the exclusion is claimed.
(Prior Code, § 5.20.020) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
CHAPTER 5.24: ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
5.24.010   License fee as a debt
   
5.24.020   Enforcement
   
5.24.030   Remedies cumulative
   
5.24.040   Violation; penalty
§ 5.24.010 LICENSE FEE AS A DEBT.
   The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this
Division I shall be deemed a debt to the town. An action may be commenced in
the name of the town, in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of
any delinquent license tax and penalties.
(Prior Code, § 5.24.010) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.24.020 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, and the Clerk is directed to
enforce each and all of the provisions of this Division I and the Chief of
Police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this Division I as
may from time to time be required by the Town Clerk or the Town Council.
   (B)   The Town Clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him or her
hereunder, and acting through his or her deputies or duly authorized
assistants, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the
town to ascertain whether the provisions of this Division I have been complied
with.
   (C)   (1)   The Town Clerk and each and all of his or her assistants, and
any police officer, shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge
and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed in
this Division I, and demand an exhibition of its license certificate.
      (2)   Any person having the license certificate theretofore issued in his
or her possession or under her or his control, who wilfully fails to exhibit
same on demand, shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to fines provided
in
Chapter 1.08 of this code. It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk and each of
his or her assistants to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all
persons found to be in violation of any of the provisions.
(Prior Code, § 5.24.020) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.24.030 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   All remedies prescribed under this Division I shall be cumulative and the
use of one or more remedies of the town shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Division I.
(Prior Code, § 5.24.030) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
§ 5.24.040 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Division I, or knowingly
or intentionally mis- representing to any officer or employee of the town any
material fact in procuring the license or permit herein provided for, is guilty
of an infraction and shall be punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 5.24.040) (Ord. 518, passed - -1983)
DIVISION II: SPECIFIC BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 5.28: BILLPOSTING AND OUTDOOR ADVERTISING
Section
   
5.28.010   Definitions
   
5.28.020   Permit; required
   
5.28.030   Permit; application; list of proposed locations
   
5.28.040   Permit; fee
§ 5.28.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLBOARD and BULLETIN BOARD.
      (1)   Either wooden or metal structures, consisting of frame walls with a
roof, awning, canopy or other appendage attached thereto, or of a single wooden
or metal board, or composed of several wooden boards or pieces of metal joined
together, upon which are or are to be placed posters or other advertising
matter or painted thereon any words, figures, signs or illustrations
advertising any business or person engaged in business, or any article of
merchandise.
      (2)   These definitions shall not be held to include any board or surface
used to display official notices issued by any court or public office, or used
to display announcements of meetings to be held upon premises whereon the
billboards are displayed, or used to advertise any business conducted on the
premises where the bulletin board is located.
(Prior Code, § 5.28.010)
§ 5.28.020 PERMIT; REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in or carry on the business or occupation of
billposting, bulletin signposting, outdoor advertising or maintaining
billboards or bulletin boards without first obtaining a permit to do so, as
provided in this chapter, and without complying with all of the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.28.020)
§ 5.28.030 PERMIT; APPLICATION; LIST OF PROPOSED LOCATIONS.
   Any person, before engaging in or continuing to engage in the business
described in this chapter, shall file with the Town Council an application for
a permit to engage in the business. The application shall be accompanied by a
list of the locations of all billboards or bulletin boards erected or intended
to be erected by the person.
(Prior Code, § 5.28.030)
§ 5.28.040 PERMIT; FEE.
   There is imposed a permit fee in an amount to be set from time to time by
resolution of the Town Council per annum for every board or sign, as defined in
§
5.28.010, maintained within the town, which permit fee shall be paid in advance
to the Chief of Police, upon granting by the Town Council of any permit under
this chapter, and annually thereafter in advance.
(Prior Code, § 5.28.040)
CHAPTER 5.32: BINGO
Section
Article I. Licenses
   
5.32.010   Eligibility
   
5.32.020   Application filing; issuing authority; term
   
5.32.030   Issuance requirements
   
5.32.040   Application contents; fee; certificate of exemption
   
5.32.050   Investigation of applicant
   
5.32.060   License contents
   
5.32.070   Revocation; notice
   
5.32.080   Appeal; reapplication
Article II. General Regulations
   
5.32.090   Definition
   
5.32.100   Maximum prize value
   
5.32.110   Receipt and disbursement of funds; recordkeeping
   
5.32.120   Licensee to have sole financial interest
   
5.32.130   Exclusive operation by licensee
   
5.32.140   Games open to public
   
5.32.150   Attendance limitation; seat reservation
   
5.32.160   Location
   
5.32.170   Participation by minors
   
5.32.180   Intoxicated persons
   
5.32.190   Hours of operation
   
5.32.200   Presence required for participation
   
5.32.210   Receipt of profit
   
5.32.220   Action to enjoin violation
ARTICLE I. LICENSES
§ 5.32.010 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation
tax by Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e,
23701f, 23701g and 237011, and senior citizens’ organizations may apply to the
town for a license to conduct bingo games in the town under the provisions of
Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 and the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The receipts of the games conducted by any such organization shall be
used only for charitable purposes.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.010) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 5.32.020 APPLICATION FILING; ISSUING AUTHORITY; TERM.
   (A)   Eligible organizations desiring to obtain the license to conduct bingo
games in the town shall file an application, in writing, therefor in the office
of the Town Manager on a form to be provided by the town.
   (B)   The issuing authority shall be the Town Manager.
   (C)   The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of
issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.020)
§ 5.32.030 ISSUANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   No license shall be issued to any organization unless the applicant is an
eligible organization under §
5.32.010 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.030)
§ 5.32.040 APPLICATION CONTENTS; FEE; CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Application for a license shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the
applicant is an eligible organization under §
5.32.010 of this chapter;
      (2)   The name and signature of at least two officers, including the
presiding officer, of the corporation or community chest and the trustee of any
trust;
      (3)   The particular property within the town, including the street
number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by the applicant for an office
or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on
which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy
capacity of the place;
      (4)   Proposed days of the week and hours of the day for conduct of bingo
games;
      (5)   The applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance
with the provisions of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 and of this chapter, as they may
be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo
games may be revoked by the Town Manager upon violation of any such provisions;
and
      (6)   The signature of the applicant, under penalty of perjury.
   (B)   The annual license fee fixed by the Town Council by resolution shall
accompany the application.
   (C)   The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate
or determination of exemption under Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d, or
a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax
Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §
23701d.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.040)
§ 5.32.050 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the Town Manager
shall refer the same to interested departments of the town, including, but not
limited to the Town Attorney, the Police Department, the Planning Department
and the Fire Department, for investigation as to whether or not all the
statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of the
applicant qualifies, and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which
bingo games may lawfully be conducted, as to fire, occupancy and other
applicable restrictions.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.050)
§ 5.32.060 LICENSE CONTENTS.
   Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law,
to conduct bingo games in the town, the Town Manager shall issue a license to
the applicant, which shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;
   (B)   The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;
   (C)   The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be
conducted;
   (D)   The date of the expiration of the license; and
   (E)   Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.060)
§ 5.32.070 REVOCATION; NOTICE.
   (A)   Whenever it appears to the Town Manager that the licensee is
conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation, the license may
be revoked; provided that, the licensee may appear before the Town Manager, at
the time fixed by the Town Manager, for the purpose of presenting evidence why
the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this
section unless written notice shall have first been given at least five days
before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States Mail a notice
directed to the licensee at the address given in the application. The notice
shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the
revocation.
   (B)   Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not
conduct any bingo game in the town until such time as the Town Council, on
appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.070)
§ 5.32.080 APPEAL; REAPPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this
chapter shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice, in
writing, of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the Town Council.
      (2)   The appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which
it is based.
      (3)   The Town Council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within 30 days
after its receipt by the town, or at a time thereafter agreed upon, and shall
cause the appellant to be given at least ten days’ written notice of the
hearing.
      (4)   At the hearing, the appellant or its authorized representative
shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or
both, in support of his or her appeal.
      (5)   The determination of the Town Council, on the appeal, shall be
final.
   (B)   Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply
for a license to conduct bingo games in the town for a period of one year from
the date of the revocation; provided that, if the ground for revocation is
cancellation of the exemption granted under Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code §
23701d, the organization may again apply for a license upon proof of
reinstatement of the exemption.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.080)
ARTICLE II. GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 5.32.090 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BINGO. A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of
designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols
selected at random.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.090)
§ 5.32.100 MAXIMUM PRIZE VALUE.
   The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games
shall not exceed $250 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is
held.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.100)
§ 5.32.110 RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS; RECORDKEEPING.
   (A)   All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund
or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account.
   (B)   The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and
expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct,
promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized
by this chapter.
   (C)   The town, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right
to examine and audit the records at any reasonable time, and the licensee shall
fully cooperate with the town by making the records available.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.110)
§ 5.32.120 LICENSEE TO HAVE SOLE FINANCIAL INTEREST.
   No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity, except the
licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of a bingo game.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.120)
§ 5.32.130 EXCLUSIVE OPERATION BY LICENSEE.
   (A)   A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the
licensed organization.
   (B)   The members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo
game.
   (C)   Only the licensee shall operate the game or participate in the
promotion, supervision or any other phase of the game.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.130)
§ 5.32.140 GAMES OPEN TO PUBLIC.
   All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the
licensee organization.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.140)
§ 5.32.150 ATTENDANCE LIMITATION; SEAT RESERVATION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the pubic, attendance at
any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which
the game is conducted as determined by the Fire Department and Building
Department of the town in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
   (B)   The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.150)
§ 5.32.160 LOCATION.
   (A)   A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased
by it, and which property is used by the organization for an office or for
performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.
   (B)   The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder
thereof to conduct bingo games only on the property, the address of which is
stated in the application.
   (C)   In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and
as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized,
the license shall have no further force or effect.
   (D)   A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon
application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by
it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization
is organized.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.160)
§ 5.32.170 PARTICIPATION BY MINORS.
   No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be allowed to participate
in any bingo game.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.170)
§ 5.32.180 INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a
bingo game.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.180)
§ 5.32.190 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No licensee shall conduct any bingo game more than six hours out of any 24-
hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before 10:00 a.m. nor after 2:00
a.m. of any day.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.190)
§ 5.32.200 PRESENCE REQUIRED FOR PARTICIPATION.
   No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person
is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.200)
§ 5.32.210 RECEIPT OF PROFIT.
   It is a misdemeanor under Cal. Penal Code § 326.5(b) for any person to
receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this
chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $10,000,
which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the town.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.210)
§ 5.32.220 ACTION TO ENJOIN VIOLATION.
   The town may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin
a violation of Cal. Penal Code § 326.5 or of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.32.220)
CHAPTER 5.36: GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
Section
   
5.36.010   Permitted services
   
5.36.020   Storage and parking on premises
§ 5.36.010 PERMITTED SERVICES.
   The following services and no others shall be permitted upon any premises
used as a gasoline service station: the sale of gasoline, lubricating oils,
greases and other products of petroleum, tires, batteries and other
accessories; the cleaning, oiling and greasing of automobiles; the minor
servicing and adjusting of brakes and electrical equipment; and the servicing
and repairing of tires and batteries; but no repairs or reconditioning of the
chassis, motors, engines, bodies, radiators or fenders of automobiles, motor
vehicles, motorboats, launches or other motor- propelled vessels shall be
permitted thereon, unless specifically provided for in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 5.36.010)
§ 5.36.020 STORAGE AND PARKING ON PREMISES.
   The storage, keeping or parking of automobiles, motor vehicles, tow trucks,
motorboats, launches or materials upon premises comprising a gasoline service
station, except as required for the services permitted by §
5.36.010, is prohibited, except as specifically provided for in the permit.
(Prior Code, § 5.36.020)
CHAPTER 5.40: MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
   
5.40.010   Definition
   
5.40.020   Exempted machines and devices
   
5.40.030   License required
   
5.40.040   License application
   
5.40.050   License; investigation by police
   
5.40.060   License; fee; term; expiration date
   
5.40.070   License; issuance and display
   
5.40.080   License; non-transferrable
§ 5.40.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE. A machine which, upon the insertion of a coin
or slug, operates or may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement of
any description or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement,
and which contains no automatic payoff device for the return of slugs, money,
tokens or merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.010)
§ 5.40.020 EXEMPTED MACHINES AND DEVICES.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any machine or mechanical
device, sometimes called an automatic vending machine, which, in return for the
coin deposited therein, will deliver the equivalent value of the coin in
merchandise or music without the operation or playing of any game or contest;
nor shall it apply to any mechanical amusement device if and when operated in
conjunction with any other device or supervision so as by any means to provide
a reward, in money or merchandise, for the skillful operation of the machine;
nor if and when operated in conjunction with any other device or supervision so
as to provide any reward in money or merchandise for a score or result
dependent upon chance or accident.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.020)
§ 5.40.030 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a mechanical amusement device, nor permit the same
to be operated, in any restaurant, store, cocktail lounge, resort, hall or
other public place under the control of the person, without first obtaining a
license from the town for the amusement device.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.030)
§ 5.40.040 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a license under this chapter shall make application
therefor to the Town Clerk upon a form to be furnished by the town and no
license shall be granted unless upon the form; or otherwise the applicant shall
furnish the following information under oath:
   (A)   The name of the applicant;
   (B)   The residence of the applicant;
   (C)   The name of the country of which the applicant is a citizen;
   (D)   The ownership or intended ownership of the devices involved;
   (E)   The place where the devices are to be located;
   (F)   A description of the devices reasonably sufficient to identify them;
and
   (G)   The number of devices to be operated at each location where the
devices are to be operated.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.040)
§ 5.40.050 LICENSE; INVESTIGATION BY POLICE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, the Town Clerk may
refuse to issue any license under this chapter until the facts set forth in the
application have been checked and verified by the Chief of Police and it has
been determined by the Chief of Police that the device to be licensed is in
fact the sort of device contemplated by this chapter. It is made the duty of
the Chief of Police to inspect the device from time to time and to report
thereon to the Town Council and to the Town Clerk; and upon demand by the Town
Clerk for an investigation of any particular device, the Chief of Police must
immediately make an investigation and report thereon.
   (B)   The investigation may be made either at the time of initial
application for license or at any time the license may be in force, or at any
time when renewal of the license is sought.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.050)
§ 5.40.060 LICENSE; FEE; TERM; EXPIRATION DATE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license, executed as required by
this chapter, and, if demanded, receipt of a favorable report from the Chief of
Police, the Town Clerk is authorized and directed to issue a license as
provided in this chapter upon the payment of a license fee for each such device
in the amount of $1.50 for each month or portion of a month of the license
period.
   (B)   The license shall expire upon June 30 or December 31 next succeeding
its issuance. No license shall be issued for less than the remainder of the
half year in which it is issued.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.060)
§ 5.40.070 LICENSE; ISSUANCE AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a license under this chapter,
properly attested and sworn to by the applicant, the Town Clerk shall issue to
the applicant a separate license for each restaurant or other place of business
in which the devices are to be operated and for which the application is made,
upon the payment of the fees prescribed in this chapter. The license in each
case shall show the number and type of devices licensed and the place where
they are to be operated, and shall be permanently affixed to the wall or other
portion of the building where they are to be operated, in a prominent place.
   (B)   Any device possessed or operated in the town after the effective date
of this chapter, without the license so displayed, at any time, shall be deemed
to be unlicensed, and no license shall be effective, valid or in force, except
while so displayed.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.070)
§ 5.40.080 LICENSE; NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   No transfer of ownership or possession of any mechanical amusement device
shall carry with it a transfer of the license and the license shall, at all
times, be non-transferable and personal exclusively to the applicant. No such
license shall be valid at any location, except that for which it is originally
issued, and upon any change of location, a new license must be obtained.
(Prior Code, § 5.40.080)
CHAPTER 5.44: PEDDLERS, CANVASSERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
5.44.010   Definition
   
5.44.020   Applicability
   
5.44.030   Permit required
   
5.44.040   Permit application; contents
   
5.44.050   Permit; investigation; fee; issuance
   
5.44.060   Permit; non-transferrable
   
5.44.070   Permit; term
   
5.44.080   Permit; recordkeeping
   
5.44.090   Permit; revocation by Town Clerk; notice
   
5.44.100   Permit; revocation by Town Clerk; appeal
   
5.44.110   Permit; revocation by Town Council; grounds
   
5.44.120   Permit; revocation by Town Council; hearing; notice
   
5.44.130   Certificate of exemption
   
5.44.140   Permit to be shown upon request
   
5.44.150   Report of violations
   
5.44.160   Enforcement
§ 5.44.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSER, PEDDLER or SOLICITOR. Any individual traveling either by foot,
wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance from place to
place, from house to house or from street to street, selling, taking or
attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books,
periodicals or personal property of any nature whatsoever for present or future
delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the present or
future, whether or not the individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample
of the subject of the sale, or whether he or she is collecting advance payments
on the sales or not.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.010)
§ 5.44.020 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to salespersons who solicit
orders from or sell to retail dealers for resale, or to manufacturers for
manufacturing purposes, or to bidders for public works or supplies.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.020)
§ 5.44.030 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any solicitor, peddler or canvasser to engage in business
within the town without first obtaining a solicitor’s permit therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.030)
§ 5.44.040 PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   Applicants for a solicitor’s permit must file with the Town Clerk a verified
application, in writing, in duplicate, on a form to be furnished by the Town
Clerk, which shall give the following information:
   (A)   Name and description of the applicant;
   (B)   Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
   (E)   The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders
taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where the goods or
products are located at the time the application is filed and the proposed
method of delivery;
   (F)   Two photographs or the fingerprints of the applicant and the names of
at least three reliable residents of the county who will certify as to the
applicant’s good character and business respectability, or, in lieu of the
names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and
business responsibility of the applicant as will indicate the character and
business responsibility; and
   (G)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any crime or misdemeanor, other than traffic violations, and the nature of the
offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.040)
§ 5.44.050 PERMIT; INVESTIGATION; FEE; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The applicant shall tender the application and a fee to be determined
by resolution of the Town Council to the Town Clerk, and upon receipt of the
application, the Town Clerk shall investigate the facts set forth in the
application; and if, after investigation, the facts are substantiated, the Town
Clerk shall execute and deliver to the applicant a solicitor’s permit.
   (B)   The permit shall contain the signature of the Town Clerk and the seal
of the town and shall show the name and address of the permittee, the purpose
for which the permit is issued, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the
date of issuance and other information or data as the Town Clerk may deem
advisable.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.050)
§ 5.44.060 PERMIT; NON-TRANSFERRABLE.
   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be assigned or
transferred, nor shall they be used by any person other than the person to whom
they were issued.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.060)
§ 5.44.070 PERMIT; TERM.
   Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid until December 31 of
the calendar year for which issued.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.070)
§ 5.44.080 PERMIT; RECORDKEEPING.
   Immediately upon the issuance of a solicitor’s permit, the Town Clerk shall
refer to the Chief of Police a duplicate of the application, with a notation
thereon as to the date on which the permit was issued. The Town Clerk shall
keep a permanent record of all permits issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.080)
§ 5.44.090 PERMIT; REVOCATION BY TOWN CLERK; NOTICE.
   If, within 21 days after the Town Clerk refers to the Chief of Police a
duplicate of the written application, the Chief of Police ascertains that the
permittee’s character or business responsibility is unsatisfactory, the Chief
of Police shall so certify to the Town Clerk, and the Clerk shall thereupon
revoke the permit theretofore issued by him or her, and shall immediately
notify the permittee of the action by depositing in the United States Mail,
postage prepaid, a notice of the revocation, addressed to the permittee at his
or her permanent home address contained in the permittee’s application. The
revocation shall be deemed to be complete upon the deposit of the notice of
revocation in the United States Mail.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.090)
§ 5.44.100 PERMIT; REVOCATION BY TOWN CLERK; APPEAL.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the Town
Clerk in the revocation of a permit, as provided in §
5.44.090, shall have the right to appeal to the Town Council.
   (B)   The appeal shall be taken by filing with the Town Clerk, within 14
days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to the person’s
last-known address, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal and payment of an appeal fee.
   (C)   The Town Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the
appeal, and notice of the hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same
manner as provided in §
5.44.120 for notice of hearing on revocation. The decision and order of the
Town Council on the appeal shall be final and conclusive.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.100)
§ 5.44.110 PERMIT; REVOCATION BY TOWN COUNCIL; GROUNDS.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
Town Council after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for permit;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on his or her business as solicitor or as canvasser;
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
   (E)   Conducting the business of soliciting or of canvassing in any unlawful
manner or in a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a
menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.110)
§ 5.44.120 PERMIT; REVOCATION BY TOWN COUNCIL; HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit by the Town Council
shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of the hearing.
   (B)   The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his
or her last-known address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.120)
§ 5.44.130 CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION.
   Any person engaged in soliciting or canvassing who is not required to obtain
a solicitor’s permit under the provisions of this chapter may obtain a
certificate from the Town Clerk certifying that the person is exempt from the
permit requirement, upon the payment of a fee of $1 to the Town Clerk and by
filing with the Town Clerk a verified application, in duplicate, on a form to
be furnished by the Town Clerk and which shall give the following information:
   (A)   The name and a description of the applicant;
   (B)   The permanent home address and full local address of the applicant;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be
sold;
   (D)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship; and
   (E)   Such other information as, in the discretion of the Town Clerk, is
necessary to establish the fact of exemption from the requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.130)
§ 5.44.140 PERMIT TO BE SHOWN UPON REQUEST.
   Solicitors, peddlers and canvassers required to have a permit shall exhibit
such permit at the request of any citizen.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.140)
§ 5.44.150 REPORT OF VIOLATIONS.
   The Chief of Police shall report to the Town Clerk all convictions for
violation of this chapter and the Town Clerk shall maintain a record for each
permit issued and record the reports of violation thereon.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.150)
§ 5.44.160 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to require any person, who is
required to have a permit, seen soliciting or canvassing within the town, to
produce his or her permit, and to enforce the provisions of this chapter
against any person found to be violating the same.
(Prior Code, § 5.44.160)
CHAPTER 5.48: TAXICABS
Section
   
5.48.010   Definitions
   
5.48.020   Compliance with program
   
5.48.030   Driver’s permit required
   
5.48.040   Taxicab vehicle permit required
   
5.48.050   Company permit required
   
5.48.060   Application for permits
   
5.48.070   Testing for controlled substances and alcohol
   
5.48.080   Insurance required
   
5.48.090   Equipment
   
5.48.100   Mechanical condition
   
5.48.110   Operational requirements
   
5.48.120   Separate from business licensing
   
5.48.130   Enforcement and penalty provisions
§ 5.48.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in this
section shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions.
   CITY. The Town of Fairfax.
   COMPANY. Any entity operating a taxicab business, including without
limitation, a natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership,
business, trust, corporation or public entity.
   COMPANY PERMIT. A valid permit issued by the JPA authorizing a company to
operate a taxicab business.
   DRIVER. A person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.
   DRIVER’S PERMIT. A valid permit issued by the JPA authorizing a person to
drive or control the movements of a taxicab.
   JPA. The Marin Streetlight Acquisition Joint Powers Authority or successor
entity.
   OPERATE A TAXICAB. To drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up
passengers for hire in the town.
   PROGRAM. The Marin Street Light Acquisition Joint Powers Authority Taxicab
Regulation Program adopted and administered by the JPA.
   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, designed for carrying not more than eight persons,
excluding the driver.
   VEHICLE PERMIT. A valid permit issued by the JPA authorizing a particular
vehicle to be operated as a taxicab.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.020 COMPLIANCE WITH PROGRAM.
   No driver or company shall operate or cause the operation of a taxicab in
the town unless such operation complies with the terms and requirements of the
program which shall be adopted by separate resolution of the town.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.030 DRIVER’S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A person shall only operate a taxicab in the town if that person possesses a
driver’s permit. A company shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab if
that driver possesses a driver’s permit.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.040 TAXICAB VEHICLE PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A driver shall only operate a taxicab in the town if that vehicle displays a
vehicle permit. A company shall only allow a taxicab to be operated in the town
on its behalf if that vehicle displays a vehicle permit.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.050 COMPANY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A company shall only operate a taxicab business in the town if that company
possesses a company permit.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.060 APPLICATION FOR PERMITS.
   Application for a driver's permit, vehicle permit and/or company permit
shall be made to the jpa, upon a form provided by the JPA and shall be
accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs
of processing such application as established by the JPA. The fee schedule
established by the JPA shall be adopted by separate resolution of the Town
Council.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.070 TESTING FOR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES AND ALCOHOL.
   A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as
required by the program and any and all applicable state statutes.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.080 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   A driver operating a taxicab in the town shall carry with him or her at all
times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and
coverage as established by the JPA. The proof of insurance must clearly
identify the vehicle covered.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.090 EQUIPMENT.
   A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped
according to the standards established by the JPA.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.100 MECHANICAL CONDITION.
   A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be maintained
according to the standards established by the JPA.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.110 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A driver shall only carry a passenger to his or her destination by the
most direct and accessible route.
   (B)   A taxicab shall have all permits issued by the JPA conspicuously
displayed according to the standards established by the JPA.
   (C)   A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in
a prominent location in the taxicab passenger compartment according to the
standards established by the JPA.
      (1)   A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of the taxicab;
      (2)   The company’s name, address and telephone number;
      (3)   The company permit;
      (4)   The taxicab identification number;
      (5)   The driver’s permit issued by the JPA; and
      (6)   The vehicle permit issued by the JPA.
   (D)   A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request
of the person paying the fare.
   (E)   A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept
in a clean and sanitary condition free from offensive odors in accordance with
the standards established by the WA.
   (F)   The name or trade name of the company shall be printed, stamped or
stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the
standards established by the JPA.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.120 SEPARATE FROM BUSINESS LICENSING.
   The requirements of this chapter are separate and independent from the
business licensing and any other provisions under the Town Code. Any company
and/or driver operating a taxicab in the town shall obtain a business license
to the extent required under the terms of this Code.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
§ 5.48.130 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The town intends to secure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter by any of the following alternate, separate and distinct methods. Each
method set forth herein is intended to be mutually exclusive and does not
prevent concurrent or consecutive methods being used to achieve compliance
against continuing violations nor does it prevent utilization of any other
enforcement mechanisms and/or penalties available by law. Each day a violation
exists constitutes a separate offense.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, each violation of
the provisions of this chapter may be enforced alternatively as follows:
      (1)   Infraction. Any person or entity including without limitation a
driver or company violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any
of the mandatory requirements of this chapter may be prosecuted for an
infraction. Written citations for infractions may be issued by police officers
or non-safety employees designated by the town by separate resolution. Any
person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this chapter shall be
punished by:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within one
year; and
         (c)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation within
one year.
      (2)   Misdemeanor. Any person or entity including without limitation a
driver or company violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any
of the mandatory requirements of this chapter may be prosecuted for a
misdemeanor. Written citations for misdemeanors may be issued by police
officers or by non-safety employees designated by the town by separate
resolution. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this
chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
      (3)   Civil action. The Town Attorney by and at the request of the Town
Council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to
restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the
provisions of this chapter, as provided by law.
(Ord. 709, passed 5-17-2005)
CHAPTER 5.52: INCOME-BASED RENTAL HOUSING DISCRIMINATION
Section
   
5.52.010   Purpose
   
5.52.020   Income-based rental housing discrimination
   
5.52.030   Civil injunctive relief
   
5.52.040   Civil liability
   
5.52.050   Criminal penalty
   
5.52.060   Definitions
§ 5.52.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to increase affordable housing opportunities
by prohibiting discrimination on the basis of tenants' participation in third
party rental assistance programs.
(Ord. 816, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 5.52.020 INCOME-BASED RENTAL HOUSING DISCRIMINATION.
   (A)   Prohibited activity. It is unlawful for any person to do any of the
following related to the rental of real property for residential use as wholly
or partially based on source of income, as defined herein:
      (1)   To interrupt, terminate, or fail or refuse to initiate or conduct
any transaction in real property related to the rental thereof; to require
different terms for such transaction; or falsely to represent that an interest
in real property is not available for transaction;
      (2)   To include in the terms or conditions of a transaction in real
property any clause, condition or restriction;
      (3)   To refuse or restrict facilities, services, repairs or improvements
for any tenant or lessee;
      (4)   To make, print, publish, advertise or disseminate in any way, or
cause to be made, printed or published, advertised or disseminated in any way,
any notice, statement or advertisement with respect to a transaction in real
property, or with respect to financing related to any such transaction, which
unlawfully indicates preference, limitation or discrimination based on source
of income.
   (B)    Prohibited economic discrimination. It is unlawful for any person to
use a financial or income standard for the rental of housing that does either
of the following:
      (1)   Fails to account for any rental payments or portions of rental
payments that will be made by other individuals or organizations, including by
a rental assistance program, homeless assistance program, security deposit
assistance program or housing subsidy program, on the same basis as rental
payments to be made directly by the tenant or prospective tenant;
      (2)   Fails to account for the aggregate income of persons residing
together or proposing to reside together or the aggregate income of tenants or
prospective tenants and their cosigners or proposed cosigners.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the rental
or leasing of any housing unit in which the owner or any member of his/her
family occupies one of the living units and it is necessary for the owner to
use either a bathroom or kitchen facility common with the prospective tenant
(s).
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit any rental or
occupancy of any dwelling unit or commercial space otherwise prohibited by law.
(Ord. 816, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 5.52.030 CIVIL INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   Any aggrieved person may enforce the provisions of this chapter by means of
a civil injunctive action. Any person who commits, or proposes to commit, an
act in violation of this chapter may be enjoined therefrom by any court of
competent jurisdiction. An action for injunction under this section may be
brought by any aggrieved person, by County Counsel, the District Attorney, the
Town Attorney, or by any person or entity which will fairly and adequately
represent the interests of the protected class.
(Ord. 816, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 5.52.040 CIVIL LIABILITY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or who aids in
the violation of any provisions of this chapter is liable for special and
general damages, or up to three times the amount of one month's rent that the
landlord charges for the unit in question. The court may award in addition
thereto not less than $200 but not more than $400, together with attorney's
fees, costs of action, and punitive damages. Civil actions filed pursuant to
this section must be filed within one year of the alleged discriminatory acts.
(Ord. 816, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 5.52.050 CRIMINAL PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not
exceeding six months, or both.
(Ord. 816, passed 4-4-2018)
§ 5.52.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, corporation, or other organization or group of
persons however organized.
   SOURCE OF INCOME. All payments from a rental assistance program, homeless
assistance program, security deposit assistance program or housing subsidy
program, provided such funds are not paid directly to the tenant.
(Ord. 816, passed 4-4-2018)
CHAPTER 5.54: JUST CAUSE EVICTIONS
Section
   
5.54.010   Definitions
   
5.54.020   Conformity with state law
§ 5.54.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING UNIT. A structure or the part of a structure that is used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one person who maintains a household or
by two or more persons who maintain a common household as defined in Cal. Civil
Code § 1940 and this code.
   LANDLORD. An owner, lessor, sublessor or any other person entitled to
receive rent for the use and occupancy of any rental unit, or an agent,
representative or successor of any of the foregoing.
   RENTAL UNIT. Any building, structure, or part thereof, or land appurtenant
thereto, or any other rental property rented or offered for rent for
residential purposes, together with all housing services connected with use or
occupancy of such property such as common areas and recreational facilities
held out for use by a tenant, regardless of zoning or permitting status. A room
or rooms rented separately from other rooms at the same property shall
constitute a single rental unit, even if tenants share other common spaces or
amenities.
   TENANT. A tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or any other person entitled
under the terms of a rental agreement to the use or occupancy of any rental
unit.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax, California.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.54.020 CONFORMITY WITH STATE LAW.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a landlord may take action to
terminate any tenancy, including but not limited to making a demand for
possession of a rental unit, threatening to terminate a tenancy verbally or in
writing, serving any notice to quit or other eviction notice, bringing any
action to recover possession or be granted recovery of possession of a rental
unit, including by seeking the entry of an eviction judgment or by causing or
permitting a writ of possession to be entered, in any circumstance authorized
by state law, including but not limited to Cal. Civil Code § 1946.2 and Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1159-1179.15. The town shall not enforce any limit
on terminating a tenancy that is more restrictive than those set forth in state
law. Any provision of law governing the applicable bases for eviction for any
rental unit that was adopted after this measure was submitted for title and
summary but prior to the effective date of this act, and that is inconsistent
with this provision, is hereby repealed.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
CHAPTER 5.55: MANDATORY MEDIATION FOR RENTAL INCREASES
Section
   
5.55.010   Purpose and intent
   
5.55.020   Applicability
   
5.55.030   Definitions
   
5.55.040   Mediation eligibility
   
5.55.050   Mediation process
   
5.55.060   Anti-harrassment and other prohibited activities
   
5.55.070   Civil remedies
   
5.55.080   Notice of tenant rights
   
5.55.090   Conformity with state law
§ 5.55.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to increase certainty and
fairness in the residential rental market within the Town of Fairfax, in order
to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of residents and businesses
within the town. This chapter only governs disputes between landlords and
tenants of rental dwelling units located within the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all dwelling units in
the town containing a separate bathroom, kitchen, and living area, including a
single-family dwelling or unit in a multifamily or multipurpose dwelling, a
unit in a condominium or cooperative housing project, or a unit in a structure
that is being used for residential uses whether or not the residential use is a
conforming use permitted under the town code, which is hired, rented, or leased
to a household within the meaning of Cal. Civil Code § 1940. This definition
applies to any dwelling space that is actually used for residential purposes,
including live-work spaces, whether or not the residential use is legally
permitted.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary above, the provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Any dwelling unit that is owned or operated by any government
agency; or
      (2)   Any dwelling, unit for which one of the following is true:
         (a)   The rent is limited to no more than affordable rent, as such
term is defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50053, pursuant and subject to
legally binding restrictions enforceable against and/or governing such units;
or
         (b)   The rent is directly subsidized by a government agency such that
the tenant's portion of the rent does not exceed 30% of income.
§ 5.55.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall mean:
   DESIGNATED SERVICE PROVIDER. A party, organization, or other governmental
agency/ department (e.g., County of Marin) selected by the Town Manager to
provide mediation services and other tasks necessary to implement the program
and procedures contained in this chapter and any associated guidelines.
   DWELLING UNIT. A structure or the part of a structure that is used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one person who maintains a household or
by two or more persons who maintain a common household as defined in Cal. Civil
Code § 1940 and the town code.
   GOOD FAITH PARTICIPATION. Includes the affirmative duty of the landlord to:
(i) refrain from any harassment or other prohibited activity described in §
5.55.060 and to (ii) refrain from an unlawful detainer proceeding while the
parties are engaged in proceedings under this chapter excepting only those
actions authorized by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1161(3) and 1161(4) or
any successor provisions. GOOD FAITH PARTICIPATION also includes the
affirmative duty of the tenant to abide by the terms of the lease or rental
agreement and to pay all lawful rent owed.
   GUIDELINES. Any written regulations forms, notices for the administration
and implementation of this chapter adopted by the Town Manager, with review by
the Town Attorney, and included in the guidelines.
   LANDLORD. An owner, lessor, or sublessor who receives or is entitled to
receive rent for the use and occupancy of any dwelling unit or portion thereof.
   MEDIATION. One or more meetings in which a landlord and tenant have the
opportunity to directly communicate with a mediator and each other in a face-
to-face setting at a neutral location in order to resolve a rental housing
dispute under ground rules designed to protect the confidentiality and
neutrality of the communications.
   MEDIATOR. A person who is employed by the designated service provider and
who meets any criteria for conducting mediations that may be established in the
guidelines.
   RENT. The consideration, including any funds, labor, bonus, benefit, or
gratuity, demanded or received by a landlord for or in connection with the use
and occupancy of a dwelling unit and the housing services provided therewith,
or for the assignment of a rental agreement for a dwelling unit.
   TENANT. A person entitled by written or oral agreement, or by sufferance, to
the use or occupancy of a dwelling unit.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Fairfax Town Manager or his or her designee unless
otherwise specified.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.040 MEDIATION ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Tenant-initiated mediation. A tenant residing in a dwelling unit may
file a request and receive mediation services within either 30 calendar days
from the enactment of this chapter or ten calendar days of the tenant's receipt
of one or more notices in accordance with Cal. Civil Code § 827 that
individually or cumulatively increase rent more than 5% within any 12-month
period.
   (B)   Landlord-requested mediation. Any landlord may file a request and
receive mediation services in order to pursue a rent increase greater than 5%
within any 12-month period.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.050 MEDIATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Designated service provider. The Town Manager shall contract with or
designate a designated service provider to provide mediation services. The
guidelines may include a description of minimum qualifications for the
designated service provider and its mediators.
   (B)   Mediation requests.
      (1)   Any tenant or landlord eligible for mediation under §
5.55.040 may request mediation services from the designated service provider.
      (2)   Each landlord and/or tenant requesting mediation services must
complete and sign a form under penalty of perjury that demonstrates eligibility
for mediation under this chapter and includes other information as may be
specified in the guidelines.
      (3)   Separate requests for mediation services that involve one or more
of the same parties may be consolidated with the consent of the landlord and
the other tenant(s), but consolidation is not required and shall not affect
individuals' ability to be separately represented or to bring a separate legal
action.
      (4)   If an eligible tenant has requested mediation as a result of
receiving one or more notices in accordance with Cal. Civil Code § 827 that
individually or cumulatively increase rent more than 5% within any 12-month
period, unless the parties otherwise agree in writing, such noticed rent
increase will not be effective until the mediation concludes.
   (C)   Two-step mediation process. The designated service provider shall
assign a mediator within ten calendar days of receiving a complete request for
mediation services. The assigned mediator shall offer a two-step mediation
process as follows:
      (1)   Within two business days of receiving a mediation assignment from
the designated service provider, the mediator shall provide notice of the
mediation to the landlord and tenant. The mediation notice shall, at a minimum
inform each party of their obligation to appear at the mediation and
participate in the mediation in good faith. The mediator shall make reasonable
efforts to schedule mediation sessions at times that are mutually convenient
for the landlord and the tenant, which may include times that are outside of
business hours. The mediation process shall commence upon notification of the
landlord and tenant by the mediator.
         (a)   A mediator may notify the landlord and/or tenant of the
mediation process via telephone, email, or any other form of communication, but
at a minimum, the mediator must notify each party in writing via first-class
mail, postage prepaid to each parties' address of record.
         (b)   Following the mediator sending such notification, both the
landlord and the tenant have an affirmative obligation to participate in the
mediation in good faith until the mediation concludes.
      (2)   The mediation process shall conclude upon the earlier of:
         (a)   The execution of a legally enforceable, written mediation
agreement signed by all parties to the mediation service under §
5.55.050(E);
         (b)   The mediator's determination that no further progress is likely
to result from continued mediation; or
         (c)   All of the parties to the mediation indicate in writing that the
mediation has concluded to their satisfaction. In no event shall a mediation
process last longer than 30 calendar days from when the parties are notified
unless the parties agree in writing to extend the mediation term. If no legally
enforceable, written mediation agreement is reached, the mediator shall prepare
and distribute a nonbinding mediation statement under §
5.55.050(F). The mediator shall send the mediation statement to each party's
address of record via first-class mail, postage prepaid.
   (D)   Mandatory participation. Every party to a mediation is affirmatively
obligated to participate in such mediation in good faith until the mediator
determines the mediation has concluded.
      (1)   Definition. For purposes of this section, GOOD FAITH PARTICIPATION
includes by reference the definition described in §
5.55.030 and also means the mutual obligation of the landlord and tenant to
meet on each occasion when notified of mediation proceedings, provide relevant
information, exchange proposals, timely consider and respond to proposals by
opposite parties, and engage in meaningful discussion on the subject of
proposed rent increases and issues related to the rent increase.
      (2)   Failure to participate in good faith.
         (a)   No rent increase will be effective unless or until the landlord
of the dwelling unit complies with the provisions of this chapter by
participating in good faith as described in §§
5.55.030 and
5.55.050 throughout the entirety of a mediation process.
         (b)   If a tenant fails to participate in good faith, the mediator at
his or her discretion may determine that the tenant has withdrawn their request
for mediation service and conclude the mediation process, allowing any rent
increase to be implemented in accordance with the notice requirements
identified in Cal. Civil Code § 827.
      (3)   Finding of a failure to participate in good faith.
         (a)   A mediator or party to the mediation process may request that
the Town Manager investigate a claim of failure to participate in good faith by
another party. The Town Manager shall be responsible for investigating
allegations of a lack of good faith participation by any party.
         (b)   Any determination that a party has failed to participate in good
faith in a proceeding under this chapter shall only be made after a fair
hearing by a hearing officer appointed by the Town Manager and the rendition of
factual findings supported by the record. All parties to such hearing must
receive written notice of the hearing at least five business days prior to the
hearing date. Following such a hearing, the Town Manager shall give prompt
notice of the determination by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the
affected party. Additional hearing procedures, including procedures for appeals
(if any), may be specified in the guidelines.
   (E)   Mediation agreements.
      (1)   Any agreement reached by the parties in mediation must:
         (a)   Be made in writing and signed by the parties;
         (b)   State the specific terms of the mediation agreement including
the duration and conditions of the agreement;
         (c)   State the effective date of any agreed-upon rent increase and
stipulate to the adequacy of notice for any rent increase in accordance with
Cal. Civil Code § 827;
         (d)   Be legally enforceable against the parties to the agreement;
         (e)   Provide that the agreement may be enforced via civil action by
any party; and
         (f)   Provide that any agent or representative signing a mediation
agreement on behalf of other persons shall be responsible for promptly
providing a copy of the agreement to the parties they represent.
      (2)   A tenant bound by a mediation agreement may not request further
mediation concerning any rent increase covering the same time period included
in the mediation agreement but may request mediation concerning an additional
rent increase that is first noticed or occurs after the mediation agreement is
signed by both parties.
   (F)   Mediation statements. If a mediation service does not result in a
mediation agreement, then the designated mediator shall produce a nonbinding
mediation statement. The guidelines shall include form mediation agreements and
mediation statements that include, without limitation, the following
information:
      (1)   The name of each party that appeared for and participated in good
faith in the mediation service; and
      (2)   A concise summary of the dispute including the perspectives of each
party that appeared for and participated in good faith in the mediation
service.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.060 ANTI-HARASSMENT AND OTHER PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No landlord may do any of the following in bad faith, with ulterior
motive, or without honest intent:
      (1)   Interrupt, fail to provide, or threaten to interrupt or fail to
provide any housing service under a lease or rental agreement, including but
not limited to utility services and other amenities and services agreed to by
contract;
      (2)   Fail to perform repairs or maintenance required by contract or by
state, town, or county housing, health, or safety laws;
      (3)   Fail to exercise due diligence to complete repairs and maintenance
once undertaken, including the failure to follow industry-appropriate safety
standards and protocols;
      (4)   Abuse or otherwise improperly use landlord's right to access the
property;
      (5)   Remove personal property of the tenant(s) from the dwelling unit;
      (6)   Influence or attempt to influence the tenant(s) to vacate the unit
by means of fraud, intimidation, or coercion (including but not limited to
threats based on immigration status in violation of Cal. Civil Code § 1940.3;
      (7)   Offer payment or any other consideration, in return for the tenant
(s) vacating the dwelling unit, more often than once every six months;
      (8)   Threaten the tenant(s) by word or gesture with physical harm;
      (9)   Interfere with the tenant(s) right to quiet use and enjoyment of
the dwelling unit;
      (10)   Refuse to accept or acknowledge receipt of lawful rent from the
tenant(s);
      (11)   Interfere with the tenant(s) right to privacy;
      (12)   Request information that violates the tenant(s) right to privacy;
      (13)   Other repeated acts or omissions of such significance as to
substantially interfere with or disturb the tenant(s) comfort, repose, peace,
or quiet enjoyment, and that cause, are likely to cause, or are intended to
cause the tenant(s) to vacate the dwelling unit; or
      (14)   Retaliate against the tenant(s) for the tenant(s) exercise of
rights under this chapter or state or federal law.
   (B)   Nothing in this §
5.55.060 prohibits the lawful eviction of a tenant in accordance with Cal.
Civil Code § 1946.1 or by any other appropriate legal means.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.070 CIVIL REMEDIES.
   (A)   Injunctive relief. Any aggrieved person may enforce the provisions of
this chapter by means of a civil injunctive action. Any person who commits, or
proposes to commit, an act in violation of this chapter may be enjoined
therefrom by any court of competent jurisdiction. An action for injunction
under this section may be brought by any aggrieved person, by county counsel,
the district attorney, or by any person or entity which will fairly and
adequately represent the interests of the protected class.
   (B)   Civil liability. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter or who aids in the violation of any provisions of this chapter is
liable for, and the court must award to the individual whose rights are
violated, three times the amount of special and general damages. The court may
award in addition thereto not less than $200 but not more than $400, together
with attorney's fees, costs of action, and punitive damages. Civil actions
filed pursuant to this section must be filed within one year of the events
giving rise to the alleged cause of action.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.080 NOTICE OF TENANT RIGHTS.
   (A)   Landlords must provide to each tenant a notice of tenant rights under
this chapter that describes the mediation service and how to request service; a
form for providing such notice may be issued in the guidelines.
   (B)   Landlords must provide to tenants the notice of tenant rights under §
5.55.080(A) in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Within 30 calendar days of enactment of this chapter;
      (2)   When entering a lease or rental agreement;
      (3)   When renewing a lease or rental agreement;
      (4)   When providing notice of a rent increase; and
      (5)   At such times as required by the town, which may include, but is
not limited to, when this chapter is significantly amended.
   (C)   All notices provided under this section shall be provided in the
primary language of the tenant, if reasonably feasible. If the tenant's rental
agreement was negotiated in another language, the landlord is obligated to
provide an accurate translation of the notification in that other language as
well. In the event that the designated service provider is unable to provide
translation services for the parties, the parties who do not speak or are not
comfortable with English must provide their own translators. To participate in
mediation proceedings, the translators will be required to take an oath that
they are fluent in both English and the relevant foreign language and that they
will fully and to the best of their ability translate the proceedings.
   (D)   Failure to comply with the notice provisions described in this chapter
shall render any rental increase notice invalid and unenforceable. The failure
to comply with the notice provisions will be cured only after the proper
written notice of tenant's rights, along with a new rental increase notice, has
been properly served on the tenant.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
§ 5.55.090 CONFORMITY WITH STATE LAW.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of law. except as provided in this
chapter an owner of residential real property may establish the initial and all
subsequent rental rates for a dwelling unit or rent unit under any circumstance
permitted under state law, including but not limited to Cal. Civil Code §§
1946.12-1946.13 and §§ 1954.50-1954.535. The town shall not enforce any limits
on rent more restrictive than those set forth in state law and this chapter.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt an owner who has otherwise
agreed by contract with a public entity to limit rent in exchange for any
consideration from the obligations of that contract, nor shall it be construed
to exempt any dwelling unit that is subject to legally binding restrictions
enforceable against and/or governing such units that limit the rent to no more
than an affordable rent, as such term is defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code
§ 50053 and as subsequently amended, from those restrictions. Any provision of
law governing the rents that may be charged for a rental unit that was adopted
after this measure was submitted for title and summary but prior to the
effective date of this act, and that is inconsistent with this provision, is
hereby repealed.
(Ord. 892, passed 11-5-2024)
CHAPTER 5.56: CANNABIS BUSINESSES
Section
Article I. Commercial Cannabis Business Permit
   
5.56.010   Purpose and intent
   
5.56.020   Definitions
   
5.56.030   Prohibited commercial cannabis activities
   
5.56.040   Permit requirements
   
5.56.050   Reserved
   
5.56.060   Permit application
   
5.56.070   Review and action on applications
   
5.56.080   Minimum criteria for issuance of a permit
   
5.56.090   Operating requirements
   
5.56.100   Term of permit and renewal procedure
   
5.56.110   Permit suspension and revocation
   
5.56.120   Expiration
   
5.56.130   Transfer of permits
   
5.56.140   Appeals
   
5.56.150   Service of town notices
   
5.56.160   Enforcement
   
5.56.170   Application of this article to existing medical cannabis retailers
Article II. Reserved
ARTICLE I. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT
§ 5.56.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate commercial cannabis
activities located within the Town of Fairfax in order to promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of residents and businesses within the town.
Commercial cannabis activities shall comply with all provisions of the Fairfax
Municipal Code, state law, and all other applicable local codes and
regulations, including all applicable land use and zoning regulations imposed
on cannabis activities.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.020 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions for commercial cannabis business uses and activities in this
chapter shall be as defined in §
17.110.020 of the Municipal Code. In addition, for purposes of this chapter,
the following words and phrases whenever used in this chapter shall have the
meanings defined in this section:
   ADULT USE. Cannabis goods intended to be sold for nonmedical use by persons
21 years of age or older in conformance with the MAUCRSA and the provisions of
state law regarding cannabis use and sale (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§
11362.1 et seq.).
   APPLICATION PERIOD. The time stated in the notice of availability during
which the town will accept applications for commercial cannabis business
permits for one or more categories of commercial cannabis activities.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. The actual or intended conduct of commercial cannabis
activity, as defined by MAUCRSA, or of one or more commercial cannabis use(s),
as defined by this Code.
   CANNABIS GOODS. Cannabis, including dried flower, cannabis products, and
products containing cannabis.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Town of Fairfax Chief of Police or the person
designated by the Chief of Police.
   DAY. Calendar days.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST. The same meaning as that term is defined in 16 Cal. Code
of Regulations § 5004, as may be amended from time to time.
   MANAGER. A person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-
to-day operations of a business.
   MAUCRSA. The Medical and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Cal.
Business and Professions Code Division 10), as may be amended from time to
time.
   MEDICAL USE. Cannabis goods intended to be sold for medicinal use by a
qualified patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation
pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Cal. Health and Safety Code §
11362.5), the Medicinal Marijuana Program Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§
11362.7 et seq.) and MAUCRSA, as each may be amended from time to time.
   OWNER. The same meaning as that term is defined in 16 Cal. Code of
Regulations § 5003, as may be amended from time to time.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other
legal entity.
   PLANNING DEPARTMENT. The Department of Planning and Building Services of the
Town of Fairfax.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.030 PROHIBITED COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   All medicinal and adult-use commercial cannabis uses or other
activities requiring a state commercial cannabis license under the MAUCRSA are
prohibited, except as expressly allowed by this chapter and
Chapter 17.110.
   (B)   The foregoing prohibition shall not apply to:
      (1)   Conduct specified in Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 26054(c)
and (d), 26080(b), or 26090(e).
      (2)   Cannabis delivery originating from a retailer located outside of
the town, which is not prohibited or regulated by this chapter.
   (C)   Cannabis temporary events, as provided under Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 26200, are prohibited in the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.040 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person seeking to establish or operate a medicinal or adult-use
cannabis business from a premises located in the town must first obtain and
maintain a commercial cannabis business permit in accordance with this chapter
prior to establishing and/or operating.
   (B)   Commercial cannabis business permits may be issued to no more than two
cannabis retail locations at any one time in the following activity categories,
or in any combination thereof:
      (1)   Medical-use only storefront retailer; and/or
      (2)   Delivery-only retailer(s) (non-storefront retailer), which may be
medical-use, adult-use or both.
The existing medical marijuana dispensary that has been legally and continually
operating as of April 3, 2018 shall be counted as one location. In the event
that the existing medical marijuana dispensary ceases to operate in accordance
with a legally-issued permit, another a permit may be issued for another
operator or location such that at all times, two, but not more than two, retail
locations may hold permits to legally operate. One retail location may consist
of side-by-side licensed premises as defined in 16 Cal. Code of Regulations §
5025, in order to permit the operation of both a medical use storefront
retailer and adult-use delivery-only retailer by a single operator.
   (C)   When the number of commercial cannabis business permit locations falls
below the limit set forth above, the Town Manager (or his or her designee)
shall post a notice of availability that the town will be accepting
applications for commercial cannabis business permit(s). The notice shall
include the dates during which applications will be accepted, information
regarding application requirements and directions, and the contact information
for questions. The notice shall be posted on the town' s website and on the
three public places in the Town of Fairfax designated for official postings.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.050 RESERVED.
§ 5.56.060 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   All applications for a commercial cannabis business permit shall be
filed with the Town Manager or designee, using forms provided by the town,
within the application period that is established by the Town Manager, and
which period may be extended from time to time. It is the responsibility of the
applicant to provide a complete application and all information required for
approval of the permit. The application shall be made under penalty of perjury.
At a minimum, each application shall contain:
      (1)   A complete identification of the applicant including name, address
and phone number to which notice of action on the application and
correspondence is to be mailed;
      (2)   A description of the statutory entity or business form that will
serve as the legal structure for the applicant and a copy of its formation and
organizing documents, including, but not limited to, articles of incorporation,
certificate of amendment, statement of information, articles of association,
bylaws, partnership agreement, operating agreement, and fictitious business
name statement;
      (3)   Names, residence and business addresses of each and every owner. If
one or more owners is a statutory entity or other business form, the name of
the entity shall be set forth exactly as shown in its formation and organizing
documents together with the names, residence and business addresses of each of
the owners and other persons with a financial interest in the entity;
      (4)   The names, residence and business addresses of each and every
manager;
      (5)   The name, residence and business address of the owner of the
property, who shall indicate in writing his, her or its consent to cannabis
business being conducted on the property by signing the application in the
space provided;
      (6)   A complete list of every individual who has a financial interest in
the commercial cannabis business, who is not an owner, as defined;
      (7)   A site plan, floor plan, and elevations of the property where the
business will operate, and indicate whether any exterior building improvements,
including façade improvements or exterior signage is proposed. If exterior
building improvements or signage is proposed, then compliance with
Chapters 17.020 and
17.064 is required, and the applicant shall submit its application for any
design review approval and/or sign permits concurrently with the application
for the commercial cannabis business permit;
      (8)   An operations plan for the business and the name under which it is
to be operated;
      (9)   A traffic study for the proposed location, if a traffic impact
permit is required under
Chapter 17.056. If required, the applicant shall submit its application for the
traffic impact permit concurrently with the application for the commercial
cannabis business permit;
      (10)   Evidence of compliance with the California Environmental Quality
Act (Cal. Public Resources Code §§21000 et seq.);
      (11)   Whether or not any person referred to in division (A)(1), (3),
(4), (5) or (6) has had a license, permit or use permit for the same or any
similar business suspended or revoked anywhere, and, if so, the circumstances
of such suspension or revocation;
      (12)   The proposed hours of operation;
      (13)   The applicant's certificates of automobile and general commercial
liability insurance coverage and evidence of workers' compensation insurance
(if required) related to the operation of the commercial cannabis business;
      (14)   An executed release of liability and indemnity agreement in the
form set forth by the town; and
      (15)   Such other related information or documentation consistent with
this Code and state law as the Town Manager may require.
The residential addresses required in divisions (A) (3), (4) and (5), as well
as the name(s) of managers listed in division (A)(4), shall be kept private and
not made available to the public.
   (B)   An application shall be accompanied by an application review fee, as
established by resolution of the Town Council from time to time. This
application review fee shall not include fingerprinting, photographing, and
background check costs and shall be in addition to any other business license
fee or other charge imposed by this Code or other governmental agencies.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.070 REVIEW AND ACTION ON APPLICATIONS.
   The processing of new permit applications will include the following phases:
   (A)   Phase 1 — Prescreening and criminal history.
      (1)   Upon close of the application period, town staff shall review each
complete application for general compliance with the town's Municipal Code, and
shall reject any application which does not meet such requirements or is
incomplete. Rejected applications shall not be scored. The town shall also
disqualify any application that contains any false or misleading information.
      (2)   All exterior building improvements, including façade improvements
and proposed signage, shall be reviewed for conformance with the town's zoning
and land use standards. If required, the applicant shall apply for any design
review approval, traffic impact permit and/or sign permit necessary under
Chapters 17.020,
17.056 and/or
17.064 concurrently with the application for the commercial cannabis business
permit. The prescreening approval may be conditioned upon the applicant
submitting complete application materials for design review, traffic impact
and/or sign permits. All applications will be required to comply with
environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act
("CEQA") (Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.).
      (3)   Each applicant shall submit to the Chief of Police a recent
photograph of the applicant (if an individual), each owner and current or
prospective manager. The applicant, owner(s) and manager(s) shall also submit
fingerprints pursuant to "Livescan" procedures and pay all costs associated
with such submittal. Upon receipt of the Livescan results, the Chief of Police
shall review and report if the criminal history of the applicant, owner(s) and
manager(s) satisfies the minimum criteria pursuant to §
5.56.080.
      (4)   The applicant prescreening decisions will be made by the Town
Manager within 60 days of the close of the application period or receipt of
Livescan results, whichever is later. Only applicants who receive approval of
the prescreening review may proceed to the next phase of the selection process.
   (B)   Phase 2 — Application scoring.
      (1)   Upon approval of the prescreening review, the Town Manager or
designee shall refer the application to the Planning Commission for preliminary
scoring of the application(s) and recommendation to the Town Council. A public
hearing on a commercial cannabis business permit application(s) may be
consolidated with any required hearing for design review approval, traffic
impact permit and/or sign permits.
      (2)   The Town Council will issue the final score on the commercial
cannabis business permit application, relying only upon the written application
itself, any other written town materials generated in connection with the
review, and the applicant presentation and representations at the public
hearing. The decision of the Town Council will be made at a duly noticed public
hearing and may be consolidated with any required hearing for design review
approval, traffic impact permit and/or sign permits.
      (3)   The specific scoring criteria, weighting (points per criteria),
minimum qualifying scores and any additional application procedures will be
determined by resolution of the Town Council prior to the commencement of the
application period and posted publically on the town's website.
      (4)   If the number of applicants who receive minimum qualifying scores
at Phase 2 exceeds the maximum number of permits available, then applicants
will be selected and issued a commercial cannabis business permit based on
highest score.
      (5)   Qualified applicants that are not selected will be placed on a
qualified applicant list. Applicants placed on the qualified applicant list
will be notified when future applications are accepted. A qualified applicant
will remain eligible for three years.
   (C)   Issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not create a
land use entitlement. Furthermore, no permittee may begin operations,
notwithstanding the issuance of a permit, until all of the state and local laws
and regulations, including but not limited to the requirements of this chapter
and of the permit, have been complied with and the town verifies such
compliance. The issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not
excuse compliance with any other requirement in the Zoning Ordinance or
Building Code. Any additional permits required may be obtained after the
business permit is issued but before operation.
   (D)   The town reserves the discretion to not grant any applications in the
interest of the health, safety, or general welfare of the town.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.080 MINIMUM CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
   (A)   The applicant, each owner, and any existing or prospective manager,
must be at least 21 years of age.
   (B)   The applicant, each owner, and any existing or prospective manager,
must not have had a similar type of license or permit previously revoked or
denied for good cause within the immediately preceding two years prior to the
permit application.
   (C)   Neither the applicant, any owner, nor any proposed or prospective
manager, shall have been convicted of:
      (1)   Any offense relating to possession, manufacture, sales, or
distribution of a controlled substance, with the exception of cannabis-related
offenses;
      (2)   Any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the person
of another;
      (3)   Any offense involving theft, fraud, dishonesty or deceit;
      (4)   Any offense involving sales of cannabis to a minor or use of a
minor to distribute cannabis;
      (5)   Any common law felony.
For purposes of this division (C), a conviction includes a plea or verdict of
guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. The above criteria
are in addition to any applicable provisions of state law.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.090 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   State and local licenses. The permittee shall obtain and maintain a
state commercial cannabis license for the equivalent state cannabis commercial
activity. The permittee shall obtain and maintain all other required state and
local licenses, permits, or approvals as required.
   (B)   MAUCRSA compliance. The permittee shall meet all operating
requirements of the MAUCRSA, and any regulations promulgated thereunder.
   (C)   Criminal history. No permittee, its owners, managers, employees, or
volunteer workers, shall have been convicted of an offense listed § 5.60.080
(C).
   (D)   The permittee shall ensure that its operations conform to the
following requirements in addition to the state regulations, which shall
include:
      (1)   Signage and notices.
         (a)   All signage shall meet the town Zoning Code's sign requirements.
         (b)   A notice shall be clearly and legibly posted in the business
premises indicating that smoking, ingesting or consuming cannabis on the
premises is prohibited.
         (c)   Signs on the premises shall not obstruct the entrance or windows
in any amount.
         (d)   Address identification shall comply with Fire Department
illuminated address signs requirements.
      (2)   Entrances. The primary entrance shall be located and maintained
free of barriers, landscaping and similar obstructions so that it is visible
from public streets, sidewalks or driveways.
      (3)   Records. A current register of all employees and volunteer workers
shall be maintained.
      (4)   Odor control. An odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system
shall be installed so that odor generated inside the business is not detected
outside the property lines or lease area boundaries, or anywhere on adjacent
property or public rights-of-way, or within any other unit located within the
same building as the cannabis business.
      (5)   Consumption. Cannabis and cannabis products shall not be consumed
(whether eaten, smoked, vaporized, applied or other method of ingestion) on the
premises of the cannabis business, including parking areas, or in a delivery
vehicle.
      (6)   Operating hours. A permittee may operate between the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m., up to seven days a week.
      (7)   Display of permit. Each commercial cannabis business permit shall
be prominently displayed at the business premises in a location readily visible
to town officials, such as a lobby or entryway, and on any business website or
advertisement.
      (8)   Contact person. A permittee shall provide the town with the name
and phone number of an on-site community relations staff person or designee to
whom one can provide notice if there are operating concerns. The permittee
shall make every good faith effort to encourage neighborhood residents to call
this person to try to solve operating concerns before any calls or complaints
are made to the town.
      (9)   State license application. The permittee shall submit to the
Planning Department within seven days of submission to the state cannabis
licensing authority, a copy of any state commercial cannabis license
application, renewal application and/or any business modification request or
notification submitted to the state licensing authority (for retail, the Bureau
of Cannabis Control) related to the permitted business.
      (10)   Inspections. The Fairfax Code Enforcement and Police Department
shall have the right, without warrant, to inspect the premises for which the
permit was obtained on the following conditions:
         (a)   The scope of the inspection is limited to determining compliance
with this chapter;
         (b)   The inspection shall be conducted not more often than once every
six months, except in the event of a complaint by a member of the public;
         (c)   The inspection shall be conducted during regular business hours;
and
         (d)   The inspection shall be conducted at a time and in a manner that
will minimize business interruption.
      (11)   State and local law compliance. The permittee shall comply with
all state and local laws, rules and regulations, including payment of all
applicable fees and taxes and payment of any future-adopted cannabis taxes.
      (12)   Notification of state and local law violations. A permittee shall
immediately report to the Chief of Police any of the following:
         (a)   Arrests of any employees, directors, managers, owners or
volunteer workers for an offense other than a misdemeanor traffic offense.
         (b)   Any disciplinary action taken by a state licensing authority
regarding the permittee's state commercial cannabis license and submit a copy
of any notice or order.
         (c)   The occurrence of any event that constitutes a violation of this
chapter or state law related to the conduct of the commercial cannabis
business.
      (13)   The permittee shall be responsible for all violations of this
chapter and MAUCRSA or its implementing regulations, whether committed by the
permittee, its owners, or any employee, volunteer worker, director, manager or
other agent of the permittee, for violations that occur in or about the
premises of the commercial cannabis business whether or not said violations
occur within the permit holder's presence.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.100 TERM OF PERMIT AND RENEWAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Permits issued under this chapter shall be valid for 24 months from
the date of issuance. The permit may be renewed annually.
   (B)   Permits may be renewed by the Town Manager unless the permit is
suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or if
the application for renewal fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Applications for renewal shall be made at least 90 days before the
expiration date of the permit and shall be accompanied by the nonrefundable
application review fee. Applications for renewal shall be acted upon by the
Town Manager and the Town Manager shall notify the permittee within 60 days of
his or her decision. Applications for renewal made less than 90 days before the
annual expiration date shall not stay the expiration date of the permit.
   (D)   A permittee shall be responsible for paying an annual permit fee, as
established by resolution of the Town Council from time to time. This deposit
shall cover the full cost borne by the town to administer the permit program
and all responsibilities established in this chapter.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.110 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Town Manager may suspend or revoke a commercial cannabis business
permit if any of the conditions identified in this section exist. On
determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation exist, the Town
Manager shall serve the permittee with written notice of the proposed
suspension or revocation. The notice shall state the ground or grounds upon
which the decision is based, the effective date of the decision, the right of
the permittee to appeal the decision to the Town Council, and that the Town
Manager's decision will be final if no written appeal is timely submitted to
the town in accordance with §
5.56.140. The notice is effective within 15 days from the date of service of
the notice. If an appeal is timely and properly filed, then the effective date
of the notice is stayed.
   (B)   A permittee is subject to suspension or revocation of the permit, or
subject to other appropriate disciplinary action, for any of the following
causes arising from the acts or omissions of the permittee, or an employee,
volunteer worker, agent, owner, director or manager of a commercial cannabis
business:
      (1)   The permittee has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement
or omission of facts in the application for a permit, or in any report or
record required to be filed with the city.
      (2)   The commercial cannabis business has been operated as a nuisance,
as defined in Fairfax Municipal Code or as defined in state law.
      (3)   A violation of any provision of this chapter, or any other
provision of the Municipal Code.
      (4)   There has been one or more violations of state law, including but
not limited to violations of MAUCRSA or its implementing regulations.
   (C)   Upon revocation, no new permit may be issued for the applicant or any
other business entity in which the applicant is a partner or owner of ten
percent or more of the business for a period of five years from the date of
revocation.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.120 EXPIRATION.
   A permit shall expire if not in active use for a period of six months at any
time after the date of issuance. ACTIVE USE means conducting the commercial
cannabis activity authorized by the permit following receipt of a certificate
of occupancy, if required. This period may be extended if the permit has
applied for a state commercial cannabis license that has been delayed through
no fault of the permittee. Expired permits may not be renewed but the permit
holder may apply again when a permit vacancy occurs.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.130 TRANSFER OF PERMITS.
   A commercial cannabis business permit issued under this chapter is valid
only as to the permittee and approved site, and is therefore nontransferable to
other persons or locations. A commercial cannabis business permit is not
property and has no value. A commercial cannabis business permit may not be
transferred, sold, assigned or bequeathed expressly or by operation by law. Any
attempt to directly or indirectly transfer a commercial cannabis business
permit shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and
such permit shall therefore be automatically rendered null and void. Except,
however, if the permittee is a partnership, corporation, limited liability
company or other entity, and one or more of the owners should die, one or more
of the surviving owners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of
the deceased owner without affecting a surrender or termination of such permit
and in each case the permittee shall thereafter be deemed to be the surviving
owner(s). Additionally, a commercial cannabis business permit may be endorsed
to add an additional owner, provided such prospective new owner satisfies the
requirements for applicants, including but not limited to, a criminal history
check and the qualifications listed in §
5.56.080, as approved by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.140 APPEALS.
   (A)   Within 15 days after the date of service of a decision of the Town
Manager to revoke, suspend, deny renewal of a permit, or deny prescreening
review, the permittee or applicant may appeal such action by filing a written
appeal with the Town Clerk.
   (B)   The notice of appeal shall be in writing and signed by the person
making the appeal, or his or her legal representative, and shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number of the appellant.
      (2)   A true and correct copy of the notice of the decision issued by the
Town Manager from which the appellant is appealing.
      (3)   A specific statement of the reasons and grounds for making the
appeal in sufficient detail to enable the Town Council to understand the nature
of the controversy, the basis of the appeal, and the relief requested, not to
exceed five pages.
      (4)   All documents or other evidence pertinent to the appeal that the
appellant requests the Town Council to consider at the hearing.
   (C)   At the time of filing the appellant shall pay the designated appeal
fee, established by resolution of the Town Council from time to time.
   (D)   Failure of the Town Clerk to receive a timely and proper appeal, or
the requisite fee, constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal the decision of
the Town Manager and a failure to exhaust all administrative remedies. In this
event, the Town Manager's decision is final and binding.
   (E)   In the event a notice of appeal is timely filed, the Town Manager's
decision is stayed until a final order has been rendered and issued by the Town
Council. If a notice of appeal is not timely filed, in the event of a decision
of nonrenewal, the permit expires at the conclusion of the term of the permit
and in the event of a suspension or revocation, the suspension of revocation is
effective upon the expiration of the period for filing a written notice of
appeal.
   (F)   Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, the Town Clerk shall set
the matter for a hearing before the Town Council. The Town Council shall
preside over the hearing on appeal, hear the matter de novo and conduct the
hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth by the town. The Town Manager
bears the burden of proof to establish the grounds for his or her decision by a
preponderance of the evidence. The issuance of the Town Manager's decision
constitutes prima facie evidence of grounds for the nonrenewal, suspension, or
revocation.
   (G)   The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing of
the notice of appeal, but in no event later than 90 days from the date of such
filing. The town shall notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and
location of the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.
   (H)   At the hearing the appellant may present witnesses and evidence
relevant to the decision appealed. Appeal hearings are informal, and the formal
rules of evidence and discovery applicable in a court of law shall not apply to
the hearing. However, rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they
are permitted by law, and irrelevant, immaterial and repetitious evidence may
be excluded.
   (I)   After the conclusion of the appeal hearing, the Town Council shall
determine if any grounds exists for the Town Manager's decision.
      (1)   If the Town Council determines that no facts exist to support the
Town Manager's decision, the Town Manager's notice of decision shall be deemed
cancelled.
      (2)   If the Town Council determines that any facts exist to support the
Town Manager's notice of decision, the decision shall be upheld.
      (3)   The Town Council shall issue a written final order. The decision of
the Town Council shall be final and shall be served on the appellant. The
decision shall contain the following statement: "The decision of the Town
Council is final and binding. Judicial review of this decision is subject to
the time limits set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6."
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.150 SERVICE OF TOWN NOTICES.
   Except as otherwise expressly required by a provision of this chapter, any
notice required by this chapter may be served by personal delivery to any
applicant or permittee, or by first class mail. The date of service shall be
the date it is personally delivered or placed in a U.S. Postal Service
receptacle. Any notice issued to any applicant or permittee may be sent to the
mailing address as listed on the application submitted to the town. Failure of
any applicant or permittee to receive a properly addressed notice by mail shall
not invalidate any action, decision, determination or proceeding under this
chapter.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.160 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. A failure to obtain a
commercial cannabis permit required by this chapter shall be punishable in
accordance with the Fairfax Municipal Code and state law.
   (B)   All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the
use of one or more remedies by the town shall not bar the use of any other
remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof.
   (C)   Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any
such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof, and
shall be penalized accordingly.
   (D)   Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared a public nuisance
and may be summarily abated by the town.
   (E)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is
declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of
Town Manager, create causes of action, including but not limited to, for
injunctive relief.
   (F)   In addition to the civil and administrative remedies set forth above,
any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to
administrative penalties as set forth by the Fairfax Municipal Code, Chapter
1.10.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 5.56.170 APPLICATION OF THIS ARTICLE TO EXISTING MEDICAL CANNABIS RETAILERS.
   The Town Council finds that the cannabis medicinal use storefront retailer
existing and legally operating in the Town of Fairfax as of December 4, 2024
must relocate by January 1, 2025 due to no fault of the owner/operator. The
Council hereby permits this existing retailer to relocate to a storefront
located at 1591-1593 Sir Frances Drake Blvd., provided however, that prior to
opening for business, the owner/operator:
   (A)   Submit an application to the Planning Commission and be granted a
Conditional Use Permit (CUP) in the Highway Commercial zone for a medicinal use
storefront retailer, as the existing CUP at the current location runs with the
land and is not transferable to a new location; and
   (B)   Should the owner/operator be granted a CUP for a medicinal use
storefront, obtain a permit for a medicinal use storefront retailer and an
adult use delivery only retailer permit to be operated at the same location as
the medicinal use storefront, pursuant to this chapter, with the exception of
the requirement of participating in a competitive process pursuant to §
5.56.070, and in conformance with
Chapter 17.110 Cannabis Uses as the owner/operator's current permits are not
transferable to a new location pursuant to §
5.56.130. Fees for the required permits shall be prorated according to the
amount of time remaining on the existing permits.
(Ord. 835, passed 9-4-2019; Am. Ord. 894, passed 1-9-2025)
ARTICLE II. RESERVED
CHAPTER 5.57: SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROGRAM
Section
   
5.57.010   Purpose and intent
   
5.57.020   Violations a public nuisance; penalties, nuisance abatement, and
other remedies
§ 5.57.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, all short-term rentals as
defined in §
17.008.020 of this Code, and also known as "tourist home" as included in the
definition of "hotel" in §
3.32.010 of this Code, as may be amended or superseded, are subject to the
policies and procedures specified in the Town Council's "policies and
procedures for the administration of the 'short term rental program' as set
forth in Fairfax Town Code Chapter 5.57" ("Program"), as adopted and amended
from time to time by Town Council resolution, and all short-term rentals shall
comply with such policies and procedures.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 5.57.020 VIOLATIONS A PUBLIC NUISANCE; PENALTIES, NUISANCE ABATEMENT, AND
OTHER REMEDIES.
   Any short-term rental operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the
provisions of this chapter and/or the program shall be, and the same is hereby
declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and the Town Attorney may, in
addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an
action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and
enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. Such remedies shall be in
addition to any other judicial and administrative penalties and remedies
available to the town under Chapters
1.08,
1.10, or
1.12 of this Code, or under state law.
(Ord. 866, passed 7-6-2022)
CHAPTER 5.58: PARKLETS
Section
   
5.58.010   Purpose and intent
   
5.58.020   Definitions
   
5.58.030   Criteria
   
5.58.040   Parklet permit required
   
5.58.050   Parklets in the public right-of- way; requirements
   
5.58.060   Reviewing authority
   
5.58.070   Standard of review
   
5.58.080   Parklet permit; conditions
   
5.58.090   Bonding and insurance
   
5.58.100   Suspension and revocation of parklet permit
§ 5.58.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate commercial outdoor
dining and other activities as determined by the Council, located within the
Town of Fairfax in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
residents and businesses within the town, and encourage development of a
pedestrian-friendly urban environment. Commercial outdoor dining and other uses
as determined shall comply with all provisions of the Fairfax Town Code, state
law, and all other applicable local codes and regulations, including all
applicable land use and zoning regulations imposed on commercial activities.
Such outdoor commercial activity shall be referred to as parklet(s).
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. A retail, food service or dining establishment, or
other place of commerce.
   DINING ESTABLISHMENT. A restaurant, bar, or other commercial establishment
operating a parklet area.
   IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT. Adjoining, abutting, or fronting.
   INTOXICATING BEVERAGES. A beverage containing alcohol, including beer, wine,
or spirits.
   LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment in which intoxicating beverages are
permitted by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control to be
served and consumed.
   OUTDOOR PARKLET AREA. Portions of the public sidewalk or public right-of-way
within a commercially zoned district in the town which are used by a dining or
other establishment for the serving and consuming of food and beverages or
other commercial activity, including licensed establishments for the serving
and consuming of intoxicating beverages.
   PRIVATE PARKLET. A parklet constructed, used and maintained by a dining
establishment for the exclusive use by its patrons and not available for
general public use. Private parklets require payment of rental charges, as set
by the Town Council, for use of the public right-of-way.
   PUBLIC PARKLET. A parklet constructed, used and maintained by a dining
establishment for the non-exclusive use by its patrons and members of the
public. Public parklets do not require payment of rental charges for use of the
public right-of-way due to the availability of the space to members of the
public who may not be purchasing food and/or beverages from the adjacent dining
establishment.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.030 CRITERIA.
   In order for parklet areas to be permitted, the following criteria shall be
met, in addition to all other applicable land use and development standards in
this Code:
   (A)   The parklet area shall be managed, operated, and maintained as an
integral part of the underlying commercial establishment.
   (B)   The parklet area shall be designed in accordance with the Fairfax
Parklet Standards.
   (C)   The proposed hours of operation for the parklet area shall be
complementary to the business district in which the use is located, and shall
not negatively impact residential uses.
   (D)   There shall be no cooking or food preparation done outside the
building supporting the parklet area.
   (E)   Only licensed establishments may serve alcoholic beverages in the
parklet area.
   (F)    There shall be no amplified music in the parklets.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.040 PARKLET PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No commercial establishment may operate a parklet area in the public
right-of-way or on private property unless a parklet permit is approved
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a parklet permit shall be filed with the Planning
and Building Department, in a form prescribed by that Department.
   (C)   If approved, a parklet permit shall be valid for a period of one year
and may be renewed for additional one-year periods on the same terms and
conditions as set forth in the original permit.
   (D)   The Town Council may establish by resolution fees for the review of
such applications as well as charges for the rental of the public right-of-way.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.050 PARKLETS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT- OF-WAY; REQUIREMENTS.
   Any parklet area proposed to be located in the public right-of-way shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
   (A)   Areas used for a parklet shall not extend beyond the immediately
adjacent building frontage for the associated commercial space, and not in
front of another business, unless said business operators share the space by
written agreement.
   (B)   A minimum distance of not less than a four-foot-wide pedestrian travel
aisle shall be maintained at all times.
   (C)   Fixed or permanent overhead coverings are permitted as long as they
are constructed of transparent material. Permitted uses may use moveable
umbrellas, but such umbrellas shall have a minimum seven-foot clearance from
the ground to the lowest element of the umbrella or covering, and shall be
located completely within the parklet area's permitted boundaries.
   (D)   Portable electric heaters may be used, but shall be located a minimum
of three feet from any combustible material, and completely within the outdoor
dining area's permitted boundaries. Gas heaters may not be used.
   (E)   All fixtures and furniture used in a private parklet area shall be
removed from the public right-of-way and stored out of public view during
nonbusiness hours. As set forth in the Fairfax Parklet Standards, parklet areas
may be required to provide a permanent barrier delineating the usable parklet
area from the remaining area of the public right-of-way.
   (F)   The parklet area must be clearly delineated by use of reflective tape,
and all parklet areas must provide adequate outdoor-appropriate electric
lighting as set forth in the Fairfax Parklet Standards.
   (G)   No business signage may be attached or affixed to any portion of the
parklet area, but branding is permitted as to the umbrellas permitted by this
section.
   (H)   If located on publicly owned property, an encroachment permit allowing
establishment of a parklet area shall be obtained from the Public Works
Department.
   (I)   A maximum of two parallel spaces of four diagonal spaces may be
allotted for parklet uses by the associated business.
   (J)   Areas used for parklets in the public right-of-way shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the Building and Fire Codes, including, without
limitation, maintaining proper building egress and ingress at all times,
observing maximum seating capacities, providing proper circulation, and
providing appropriate access to persons with disabilities.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.060 REVIEWING AUTHORITY.
   Unless otherwise specified, the reviewing authority for a parklet permit
shall be the Town Building Official.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.070 STANDARD OF REVIEW.
   The reviewing authority shall approve a parklet permit application if all of
the following findings can be made:
   (A)   The proposed parklet use is consistent with the general plan for the
area, and any specific plan that may be adopted for the area.
   (B)   The proposed parklet use will not adversely affect existing and
anticipated development in the vicinity and will promote the harmonious
development of the area.
   (C)   The nature, configuration, location, density, and manner of operation
of any proposed parklet use will not significantly and adversely interfere with
the use and enjoyment of residential properties in the vicinity of the subject
property.
   (D)   The proposed parklet use will not create any significant traffic
impacts, traffic safety hazards, pedestrian/vehicle conflicts, or pedestrian
safety hazards, and will not impede the safe and orderly flow of pedestrians
along the public right-of-way.
   (E)   The proposed parklet use will not create any significantly adverse
parking impacts as a result of employee or patron parking demand.
   (F)   The proposed parklet use will not create any significantly adverse
impacts on neighboring properties as a result of:
      (1)   The accumulation of garbage, trash or other waste;
      (2)   Noise created by operation of the commercial establishment or by
employees or visitors entering or exiting the commercial establishment;
      (3)   Light and glare; or
      (4)   Odors and noxious fumes.
   (G)   The proposed parklet use will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.080 PARKLET PERMIT; CONDITIONS.
   In approving a parklet permit, the reviewing authority may impose such
conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to ensure that the proposed parklet use is established
and conducted in a manner which is consistent with this chapter and the
development standards for the underlying zone. The conditions imposed by the
reviewing authority may include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
   (A)   The appropriate setback for the proposed parklet use;
   (B)   Pedestrian access and safety;
   (C)   Parking requirements;
   (D)   Barrier requirements;
   (E)   Lighting requirements;
   (F)   The time limit for the permit;
   (G)   An obligation to indemnify the town against any and all claims,
liability, and damages arising from or in any way connected to the town's
issuance of a parklet permit to the commercial establishment.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.090 BONDING AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   Upon issuance of a parklet permit in the public right-of-way pursuant
to this chapter, the permittee shall post, and maintain at all times while the
permit is effective, a security bond and insurance. The security bond and proof
of insurance, when required, shall be deposited with the Town Clerk before the
permit is issued.
   (B)   The amount and form of the bond shall be designated by the reviewing
authority at the time of approval of the parklet permit, and shall be in an
amount which is determined to be sufficient for removal of the parklet area in
the event the permittee fails to comply with the conditions of the permit. The
form and content of the bond shall be satisfactory to the Town Attorney. The
bond may be waived where it is determined that the potential for any injury to
the town from the existence of the parklet area is minimal. Any security bond
required by this section may be cash, or cash equivalent security approved by
the Town Attorney and the Town Clerk.
   (C)   The amount of insurance shall be designated by the reviewing
authority, after discussion with the Town Attorney, at the time of approval of
the parklet permit, and shall be in an amount which is determined to be
sufficient to adequately protect the town, persons, and property from injuries
or damages which may be caused by the use or operation of the parklet area
authorized by the permit. The certificate(s) of insurance deposited by the
applicant with the Town Clerk shall name the Town of Fairfax as additional
insured and provide the minimum coverage amount required by the town.
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 5.58.100 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PARKLET PERMIT.
   (A)   If the Building Official determines that evidence could be presented
to the Planning Commission which may provide grounds for revocation or
suspension of a parklet permit, and the Building Official believes that the
Planning Commission may find that such evidence is adequate to support
revocation or suspension, the Building Official may initiate a revocation or
suspension proceeding before the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Upon initiation of a revocation or suspension proceeding, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing regarding the possible revocation or
modification of the parklet permit. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in
the same manner as the notice required for issuance of the original permit. The
Planning Commission, after such hearing, may revoke or suspend the parklet
permit if it determines that one or more of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   The permittee has violated any condition imposed on the permit
approval, or violated any provision of this Code that governs, in whole or in
part, the activity for which the permit was granted or the land on which it is
located;
      (2)   The permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner; or
      (3)   The operation of the parklet use constitutes or creates a
"nuisance."
(Ord. 868, passed 9-7-2022)
TITLE 6: ANIMALS
   Chapter
      
6.04.   MARIN COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL CODE ADOPTED
      
6.08.   DOG KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
      
6.12.   CATS
      
6.16.   MISCELLANEOUS ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 6.04: MARIN COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL CODE ADOPTED
Section
   
6.04.010   County code adopted including amendments
   
6.04.020   Violation; penalty
   
6.04.030   Amendments; county’s Ord. 3236
   
6.04.036   Amendments; county's Ord. 3377 and 3378
   
6.04.037   Amendments; county’s Ord. 3687
   
6.04.038   Amendments; revised animal control fee schedule, Marin County Ord.
3532
   
6.04.040   Amendments; revised animal control fee schedule, Marin County
Ordinance No. 3582
   
6.04.041   Amendments; revised animal control fee schedule county's Ord. No.
3688
   
6.04.042   Revisions to animal control fee schedule
§ 6.04.010 COUNTY CODE ADOPTED INCLUDING AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 50022.9, the Marin County animal
control regulations set forth in Title 8 of the Marin County Code as Chapters
8.04, 8.08 and 8.12, including all revisions and amendments thereto adopted by
the Marin County Board of Supervisors as of April 10, 2018, are adopted by
reference and shall be in force and effect within the town.
      (2)   Wherever the term “Sheriff” is used in the foregoing Marin County
animal control regulations the same shall be deemed to refer to the Police
Chief of the Town of Fairfax or his or her designated representative.
   (B)   Excluded from the provisions of this section are ostriches housed at
any location within the town as of the operative date of the ordinance codified
in this chapter, so long as the number of said ostriches does not exceed six,
and so long as the owner of any such property or site obtains any and all
licenses and/or permits required by the Marin County Humane Society within 30
days of the operative date of this amendment. If ostriches cease to be housed
at the site for a period of six months or longer, the exclusion created hereby
shall cease and become inoperative for any purpose.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.010) (Ord. 643, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 671, passed - -
1998; Am. Ord. 732, passed 4-16-2008; Am. Ord. 818, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 6.04.020 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating within the town any of the provisions of §§
8.04.179, 8.04.180, 8.04.181, 8.04.225, 8.04.230, 8.04.240, 8.04.245, 8.04.246,
8.08.010, 8.08.020,
8.12.010 or 8.12.020 of the Marin County Code is guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500, by
imprisonment not exceeding six months or by both the fine and imprisonment. Any
person who boards, has, keeps, maintains or has in his or her possession or
control, for any length of time, any wild and/or undomesticated animal in
violation of any of the provisions of §§ 8.04.182 through 8.04.184 of Chapter
8.04 of the Marin County Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months or a
fine not to exceed $1,000 or both.
   (B)   Any person violating within the town any other provisions of Title 8
of the Marin County Code is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation,
a fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation within one year and a fine not
exceeding $500 for each additional violation within one year.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.020) (Ord. 643, passed - -1995; Am. Ord. 671, passed - -
1998; Am. Ord. 732, passed 4-16-2008; Am. Ord. 818, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 6.04.030 AMENDMENTS; COUNTY’S ORD. 3236.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 50022.9, the amendments to the Marin County
Code pertaining to animal control, which amendments are contained in Ord. 3236
adopted on October 8, 1996, by the Marin County Board of Supervisors, are
adopted by reference and shall be in force and effect within the town.
(Prior Code, § 6.04.036) (Ord. 657, passed - -1996)
§ 6.04.036 AMENDMENTS; COUNTY'S ORD. 3377 AND 3378.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 50022.9, the amendments to the Marin County
Code pertaining to animal control, which amendments are contained in Ord. 3377
and Ord. 3378, adopted on June 6, 2003, by the Marin County Board of
Supervisors, with the exceptions of those portions of said county ordinances
referring to penalties, are adopted by reference and shall be in force and
effect within the town.
(Ord. 701, passed 12-16-2003)
§ 6.04.037 AMENDMENTS; COUNTY'S ORD. 3687.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 50022.9, the amendments to the Marin County
Code pertaining to animal control, which amendments are contained in Ord. 3687,
adopted on April 10, 2018, by the Marin County Board of Supervisors, with the
exceptions of those portions of said county ordinances referring to penalties,
are adopted by reference and shall be in force and effect within the town.
(Ord. 818, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 6.04.038 AMENDMENTS; REVISED ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE, MARIN COUNTY ORD.
3532.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 50022.9, the amendments to the Marin County
Code adopting a revised animal control ordinance fee schedule, which amendments
are contained in Ord. 3532, adopted on December 15, 2009, by the Marin County
Board of Supervisors, are adopted by reference and shall be in force and effect
within the town.
(Ord. 749, passed 3-3-2010)
§ 6.04.040 AMENDMENTS; REVISED ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE, MARIN COUNTY
ORDINANCE NO. 3582.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 50022.9, the amendments to the Marin County
Code adopting a revised animal control ordinance fee schedule, which amendments
are contained in Ordinance No. 3582, adopted on May 22, 2012, by the Marin
County Board of Supervisors, are adopted by reference and shall be in force and
effect within the town.
(Ord. U-767, passed 7-11-2012; Am. Ord. 768, passed 8-1-2012)
§ 6.04.041 AMENDMENTS; REVISED ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE COUNTY'S ORD. NO.
3688.
   Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 50022.9, the amendments to the Marin County
Code adopting a revised animal control ordinance fee schedule, which amendments
are contained in Ord. No. 3688, adopted on April 10, 2018, by the Marin County
Board of Supervisors, are adopted by reference and shall be in force and effect
within the town.
(Ord. 818, passed 6-6-2018)
§ 6.04.042 REVISIONS TO ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE.
   The Town Council may revise the animal control fee schedule from time to
time by passage of a resolution to the extent such action is then permitted by
state law and any applicable joint powers agreements with Marin County.
(Ord. 768, passed 8-1-2012)
CHAPTER 6.08: DOG KENNELS AND PET SHOPS
Section
   
6.08.010   Definitions
   
6.08.020   Permit; required; standards and investigations
   
6.08.030   Permit; issuance; fee; term
   
6.08.040   Permit; in lieu of business license
   
6.08.050   Permit; revocation
§ 6.08.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG KENNEL. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon or
wherein four or more dogs are kept or maintained for any commercial purpose;
provided that, if other animals or birds or fowl are bought, sold or bartered,
the classification to apply shall be that of a pet shop; and provided further
that this definition of DOG KENNEL shall not be construed as applying to a duly
licensed veterinary hospital nor to the county’s Humane Society.
   PET SHOP. Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereon or
wherein is carried on a business of buying or selling or bartering birds,
animals or fowl; but this definition shall not be construed as applying to the
buying or selling of livestock, nor to the business or activities of a duly
licensed veterinary hospital, nor to the business or activities of the county
humane society, nor to a licensed dog kennel.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.010)
§ 6.08.020 PERMIT; REQUIRED; STANDARDS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to erect, establish or maintain any dog kennel
or pet shop without first obtaining a permit from the Town Council. The
granting of the permit shall be in the discretion of the Town Council, which
shall take into consideration the type of construction to be employed as it
relates to sanitation and manner in which the animals, birds or fowl are to be
housed, as well as the character of the person making application and the
zoning regulations as may now be in effect or adopted from time to time. The
Town Council may appoint the Poundkeeper as its agent to act in its behalf in
investigating applications for the permits.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.020)
§ 6.08.030 PERMIT; ISSUANCE; FEE; TERM.
   (A)    Upon the issuance of a pet shop or dog kennel permit by the Town
Council, the applicant shall pay to the town an annual fee as set by resolution
of the Town Council for the privilege of maintaining the dog kennel or pet
shop.
   (B)   The permit and fee shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof
during which the dog kennel or pet shop shall be maintained and shall be due
and payable in advance on January 1 of each year and shall expire on December
31 of the same year, provided the permit has not been revoked.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.030)
§ 6.08.040 PERMIT; IN LIEU OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be in lieu of any business
license required by Title 5, Division I of this code.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.040)
§ 6.08.050 PERMIT; REVOCATION.
   (A)   The permit for the maintenance and operation of a dog kennel or pet
shop pursuant to this chapter may be revoked at any time for cause when, in the
opinion of the Town Council or its agent, the dog kennel or pet shop is not
being properly maintained or operated from the standpoint of sanitation of the
premises or proper care of the animals, birds or fowl.
   (B)   Upon revocation, the permit issued by the town for the then current
calendar year shall be null and void, and the entire fee paid for the annual
permit shall be forfeited.
(Prior Code, § 6.08.050)
CHAPTER 6.12: CATS
Section
   
6.12.010   Purpose
   
6.12.020   Applicability
   
6.12.030   Permit; required
   
6.12.040   Permit; application
   
6.12.050   Application; fee
   
6.12.060   Application; investigation and report
   
6.12.070   Application; public hearing; notice
   
6.12.080   Application; hearing; decision by Council
   
6.12.090   Permit; revocation
§ 6.12.010 PURPOSE.
   The Town Council finds and determines that the keeping, harboring or
maintenance of six or more cats of the age of eight months and upward within
the town, except as provided in this chapter, unless regulated as to location,
sanitary conditions, proper fencing and security, is detrimental to the public
health, safety and general welfare, and that the public interest requires that
the Town Council prescribe reasonable restrictions for the more efficient
control thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.010)
§ 6.12.020 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter does not apply to any of the following persons:
   (A)   The operator of any licensed business dealing in the purchase and sale
of cats or the keeping or boarding of them for hire;
   (B)   Any licensed veterinarian or animal hospital where cats in the numbers
of six or more over the age of eight months may be kept, harbored or
maintained; and
   (C)   Any person or persons operating any show or exhibition of cats where
the cats will be physically controlled and restrained and not permitted to run
at large; provided, the show or exhibition is of a temporary nature, not
exceeding three days.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.020)
§ 6.12.030 PERMIT; REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain or cause to be
kept, harbored or maintained in the town six or more cats over the age of eight
months without having first obtained a permit so to do as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.030)
§ 6.12.040 PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to keep, harbor or maintain or cause to be kept,
harbored or maintained six or more cats over the age of eight months in the
town shall make application so to do directed to the Town Council and file the
same in duplicate with the Chief of Police of the town.
   (B)   The application shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the Town
Council and shall include the written consent of the applicant to permit the
Chief of Police or the Health Officer, as the case may be, to make reasonable
inspection of the premises where the cats are to be kept, harbored or
maintained.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.040)
§ 6.12.050 APPLICATION; FEE.
   A filing fee as set by resolution of the Town Council shall be paid prior to
filing each application, no part of which shall be returned to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.050)
§ 6.12.060 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION AND REPORT.
   Upon payment of the fee prescribed in §
6.12.050, the Chief of Police shall forthwith cause an inspection to be made of
the premises where it is proposed that such cats are to be kept, harbored or
maintained, and shall thereafter make a written report to the Town Council
concerning the inspection, which report shall be forwarded with the copy of the
application. The report shall include, but is not limited to, health and safety
factors, manner of housing and feeding, fencing or security, offensiveness and
proximity to neighbors’ dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.060)
§ 6.12.070 APPLICATION; PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   When the Chief of Police has filed his or her report and the
application as aforesaid, the Town Clerk shall immediately set a date for a
public hearing on the application, which date shall be the first regular
meeting of the Town Council occurring after 15 days have expired from the date
of filing the report and application. The Town Clerk shall also notify, in
writing, all persons owning real property within a radius of 250 feet of the
exterior boundaries of the premises where the cats are to be kept, harbored or
maintained of the public hearing before the Town Council, setting forth the
time and place of the hearing, the nature of the application and the name and
address of the applicant, and further stating that protests to the granting of
a permit may be made in person or in writing.
   (B)   The mailing, postage prepaid, of a notice to the owner as shown on the
assessment rolls of the real property shall constitute compliance with this
section. Such a notice may also be delivered to any adult person at any
residence within the area and shall constitute compliance.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.070)
§ 6.12.080 APPLICATION; HEARING; DECISION BY COUNCIL.
   At the time set forth for the public hearing or at the time to which the
hearing may be continued, the Town Council shall hear any persons appearing at
the meeting either for or against the granting of the permit, and shall
consider the report of the Chief of Police and any written communications in
regard thereto. If the Council specifically finds that the keeping, harboring
or maintaining of the cats described in the application may be so kept,
harbored and maintained without the creation of any nuisance, then the Town
Council may grant the application.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.080)
§ 6.12.090 PERMIT; REVOCATION.
   Any permit granted or issued pursuant to this chapter shall be revocable at
any time by the Town Council upon a finding that the keeping of six cats or
more over the age of eight months is or may become detrimental to the public
health, safety or general welfare or may constitute a public or private
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 6.12.090)
CHAPTER 6.16: MISCELLANEOUS ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
Section
   
6.16.010   Dogs running at large prohibited
   
6.16.020   Dogs prohibited on playing fields of Fairfax Park
   
6.16.030   Dog feces
   
6.16.040   Livestock; permitted location
   
6.16.050   Fowl; permitted location and other regulations
   
6.16.060   Cleanliness of pens and stables
   
6.16.070   Sale of baby rabbits and fowl
Cross-reference:
   Marin County Animal Control Code Adopted, see
Chapter 6.04
§ 6.16.010 DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody or control of any dog
to suffer or permit the same under any circumstances to be upon any public
property, street, sidewalk or other public place unless the dog is restrained
by a leash not to exceed ten feet in length to enable the person to maintain
constant control over the dog.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.010) (Ord. 479, passed - -1981)
§ 6.16.020 DOGS PROHIBITED ON PLAYING FIELDS OF FAIRFAX PARK.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody or control of
any dog, other than guide dogs, to suffer or permit the same under any
circumstances to go or remain upon the Central Ballfield Playing Field or the
Peri Park Playground Area in the Fairfax Park.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute an infraction.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.011) (Ord. 595, passed - -1990)
§ 6.16.030 DOG FECES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody or control of
any dog to allow the dog to defecate upon any public property or any private
property not owned or possessed by the person owning or having control of the
dog unless the person immediately removes and disposes of the feces in a
sanitary manner to a proper receptacle.
   (B)   A visually handicapped person who has the charge or control of a guide
dog, or a police dog in the performance of law enforcement duties, shall be
exempt from the provisions of the section.
   (C)   Any person violating this section shall be guilty of an infraction
and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine set forth by the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.020) (Ord. 479, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 675, passed - -
1998)
§ 6.16.040 LIVESTOCK; PERMITTED LOCATION.
   It is unlawful for any person to keep or permit to be kept any horse, burro,
cow, steer, bull, pig, calf, goat or sheep within 200 feet of any window or
door of any residence or dwelling in the town, or to permit any such animal to
remain within such distance of any window or door of any residence or dwelling.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.030)
§ 6.16.050 FOWL; PERMITTED LOCATION AND OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to keep or cause or permit to be kept or
fed, within 25 feet of any window or door of any residence or dwelling within
the town, any pigeon, dove, chicken, duck, turkey, goose or other fowl, or to
permit any such fowl to enter or remain in any creek or standing water or to
run or go upon the premises of any other person within the town.
   (B)   The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained
upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any fowl
which by any frequent or long-continued noise shall cause annoyance or
discomfort to persons of normal sensitivity in the vicinity is prohibited. The
written affirmation by two persons that violation of this section disturbs the
peace and quiet of said persons within the same two-week period shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this section. Enforcement of this provision
shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or Code Enforcement
Officer and shall occur as set forth in
Chapter 1.10, Administrative Citation and Hearing Process Enforcement. The use
of administrative citation and fine as means for addressing violations of this
section shall be in addition to criminal, civil or other legal or equitable
remedies established by law that may be pursued to address violations of this
code and may be used at the sole discretion of the town.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.040) (Ord. 777, passed 3-5-2014)
§ 6.16.060 CLEANLINESS OF PENS AND STABLES.
   Any person maintaining any stable, corral, pen or coop for holding or
confining any of the birds, fowl or animals mentioned in §§
6.16.040 and
6.16.050 shall keep and maintain the same in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.050)
§ 6.16.070 SALE OF BABY RABBITS AND FOWL.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to display, sell, offer for sale, barter
or give away any baby chicks, rabbits, duckling or other fowl as pets or
novelties, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of
natural chicks, rabbits, ducklings or other fowl in proper facilities by
dealers, hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling the same to be
raised for food purposes.
(Prior Code, § 6.16.060)
TITLE 7: RESERVED
 
TITLE 8: HEALTH AND SAFETY
   Chapter
      
8.04.   CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
      
8.06.   INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND URBAN-INTERFACE CODE
      
8.08.   SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND ORGANIC WASTE
      
8.12.   LITTER
      
8.14.   COLLECTION, RECYCLING, AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE GENERATED FROM
CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND RENOVATION PROJECTS
      
8.16.   POLYSTYRENE FOAM, DEGRADABLE AND RECYCLABLE FOOD PACKAGING
      
8.18.   PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION
      
8.19.   PAPER BAG REDUCTION
      
8.20.   NOISE CONTROL
      
8.24.   ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS ASSOCIATED WITH FLAMMABLE VEGETATION AND
OTHER MATERIALS
      
8.28.   WATERCOURSES
      
8.32.   URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION
      
8.36.   TREES
      
8.40.   WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION
      
8.44.   CLEAN INDOOR AND OUTDOOR AIR AND HEALTH PROTECTION - SMOKING
REGULATIONS
      
8.48.   REGULATORY FEE FOR CLEAN STORM WATER ACTIVITIES
      
8.52.   PESTICIDES
      
8.56.   LIVING WAGE FOR CONTRACTORS
      
8.60.   RECYCLING AREAS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
      
8.64.   INSTALLATION OF WOOD BURNING APPLIANCES, REMOVAL AND OPERATION OF NON-
CERTIFIED WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES
      
8.68.   SMARTMETERS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT
      
8.72.   REUSABLE FOODWARE
      
8.74.   GASOLINE POWERED LANDSCAPE EQUIPMENT
CHAPTER 8.04: CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE
Section
   
8.04.010   Adoption of 2022 California Fire Code, International Fire Code and
Appendix A of the 2021 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
   
8.04.020   Establishment and duties of the Fire Prevention Bureau
   
8.04.030   Definitions
   
8.04.040   Establishment of geographic limits of districts in which storage of
class I, class II and class III liquids in outside aboveground tanks is
prohibited
   
8.04.041   Establishment of geographic limits of districts in which storage of
class I, class II and class III liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited
   
8.04.050   Establishment of geographic limits in which storage of liquified
petroleum gases is to be restricted
   
8.04.060   Establishment of geographic limits of districts in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is to be prohibited
   
8.04.070   Establishment of the geographic limits of districts in which the
storage of compressed natural gas is to be prohibited
   
8.04.080   Establishment of the geographic limits of districts in which the
storage of stationary tanks of flammable cryogenic fluids is to be prohibited
   
8.04.090   Establishment of the geographic limits of districts in which the
storage of hazardous materials is to be prohibited or limited
   
8.04.100   Amendments made to the 2022 California Fire Code, 2021 International
Fire Code and 2021 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
   
8.04.110   Authority to arrest and issue citations
   
8.04.115   Nuisance abatement
   
8.04.120   Penalties
   
8.04.130   Appeals
   
8.04.135   Fee and penalty adjustments
§ 8.04.010 ADOPTION OF 2022 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE, INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE AND
APPENDIX A OF THE 2021 INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE.
   (A)   The Town Council of Fairfax does hereby adopt, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, the following, which shall be collectively known as the
"Town Fire Code":
      (1)   The 2022 California Fire Code, which consists of certain portions
of the 2021 edition of the International Fire Code as amended by the California
Building Standards Commission, including:
         (a)   Division II of Chapter 1 ADMINISTRATION, except Section 103.2
and 109;
         (b)   Appendix B FIRE FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDINGS;
         (c)   Appendix C FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION;
         (d)   Appendix E HAZARD CATEGORIES;
         (e)   Appendix F HAZARD RANKING;
         (f)   Appendix G CRYOGENIC FLUIDS WEIGHT AND VOLUME EQUIVALENTS;
         (g)   Appendix H HAZARDOUS MATERIALS MANAGEMENT PLANS AND HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS INVENTORY STATEMENTS; and
         (h)   Appendix N TEMPORARY HAUNTED HOUSES, GHOST WALKS AND SIMILAR
AMUSEMENT USES;
      (2)   The 2021 edition of the International Fire Code published by the
International Fire Code Council, Inc., to the extent the same is not
inconsistent with the 2022 California Fire Code;
      (3)   Appendix A of the 2021 edition of the International Wildland-Urban
Interface Code save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted,
modified or amended by §
8.04.100.
   (B)   Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions,
and terms of said Town Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and as if
fully set out in this chapter, subject only to the amendments and deletions
herein. Not less than one copy of the Codes and Standards hereby adopted is
filed in the office of the Fire Marshal of the Ross Valley Fire Department, and
from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, and the provisions
thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.020 ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF THE FIRE PREVENTION BUREAU.
   The Town Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau of the
Ross Valley Fire Department and shall be operated under the supervision of the
Fire Chief of the Ross Valley Fire Department.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.030 DEFINITIONS.
   Wherever they appear in the California and International Fire Codes, unless
otherwise provided, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section:
   (A)   Whenever the words FIRE CODE are used they shall mean the Town Fire
Code adopted in §
8.04.010.
   (B)   Wherever the word JURISDICTION is used, it shall be held to mean the
Town of Fairfax.
   (C)   Wherever the term COUNSEL is used, it shall be held to mean the
attorney for the Town of Fairfax.
   (D)   Wherever the words FIRE CODE OFFICIAL are used, they shall be held to
mean the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal or their designee of the Ross Valley Fire
Department.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.040 ESTABLISHMENT OF GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF
CLASS I, CLASS II AND CLASS III LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The geographic limits referred to in Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the 2022
California Fire Code in which storage of Class I, Class II and Class III
liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited are amended as follows:
5704.2.9.6.1 Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of
Class I, Class II, and Class III liquids in above-ground tanks outside of
buildings is prohibited within the Town limits.
   (B)   EXCEPTION: Property owned by the town when approved by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.041 ESTABLISHMENT OF GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF
CLASS I, CLASS II AND CLASS III LIQUIDS IN ABOVEGROUND TANKS IS PROHIBITED.
   The geographic limits referred to in Section 5706.2.4.4 of the 2022
California Fire Code in which storage of Class I, Class II and Class III
liquids in aboveground tanks is prohibited are amended as follows: 5706.2.4.4
Locations where above-ground tanks are prohibited. The storage of Class I,
Class II, and Class III liquids in above-ground tanks is prohibited within the
Town limits.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.050 ESTABLISHMENT OF GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS IN WHICH STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED
PETROLEUM GASES IS TO BE RESTRICTED.
   (A)   The geographic limits referred to in Section 6104.2 of the 2022
California Code, in which storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are
amended as follows: 6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. Within
the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum
gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate
capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000
gallons (7570L) within the Town limits.
   (B)   EXCEPTION: Property owned by the Town when approved by the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.060 ESTABLISHMENT OF GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF
EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The geographic limits, in which storage of explosives and blasting agents is
prohibited, are as follows: Town limits.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.070 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE
STORAGE OF COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The geographic limits, in which the storage of compressed natural gas is
prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Town limits.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.080 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE
STORAGE OF STATIONARY TANKS OF FLAMMABLE CRYOGENIC FLUIDS IS TO BE PROHIBITED.
   The geographic limits in which the storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in
stationary containers are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: Town
limits.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.090 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GEOGRAPHIC LIMITS OF DISTRICTS IN WHICH THE
STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS IS TO BE PROHIBITED OR LIMITED.
   The geographic limits, in which the storage of hazardous materials is
prohibited or limited, are hereby established as follows: Town limits.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.100 AMENDMENTS MADE TO THE 2022 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE, 2021 INTERNATIONAL
FIRE CODE AND 2021 INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE.
   The 2022 California Fire Code is amended and changed in the following
respects:
   CHAPTER 1
   SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION
   Section 101.1 of Chapter 1 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 101.1 Title. These regulations and locally adopted standards shall
be known as the Fire Code of the Town of Fairfax, hereinafter referred to as
"this code."
   Section 102.5 of Chapter 1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 102.5 Application of residential code. Where structures are designed
and constructed in accordance with the California Residential Code, the
provisions of this code shall apply as follows:
   1.   Construction and designed provisions: Provisions of this code
pertaining to the exterior of the structure shall apply including, but not
limited to, premises identification, fire apparatus access and water supplies.
Provisions of this code pertaining to the interior of the structure when
specifically required by this code including, but not limited to, Section 903.2
and Chapter 12 shall apply. Where interior or exterior systems or devices are
installed, construction permits required by Section 105.7 of this code shall
also apply
   2.   Administrative, operational, and maintenance provisions: all such
provisions of this code shall apply.
   Section 102.7.3 is hereby added to Chapter 1 and shall read as follows:
   Section 102.7.3 Nationally Recognized Listed Products. Any installation of
products and equipment due to permits required by this Code shall be Labeled
and Listed, as defined in Section 202.
   Section 104.1.1 is hereby added to Chapter 1 and shall read as follows:
   Section 104.1.1 Supplemental Rules, Regulations, and Standards or Policies.
The Fire Code Official is authorized to render interpretations of this code and
to make and enforce rules and supplemental regulations and to develop Fire
Protection Standards or Policies to carry out the application and intent of
this code.
   Section 104.13 is hereby added to Chapter 1 and shall read as follows:
   Section 104.13. Fire Prevention Resource Sharing. Other enforcement agencies
shall have authority to render necessary assistance in plan review, inspection,
code interpretation, enforcement, investigation and other fire prevention
services when requested to do so.
   Section 105.5 of Chapter 1 is hereby amended by adding the following
additional operational permits:
   105.5 Required Operational Permits. The fire code official is authorized to
issue operational permits for operations set forth in Sections 105.5.1 through
105.5.52
   Section 105.5.55 of Chapter 1 is hereby added to read as follows:
   105.5.55 Local Operational Permits. In addition to the permits required by
section 105.6, the following permits shall be obtained from the Fire Prevention
Bureau of the Ross Valley Fire Department prior to engaging in the following
activities, operations, practices or functions:
   1.   Fire Protection Plan. An operational permit is required to implement a
fire protection plan.
   2.   Radioactive material. An operational permit is required to store or
handle at any installation more than 1 micro curie (37,000 Becquerel) of
radioactive material not contained in a sealed source or more that 1 millicurie
(37,000,000 Becquerel) of radioactive material in a sealed source or sources,
or any amount of radioactive material for which specific license from the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission is required.
   Section 105.6 of Chapter 1 is hereby amended by adding the following
additional construction permits:
   105.6 Required Construction Permits. The fire code official is authorized to
issue construction permits for work as set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through
105.6.25
   Section 105.6.25 of Chapter 1 is hereby added to read as follows:
   105.6.25 Local Construction Permits. In addition to the permits required by
section 105.6, the following permits shall be obtained from the Ross Valley
Fire Department prior to installation of the following:
   1.   Exterior Wildfire Protection Systems. A construction permit is required
for the installation of or design modification to an Exterior Wildfire
Protection System as regulated by section 918.
   2.   Home Backup Generator. A construction permit is required for the
installation of a home backup generator as regulated by section 1218.
   3.   Vegetation Management Plan. A construction permit is required to
implement a vegetation management plan.
   Section 112.4 of Chapter 1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 112.4 Violation Penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install, alter repair or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the Fire Code Official, or of a permit
or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500 dollars or by
imprisonment not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each
day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed
a separate offense.
   The imposition of one penalty of any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when
not otherwise specified, each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
   Section 112.4.2 of Chapter 1 is added to read as follows:
   Section 112.4.2 Abatement of clearance of brush or vegetative growth from
structures. The executive body is authorized to instruct the Chief to give
notice to the owner of the property upon which conditions regulated by section
304.1.2 of Chapter 3 and section 4907.4 of Chapter 49 exists to correct such
conditions. If the owner fails to correct such conditions, the executive body
is authorized to cause the same to be done and make the expense of such
correction a lien upon the property where such condition exists.
   Section 113.4 of Chapter 1 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 113.4 Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall
be liable to a fine not less than $500 dollars or more than $1000 dollars.
   Section 115 is hereby added Chapter 1 and shall read as follows:
   Section 115 DAMAGES AND EXPENSE RECOVERY
   Section 115.1 Damages and Expense Recovery. The expense of securing any
emergency that is within the responsibility for enforcement of the Fire Chief
as given in Section 104 is a charge against the person who caused the
emergency. Damages and expenses incurred by any public agency having
jurisdiction or any public agency assisting the agency having jurisdiction
shall constitute a debt of such person and shall be collectible by the Fire
Chief for proper distribution in the same manner as in the case of an
obligation under contract expressed or implied. Expenses as stated above shall
include, but not be limited to, equipment and personnel committed and any
payments required by the public agency to outside business firms requested by
the public agency to secure the emergency, monitor remediation, and clean up.
   CHAPTER 2
   DEFINITIONS
   Section 202 of Chapter 2 is hereby amended by adding the following general
definitions:
   ALL WEATHER SURFACE shall mean A/C paving, or concrete capable of supporting
70,000 gross vehicle weight. Grades up to and including 18% may be of A/
C paving. Grades greater than 18% shall be of concrete curf-cut so as to allow
for water run-off and traction.
   COVERINGS shall mean materials including, but not limited to gypsum board,
paneling, floor boards, lathe and plaster, wood paneling, brick and mortar, or
other materials attached to rough framing of the building elements. 'Coverings'
do not include carpet, linoleum, tile, wall paper, or other decorative
finishes.
   OCCUPANCY CLASSIFICATION is modified to include:
      [BG] Factory Industrial F-1 Moderate-hazard occupancy is amended to add
to the list of moderate-hazard factory industrial groups the following:
         Agricultural crop production including cultivation, drying, processing
and /or storage.
   EXTERIOR WILDFIRE PROTECTION SYSTEM shall mean an approved system of devices
and equipment which is automatically or manually activated to discharge water
and or an approved fire-extinguishing agent onto the structure and or the
exterior of the structure to hydrate the Immediate Zone 0 (0-5 feet from the
home, including the home) and the Intermediate Zone 1 (5-30 feet from the
home).
   FIRE ROAD shall mean those improved or unimproved roads, public or private,
that provide access for firefighting equipment and personnel to undeveloped
areas.
   HOME BACKUP GENERATOR. A permanent, fixed installation, internal combustion
engine-driven device that provides temporary electrical power to a Group R-
3 and R-4 Occupancies.
   PRE-PLANS shall mean detailed plans of target hazard buildings. These pre-
plans include information on the building's location, occupancy, hazards, fire
department connections and hydrants, building layout, and other pertinent data
that would assist the fire department in case of an emergency.
   PUBLIC STORAGE FACILITY shall mean any business that sells, leases or rents
space to the public that is enclosed, whether it is a building, storage
container or similar configuration.
   SPARK ARRESTOR shall mean a chimney device constructed in a skillful-like
manner. The net free area of a spark arrestor shall not be less than four times
the net free area of the outlet of the chimney. The spark arrestor screen shall
have heat and corrosion resistance equivalent to 12-gauge wire, 19-gauge
galvanized wire or 24-gauge stainless steel. Opening shall not permit the
passage of spheres having a diameter larger than 1/2 inch and shall not block
the passage of spheres having a diameter of less than 3/8 inch.
   SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL shall mean the renovation of any structure, which
combined with any additions to the structure, affects a floor area which
exceeds fifty percent of the existing floor area of the structure within any 36
month period. When any changes are made in the building, such as walls,
columns, beams or girders, floor or ceiling joists and coverings, roof rafters,
roof diaphragms, foundations, piles or retaining walls or similar components,
the floor area of all rooms affected by such changes shall be included in
computing floor areas for the purposes of applying this definition. This
definition does not apply to the replacement and upgrading of residential roof
coverings
   TARGET HAZARD is defined as a location or plausible scenario in which a fire
department or fire district could quickly become overwhelmed and for which
additional resources, now scarce, would be needed.
   TEMPORARY shall mean any use for a period of less than 90 days, where not
otherwise referenced.
   UNWARRANTED ALARM shall mean the giving, signaling or transition of an alarm
notification to a public fire station or emergency communication center when
such alarm is the result of a defective condition of an alarm system, system
servicing testing, construction activities, ordinary household activities,
false alarm or other cause when no such danger exists.
   CHAPTER 3
   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
   Section 302.1 in Chapter 3 is hereby amended to add the following:
   PUBLIC STORAGE FACILITY
   Section 319 of Chapter 3 is deleted in its entirety.
   Section 324 is hereby added to Chapter 3 and shall read as follows:
   Section 324 Public Storage Facilities
   Section 324.1 General. Public Storage Facilities shall comply with the
provisions of this section.
   Section 324.2 Location on Property and Fire Resistance of Exterior. All
public storage facilities shall meet the minimum requirements for setback from
property lines or fire resistive construction as set forth in Table 602 of the
Building Code for Group S, Division 1 occupancies.
   Section 324.3 Fire Apparatus Access. All public storage facilities shall
have fire apparatus access roads provided in accordance with Section 503.
   Section 324.4 Storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids and Hazardous
Materials. The storage of hazardous materials or flammable or combustible
liquids in public storage facilities is prohibited. Such facilities shall post
legible and durable sign(s) to indicate same in a manner and location(s) as
specified by the Fire Code Official. This section shall apply to new and
existing public storage facilities.
   Exception: Only those quantities of flammable and combustible liquids
necessary for maintenance of the facility may be stored by the facility
management per Chapter 57 of this code.
   CHAPTER 4
   EMERGENCY PLANNING AND     PREPAREDNESS
   Section 401.1.1 is hereby added to Chapter 4 and shall read as follows:
   Section 401.1.1 Hazardous Occupancies. In occupancies of a hazardous nature,
where access for fire apparatus is unduly difficult, or where special life and
fire safety hazards exist as determined by standards or policies of the Ross
Valley Fire Department, that facility or business management shall be required
to develop and implement an Emergency Response Plan, provide for an on-site
Emergency Response Team, Emergency Liaison Officer, staff training and fire
drills in accordance with Sections 405 and 406 and standards developed by the
Ross Valley Fire Department.
   Section 401.3.2.1 is hereby added to Chapter 4 and shall read as follows:
   Section 401.3.2.1 Unwarranted Alarm Notification. Notification of emergency
responders based on an unwarranted alarm may be punishable by a fine in
accordance with the adopted fee schedule. In addition, the responsible party
may be liable for the operational and administrative costs, incurred from the
emergency response or mitigation procedures resulting from an unwarranted alarm
notification.
   Section 401.3.2.2 is added to read as follows:
   Section 401.3.2.2 Multiple Unwarranted or Nuisance Alarm Activations. Any
occupancy that has more than 3 unwarranted or nuisance alarms causing emergency
response within a 12-month period may be required to modify, repair, upgrade or
replace their system and or monitoring station as determined by the Fire Code
Official.
   Section 402.1 of Chapter 4 is hereby amended to add the following:
   PRE-PLANS
   TARGET HAZARDS
   UNWARRANTED ALARMS
   Section 403.1.1 is hereby added to Chapter 4 and shall read as follows:
   Section 403.1.1 Pre-Plans: When required by the fire code official, pre-
plans shall be developed for target hazard buildings according to the written
standards developed by the authority having jurisdiction.
   Section 403.9.1.4 is hereby added to Chapter 4 and shall read as follows:   
   Section 403.9.1.4 Emergency Preparedness for Hotels, Lodging and Congregate
Houses. Hotels, lodging and congregate houses shall provide guests with
immediate access to a telephone to report emergencies. The exit diagram shall
indicate the location of the nearest telephone and instructions to dial 911.
   CHAPTER 5
   FIRE SERVICE FEATURES
   Section 501.5 is hereby added to Chapter 5 as follows:
   Section 501.5 Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with this section upon
written or verbal notice from the Chief shall result in a Ross Valley Fire
Department order to cease operations and desist further operations until such
time as adequate access and/or water for fire protection is provided.
   Section 503.1. of Chapter 5 is hereby amended as follows:
   Section 503.1 Where Required. Fire Apparatus access roads shall be provided
and maintained in accordance with Sections 503.1.1 through 503.1.5.
   Section 503.1.4 of Chapter 5 is hereby added to read as follows:
   Section 503.1.4 Undeveloped Areas. Fire Apparatus Access Roads, improved or
unimproved, shall be provided for firefighting equipment, apparatus and
personnel to undeveloped areas of the Town of Fairfax so as to gain access to
improved, unimproved, and undeveloped areas of the Town of Fairfax in a manner
approved by the Fire Code Official. Any vehicle or other obstructions may be
towed away at the owner's expense.
   Section 503.1.5 of Chapter 5 is hereby added to read as follows:
   Section 503.1.5 Aerial fire apparatus access. Buildings or facilities
exceeding 30 feet or three stories in height, approved aerial apparatus access
roads shall be provided. For the purposes of this section, the highest rood
surface shall be determined by the measurement to the eave of the pitched roof,
the intersection of the roof to the exterior wall, or the top of parapet walls,
whichever is greater.
   Section 503.1.5.1 Width. Aerial fire apparatus access roads shall have a
minimum unobstructed width of 26 feet, exclusive of shoulders, in the immediate
vicinity of the building or portion thereof.
   Section 503.1.5.2 Proximity to building. One or more of the required access
routes meeting this condition shall be located not less than 15 feet and not
more than 30 feet from the building, and shall be positioned parallel to one
entire side of the building. The side of the building on which the aerial fire
apparatus access road is positioned shall be approved by the fire code
official.
   Section 503.1.5.3 Obstructions. Overhead utility and power lines shall not
be located over the aerial fire apparatus access road or between the aerial
fire apparatus access road and the building. Other obstructions shall be
permitted to be placed with the approval of the fire code official.
   Section 503.2.1 is amended by adding an exception to read as follows:
   EXCEPTION: Driveways serving as fire apparatus access roads serving fewer
than 5 structures may reduce the width to 16 feet.
   Section 503.2.6.1. is hereby added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:
   Section 503.2.6.1 Evaluation and maintenance. All existing private bridges
and elevated surfaces that are a part of the fire department access roadway
shall be evaluated by a California licensed civil engineer experienced in
structural engineering or a California licensed structural engineer, for safety
and weight rating, in accordance with American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Manual: ``The Manual for Bridge Evaluation,''
Second Edition, or other approved standard. Vehicle load limits shall be posted
at both entrances to bridges. All bridges and elevated structures providing
fire department access shall be routinely maintained in accordance with Section
503.2.6 or when directed by the fire code official or authorized designee.
   Section 503.4 of Chapter 5 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 503.4 Obstruction of Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Fire apparatus
access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of
vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in sections 503.2.1 and
503.2.2 shall be maintained at all times. Any vehicle or other obstruction may
be towed away at the owner's expense.
   Section 503.4.2 is hereby added to read as follows:
   503.4.2 Prohibition on Vehicular Parking on Private Access ways. If, in the
judgment of the Fire Code Official, it is necessary to prohibit vehicular
parking along private access ways serving existing facilities, buildings, or
portions of buildings in order to keep them clear and unobstructed for fire
apparatus access, the Fie Code Official may issue an Order to the owner, lessee
or other person in charge of the premises to paint the curbs red or install
signs or other appropriate notices to the effect that parking is prohibited by
Order of the Fire Department. It shall thereafter be unlawful for such owner,
lessee or other person in charge of the premises to fail to install, maintain
in good condition, the form of notice so prescribed. When such areas are marked
or signed as provided herein, no person shall park a vehicle adjacent to any
such curb or in the private access way contrary to such markings or signs. Any
vehicle so parked in the private access way may be towed away at the expense of
the owner of the vehicle.
   Section 503.6.1 is hereby added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:
   503.6.1 Width. All gates shall open fully to provide an unobstructed passage
width of not less than 16 feet or a minimum of two feet wider than the approved
net clear opening of the required all weather roadway or driveway and a minimum
net vertical clearance of 15 feet.
   Section 503.6.2 is hereby added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:
   Section 503.6.2 Electronic Gates. All electronic operated gates shall have
installed an approved key switch override system mounted on a stanchion or wall
as approved by the Chief in accordance with Standards/Policies adopted by the
Fire Code Official. All electronic or motorized gates shall incorporate in
their design the means for fast, effective manual operation of the gates in the
event of power or mechanical failure (i.e., easily removable hinge pins for
separating power linkage from gates; undercut, weakened or frangible members
requiring 40 pounds or less pressure against the gates to cause their failure
and the gates to open. All electrical wiring and components of motorized gates
shall be UL listed and installed in accordance with the National Electric Code.
   Section 503.6.3 is hereby added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:
   Section 503.6.3 Gate Setback Required. Gates shall be set back from roadways
a minimum of 30 feet or more so as not to cause cross traffic to stop or create
a hazardous traffic condition on the roadway approach to the driveway.
   Exception: The fire code official is authorized to modify the setback if
fire apparatus access onto the property is not required to achieve 150-foot
access to the most remote portion of the building per 503.1.1.
   Section 507.5.1 of Chapter 5 is hereby amended by deleting the exception
thereto.
   Section 507.5.1.1 of Chapter 5 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 507.5.1.1 Hydrant for fire department connections. Buildings
equipped with a water-based fire protection system installed in accordance with
Section 903 through 905 shall have a fire hydrant within 100 feet of the fire
department connections, or as approved by the fire code official.
   Section 507.5.7 is hereby added to Chapter 5 and shall read as follows:
   Section 507.5.7 Fire Hydrant Upgrades. When additions or modifications to
structures are made, the nearest fire hydrant (if a new one is not required)
located by the Fire Code Official, shall be upgraded to the minimum standard of
one 4 1/2" outlet and one 2 1/2" outlet for single family dwellings and the
minimum standard of one 4 1/2" outlet and two 2 1/2" outlets for commercial
structures.
   Exception:
   1.   If the cost of upgrading the fire hydrant exceeds 2% of the cost of the
project based on the building permit valuation.
   2.   One and two family dwellings equipped throughout with an approved
automatic sprinkler system.
   Section 510.1 of Chapter 5 is hereby amended by deleting Exception 1.
   CHAPTER 9
   FIRE PROTECTION AND LIFE SAFETY SYSTEMS
   Section 901.7 of Chapter 9 is hereby amended by adding the following
sentence:
   Section 901.7 Systems out of Service. Where a required fire protection
system is out of service, the fire department and the fire code official shall
be notified immediately and, where required by the fire code official, the
building shall be either evacuated or an approved fire watch shall be provided
for all occupants left unprotected by the shutdown until the fire protection
system has been returned to service. This section shall also apply to
residential fire sprinkler systems.
   Section 903.2 of Chapter 9 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new
and existing buildings shall be provided in the locations described in Sections
903.2.1 through 903.2.8, 903.2.11 through 903.2.12, and 903.2.14 through
903.2.20.
   Section 903.2.1 through 903.2.4 of Chapter 9 are hereby amended to read as
follows:
   Section 903.2.1 Required Installations. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be installed and maintained in all newly constructed buildings or structures.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Free-standing Group U Occupancies not more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet and provided with exterior wall and opening protection as per Table
602 of the Building Code.
   2.   Agricultural buildings as defined in Appendix C of the Building Code
and not exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet, having clear unobstructed
side yard of combustible materials, exceeding sixty (60) feet in all directions
and not exceeding twenty-five (25) feet in height, and located within an
Agricultural zoned district as defined in the Town of Fairfax Planning Code.
   Section 903.2.2 Additions and Alterations. An automatic sprinkler system
shall be installed in all buildings in excess of 3,000 sq. ft. which have ten
per cent (10%) or more floor area added within any 36 month period.
   Section 903.2.2.1 Substantial Remodel. An automatic sprinkler system shall
be installed in all buildings which have fifty per cent (50%) or more floor
area added, or any "substantial remodel" as defined in this code, within any 36
month period.
   Section 903.2.3 Group R-3. An automatic sprinkler system installed in
accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall be permitted in Group R-3 occupancies
and shall be provided throughout all one- and two-family dwellings regardless
of square footage in accordance with the California Residential Code. An
automatic sprinkler system shall be installed in all mobile homes, manufactured
homes and multi-family manufactured homes with two or more dwelling units in
accordance with Title 25 of the California Code of Regulations.
   Section 903.2.4 Change of Occupancy or Use. For any change of occupancy or
use, when the proposed new occupancy classification is more hazardous based on
a fire and life safety evaluation by the Fire Code Official, including but not
limited to conversion of buildings to single family residences, accessory
dwelling units, bed and breakfast, inns, lodging houses or congregate
residences or other similar uses, an automatic sprinkler system shall be
installed throughout.
   Section 903.3.9 of Chapter 9 is hereby amended as follows:
   Section 903.3.9 Floor control valves. Floor control valves and waterflow
detection assemblies shall be installed at each floor where any of the
following occur:
   1.   Buildings where the floor level of the highest story is located more
than 30 feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access.
   2.   Buildings that are two or more stories in height.
   3.   Buildings that are two or more stories below the highest level of fire
department vehicle access.
   Exception: Group R-3 and R-3.1 occupancies floor control valves and
waterflow detection assemblies shall not be required.
   Section 903.6.1 of Chapter 9 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 903.6.1 Application. In all existing buildings, when the addition of
automatic fire sprinklers are required by the provisions of this code,
automatic fire sprinklers shall be extended into all unprotected areas of the
building.
   Section 906.11 is hereby added to Chapter 9 and shall read as follows:
   Section 906.11 Fire Extinguisher Documentation. The owner and/or operator of
every Group R Division 1 and R Division 2 occupancies shall annually provide
the Chief written documentation that fire extinguishers are installed and have
been serviced as required by Title 19 California Code of Regulations when such
extinguishers are installed in residential units in lieu of common areas.
   Section 907.2 of Chapter 9 is amended to add the following paragraphs after
the second paragraph but before the exceptions:
   New Construction: Every new building constructed for non-residential
occupancies greater than 2000 square feet shall have installed therein an
approved fire detection (products of combustion) system in accordance with the
standards established by the National Fire Protection Association. The type of
system installed shall be determined by the Fire Chief.
   Existing Construction: Every existing building remodeled for non-residential
occupancies greater than 2000 square feet shall have installed therein an
approved fire detection (products of combustion) system in accordance with the
standards established by the National Fire Protection Association. The type of
system installed shall be determined by the Fire Chief.
   Section 907.2.13.1.2 of Chapter 9 is hereby amended by adding Item 3 to read
as follows:
   3.   Duct smoke detectors shall be capable of being reset by a readily
accessible, remote push button or key activated switch as approved by the Fire
Code Official.
   Section 907.6.6 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 907.6.6 Monitoring. New and upgraded fire alarm systems required by
this chapter or by the California Building Code shall be monitored by an
approved Central Station in accordance with NFPA 72 and this section.
   Exception: Monitoring by central station is not required for:
   1.   Single- and multiple-station smoke alarms required by Section 907.2.11.
   2.   Group I-3 occupancies shall be monitored in accordance with Section
907.2.6.3.
   3.   Automatic sprinkler systems in one- and two-family dwellings.
   Section 907.8.5 of Chapter 9 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 907.8.5 Smoke Alarm Documentation. The owner and/or operator of
every Group R Division 1, Division 2, Division 3.1, and Division 4 Occupancies
shall annually provide the Fire Code Official with written documentation that
the smoke alarms installed pursuant to the Building Code have been tested and
are operational. If alarms are found to be inoperable or are missing, such
alarms shall be repaired or replaced immediately.
   Section 918 of Chapter 9 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   SECTION 918 EXTERIOR WILDFIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
   Section 918.1 of Chapter 9 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 918.1 General. Exterior Wildfire Protection Systems shall comply
with this section.
   Section 918.2 of Chapter 9 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 918.2 Construction documents. Documentation of the system shall be
submitted per 901.2.
   Section 918.3 of Chapter 9 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 918.3 Permits. Permits shall be required as set forth in section
901.3
   CHAPTER 11
   CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING BUILDINGS
   Section 1103.1 of Chapter 11 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 1103.1 Required Construction. Existing buildings shall comply with
not less than the minimum provisions specified in Table 1103.1 and as further
enumerated in Sections 1103.2, 1103.7 through 1103.8.5.3, 1103.9.1, and
1103.10.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be constructed to allow the
elimination of fire protection systems or a reduction in the level of fire
safety provided in buildings constructed in accordance with previously adopted
codes.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Where a change in fire-resistance rating has been approved in
accordance with Section 501.2 or 802.6 of the California Existing Building
Code.
   2.   Group U occupancies.
   Sections 1103.2 Item #1 is deleted.
   Sections 1103.3 through 1103.6.2 are deleted.
   Sections 1103.9 is deleted.
   Sections 1104 and 1105 are deleted.
   CHAPTER 12
   ENERGY SYSTEMS
   Section 1201.4 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1201.4 Construction Documents. A scaled and dimensioned site plan
showing the location of all energy systems, property lines, buildings, service
and electrical panels, transfer switches, disconnects, underground wiring and
piping, fuel type and piping, map placard and signage. Site Plan shall clearly
designate property frontage for viewer orientation.
   Section 1201.5 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1201.5 Signs and Labels. Caution signs or labels are required to
identify the quantity and type of additional power source(s) located on site.
Signs shall be required at the main service panel, and on disconnect equipment.
Additional locations may be required by the fire code official.
   Section 1201.6 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1201.6 Disconnect. An approved and readily accessible independent
and clearly labeled single exterior disconnect shall be located prior to any
load/service panel and installed as close as possible to the main service panel
or as approved by the fire code official. Integrated equipment toggle, rocker,
or electronic switches shall not be utilized as an independent disconnects.
   Section 1201.7 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1201.7 Operational Testing. New installations shall be tested for
complete power and energy system shutdown. A normal power failure shall be
simulated by closing the main service breaker supplying normal power to the
building. Upon transfer from main power to alternate power source(s), the
single disconnect(s) shall be used to disconnect alternate power from all
alternate energy sources. A successful result of the shutdown test shall
include termination of all alternate energy power sources serving the building
(i.e. main service, photovoltaic system, energy storage systems, and
generators, when installed).
   Section 1202.1 in Chapter 12 is hereby amended to add the following:
   HOME BACKUP GENERATOR
   Section 1208 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.1 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.1 General. The use, operation and maintenance of home backup
generators in Group R-3 and R-4 occupancies shall comply with this section.
   Section 1208.2 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.2 Use. Home backup generators shall be installed in accordance
with the California Building Code, the California Electrical Code, NFPA 110.
   Section 1208.3 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.3 Permits. Permits shall be obtained for Home Backup Generators
as set forth in Section 105.
   Section 1208.4 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.4 Installation. Home backup generators shall be installed in
accordance with the California Building Code, the California Electrical Code,
NFPA 110.
   Section 1208.5 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.5 Listing. Home backup generators shall be listed and labeled
in accordance with UL 2200.
   Section 1208.6 of Chapter 12 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 1208.6. Maintenance. Home backup generators shall be operated and
maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
   CHAPTER 26
   FUMIGATION AND INSECTICIDAL FOGGING
   Chapter 26 is deleted in its entirety.
   CHAPTER 33
   FIRE SAFETY DURING CONSTRUCTION
   The exception to Section 3314.3 of Chapter 33 is amended to read as follows:
   Exception: Standpipes shall be either temporary or permanent in nature, and
with or without a water supply, provided that such standpipes comply with the
requirements of Section 905 as to capacity, outlets and materials, as approved
by the Fire Code Official.
   Section 3315.3 in Chapter 33 is added to read as follows:
   Section 3315.3 Where required. In buildings of combustible construction
required to have automatic sprinkler system by Section 903, automatic sprinkler
system shall be installed prior to construction exceeding two stories in height
above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access. Such automatic
sprinkler system shall be extended as construction progresses to within one
floor of the highest point of construction having secured decking or flooring.
   Section 3315.4 of Chapter 33 is added to read as follows:
   Section 3315.4 Buildings being demolished. Where a building is being
demolished and an automatic sprinkler system is existing within such a
building, such automatic sprinkler system shall be maintained in an operable
condition so as to be available for use by the fire department. Such automatic
sprinkler system shall be demolished with the building but shall not be
demolished more than one floor below the floor being demolished.
   Section 3315.5 of Chapter 33 is added to read as follows:
   Section 3315.5 Detailed requirements. Automatic sprinkler systems shall be
installed in accordance with the provisions of Section 903.
   CHAPTER 49
   REQUIREMENTS FOR WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREAS
   The definitions of "Fire Protection Plan" and "Wildland-Urban Interface Fire
Area (WUI)," as set forth in Section 4902.1 of Chapter 49, are amended to read
as follows:
   FIRE PROTECTION PLAN. A document prepared for a specific project or
development proposed for construction and development in areas designated as
Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI), and/or Moderate, High, or Very High Fire Hazard
Severity Zone. It describes ways to minimize and mitigate potential for loss
from wildfire exposure.
   WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA. A geographical area identified by the
Town of Fairfax as a "Fire Hazard Severity Zone" in accordance with the Public
Resources Code, Sections 4201 through 4204, and Government Code, Sections 51175
through 51189, or other areas designated by the enforcing agency to be at a
significant risk from wildfires, as designated on the map titled Wildland-Urban
Interface Fire Area, dated January 1, 2008.
   Section 4903.2.1 of Chapter 49 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 4903.2.1.1 Preliminary fire protection plan. When a preliminary fire
protection plan is submitted, it shall include, at a minimum, the following:
   1.   Total size of the project.
   2.   Information on the adjoining properties on all sides, including current
land uses, and if known, existing structures and densities, planned
construction, natural vegetation, environmental restoration plans, roads and
parks.
   3.   A map with all project boundary lines, property lines, slope contour
lines, proposed structure foundation footprints, and proposed roads and
driveways. The map shall identify project fuel modification zones and method of
identifying the fuel modification zone boundaries.
   4.   The map shall include all existing emergency water supplies.
   Section 4903.2.1.2 of Chapter 49 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 4903.2.1.2 Final fire protection plan. The final fire protection
plan shall include items listed in Section 4903.2.1.1 and the following:
   1.   A map identifying all proposed plants in the fuel modification zones
with a legend that includes a symbol for each proposed plant species. The plan
shall include specific information on each species proposed, including but not
limited to:
      a.   The plant life-form;
      b.   The scientific and common name; and
      c.   The expected height and width for mature growth.
   2.   Identification of irrigated and non-irrigated zones.
   3.   Requirements for vegetation reduction around emergency access and
evacuation routes.
   4.   Identification for points of access for equipment and personnel to
maintain vegetation in common areas.
   5.   Legally binding statements regarding community responsibility for
maintenance of fuel modifications zones.
   6.   Legally binding statements to be included in covenants, conditions and
restrictions regarding property owner responsibilities for vegetation
maintenance.
   7.   Identify the location of fire protection systems or equipment.
   8.   Identify any power sources, meters, and shut downs.
   Section 4906.2 of Chapter 49 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 4906.2 Application. Buildings and structures located in any Fire
Hazard Severity Zone or any Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) Fire Area designated
by the enforcing agency shall maintain the required hazardous vegetation and
fuel management per Sections 4906.3 through 4906.5.3.
   Section 4906.3 of Chapter 49 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 4906.3. Vegetation Management Plan. A Vegetation Management plan
shall be required for new construction, substantial remodels, and landscape
modifications including new plantings, modifications to existing plantings,
and/or excavation.   
   Section 4906.3.1 of Chapter 49 is deleted in its entirety.
   Section 4906.4.2.1 of Chapter 49 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 4906.4.2.1 Tree Planting. New trees classified as fire-resistant
vegetation shall be permitted provided the tree is planted and maintained so
that the tree's drip line at maturity is a minimum 5 feet (9144 mm) from any
combustible structure.
   Section 4907.2 of Chapter 49 is amended to read as follows:
   Section 4907.2 Application. Buildings and structures located in any Fire
Hazard Severity Zone or any Wildland-Urban Interface (WUI) Fire Area designated
by the enforcing agency shall maintain the required hazardous vegetation and
fuel management:
   Section 4907.4 of Chapter 49 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 4907.4 Fire Hazard Reduction. Any person who owns, leases, controls
or maintains any building or structure, vacant lands, open space, and/or lands
within specific Wildland Urban Interface areas of the jurisdiction of the Town
of Fairfax, shall comply with the following:
   1.   Cut and remove all hazardous vegetation and ground coverings within 100
feet of structures, up to 200 feet when topographic or combustible vegetative
types necessitate removal as determined by the Fire Code Official.
   2.   Remove accumulated dead vegetation on the property.
   3.   Cut and remove tree limbs that overhang wood decks and roofs.
   4.   Remove that portion of any tree which extends within 10 feet of any
chimney or stovepipe, roof surfaces and roof gutters
   5.   Clean any leaves and needles from roof and gutters.
   6.   Cut and remove growth less than 3-inches in diameter, from the ground
up to a height of 10 feet, provided that no crown shall be raised to a point so
as to remove branches from more than the lower one-third of the tree's total
height.
   7.   Ladder fuels shall be removed within 100 feet of the structure.
   8.   When required by the Fire Code Official, cut and remove trees that are
8" of diameter or less at breast height, or four feet, six inches above ground,
to achieve canopy separation within 30 feet of the structure.
   9.   Vegetation clearance requirements for new construction and substantial
remodels in Wildland-Urban Interface Areas shall be in accordance with the 2021
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, as amended by the Town of Fairfax.
   EXCEPTION 1: When approved by the Fire Code Official, single specimens of
trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants, or plants used as ground covers,
provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the
native growth to any structure.
   EXCEPTION 2: When approved by the Fire Code Official, grass and other
vegetation located more than 30 feet (9144 mm) from buildings or structures
less than 18 inches (457 mm) in height above the ground need not be removed
where necessary to stabilize soil, and prevent erosion.
   Section 4907.5 of Chapter 49 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 4907.5 Fire Hazard Reduction from Roadways. The Fire Code Official
is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3048 cm) on each side of portions
of highways, fire apparatus access roads (improved or unimproved), and
driveways (improved or unimproved), which are improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other
combustible growth. Corrective action, if necessary, shall be the same as the
actions required in section 4907.4. The Fire Code Official is authorized to
enter upon private property to carry out this work.
   EXCEPTION 1: When approved by the Fire Code Official, single specimens of
trees, ornamental shrubbery or similar plants, or plants used as ground covers,
provided that they do not form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the
native growth to any structure.
   Section 4907.6 of Chapter 49 is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section 4907.6 Nuisance. Failure to comply with the requirements of Section
4907.4 shall be deemed a public nuisance. The Fire Chief is hereby authorized
to require the abatement of any nuisance condition described in Section 4907.4
or Section 4907.5. Abatement shall be accomplished in accordance with Section
4907.7 of the Code and Section 3-3.812 of the Town of Fairfax Municipal Code.
   Section 4907.7 is hereby added to Chapter 49 and shall read as follows:
   Section 4907.7 Notice to Abate. Failure to comply with the requirements of
Section 4907.4 shall be deemed a public nuisance. The Fire Chief is hereby
authorized to require the abatement of any nuisance condition described in
Section 4907.4 Notice requiring the abatement of such nuisance shall be given
by mail to the owner of the property upon which, or in front of which, such
nuisance exists, at such owner's address as shown on the last equalized
Assessment Roll of the County of Marin. Such notice shall contain the
following:
   A.   The street address and Assessor's Parcel Number for the affected
property.
   B.   The date of the inspection of the property by the Fire Department
during which such nuisance was discovered.
   C.   A description of the nuisance and its location on, or around, the
property.
   D.   The abatement action which the owner is required to take and a time
limit for such abatement.
   E.   A statement that if the owner fails to abate such nuisance within the
prescribed time, the Fire Department or other Town agent, will abate the
nuisance.
   F.   A statement that if the Fire Department or other Town agent, is
required to abate the nuisance the cost of such abatement may be assessed as a
lien against the property.
   Abatement and Assessment of Cost to Abate
   Should the abatement of the nuisance not be accomplished by the owner of the
affected property within the period set forth in the notice requiring
abatement, the Fire Chief is authorized to perform such abatement and shall
keep an accurate account of the cost of such abatement. The Fire Chief shall
mail written notice of such cost to the owner of the affected property who may,
within fifteen days of the date of such mailing, request a hearing by the Fire
Chief with respect to such cost. The Fire Chief shall hold a hearing within
thirty (30) days of receiving the request. The decision of the Fire Chief shall
be final. The cost of such abatement as finally fixed and determined by the
Fire Chief shall constitute a special assessment against the affected property.
The Fire Chief shall cause an order confirming such assessment to be recorded
in the office of the County Recorder at which time a lien for such assessment
shall attach to the affected property. The Fire Chief shall also file a copy of
the order confirming the assessment with the County Auditor and the amount of
such assessment shall, thereafter, be collected at the time and in the manner
of ordinary property taxes. If delinquent, the amount of such assessment shall
be subject to the same penalties and procedure for foreclosure and sale
provided for ordinary property taxes.
   CHAPTER 56
   EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
   Section 5601.1.3 of Chapter 56 Exceptions 1, 2, and 4 are hereby deleted.
   Section 5608.1.2 of Chapter is added to read as follows:
   Section 5608.1.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the fire
code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to the performance of any
firework display. Application for such approval shall be made in writing no
less than twenty (20) days prior to the proposed display. The application shall
be considered and acted upon by the fire code official or authorized designee
pursuant to this Chapter and Title 19, Chapter 6, Article 3 - Licenses of the
California Code of Regulations. Any permit for a fireworks display may be
suspended or revoked at any time by the Fire code official or authorized
designee.
   Section 5608.2 of Chapter 56 is added to read as follows:
   Section 5608.2 Limitations. Possession, storage, offer or expose for sale,
sell at retail, gift or give away, use, explode, discharge, or in any manner
dispose of fireworks is prohibited within the limits established by law as the
limits of the districts in which such possession, storage, offer or exposure
for sale, retail sale, gifting, use, explosion, discharge, or disposal of
fireworks is prohibited in any area as established by applicable land-use and
zoning standards.
   Exception: Firework displays authorized pursuant to section 5608.1 for which
a permit has been issued.
   CHAPTER 80
   REFERENCED STANDARDS
   California Fire Code, Chapter 80 is amended as follows:
   NFPA.13-22: Standard for the installation of Sprinkler Systems
   NFPA 13, Amended additional Sections as follows:
   Revise Section 29.4.1 as follows:
   29.4.1 The installing contractor shall identify a hydraulically designed
sprinkler system with permanently raised, stamped or etched marked weatherproof
metal or ridged plastic sign secured with corrosion resistant wire, chain, or
other approved means. Such signs shall be placed at the alarm valve, dry pipe
valve, pre-action valve, or deluge valve supplying the corresponding
hydraulically designed area. Pipe schedule systems shall be provided with a
sign indicating that the system was designed and installed as a pipe schedule
system and the hazard classification(s) included in the design.
   APPENDIX C
   FIRE HYDRANT LOCATIONS AND DISTRIBUTION
   Section C103.1 of Appendix C is amended to read as follows:
   Section C103.1 Hydrant spacing. Fire apparatus access roads and public
streets providing required access to buildings in accordance with Section 503
of the California Fire Code shall be provided with one or more fire hydrants,
as determined by Section C102.1. Where more than one fire hydrant is required,
the distance between required fire hydrants shall be approved by the fire code
official.
   Section C103.2 of Appendix C is deleted.
   Section C103.3 of Appendix C is deleted.
   INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE
   APPENDIX A
   Section A104.7.2 of Appendix A of the International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code is amended to read as follows:
   Section A104.7.2 Permits. The Fire Code Official is authorized to stipulate
conditions for permits. Permits shall not be issued when public safety would be
at risk, as determined by the Fire Code Official.
   Section A104.11 of Appendix A of the International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section A104.11 - Tracer Bullets, Tracer Charges, Rockets and Model
Aircraft. Tracer bullets and tracer charges shall not be possessed, fired or
caused to be fired into or across hazardous fire areas. Rockets, model planes,
gliders and balloons powered with an engine, propellant or other feature liable
to start or cause a fire shall not be fired or projected into or across
hazardous fire areas.
   Section A104.12 of Appendix A of the International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section A104.12 Explosives and Blasting. Explosives shall not be possessed,
kept, stored, sold, offered for sale, given away, used, discharged, transported
or disposed of within hazardous fire areas except by permit from the Fire Code
Official.
   Section A104.13 of Appendix A of the International Wildland-Urban Interface
Code is hereby added and shall read as follows:
   Section A104.13 APIARIES. Lighted or smoldering material shall not be used
in connection with smoking bees in or upon hazardous fire areas except by
permit from the Fire Code Official.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.110 AUTHORITY TO ARREST AND ISSUE CITATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, Chief Officers, Fire Marshal, and Fire Inspectors
shall have authority to arrest or to cite any person who violates any provision
of this chapter involving the Fire Code or the California Building Standards
Code regulations relating to fire and panic safety as adopted by the State Fire
Marshal, in the manner provided for the arrest or release on citation and
notice to appear with respect to misdemeanors or infractions, as prescribed by
Chapters 5, 5c and 5d of Title 3, Part 2 of the Cal. Penal Code, including §
853.6, or as the same hereafter may be amended.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Town Council of the Town of Fairfax that the
immunities provided in Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 be applicable to aforementioned
officers and employees exercising their arrest or citation authority within the
course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.115 NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any violations of the Town Fire Code shall be deemed a public
nuisance.
   (B)   The owner of any property within the town has the primary
responsibility for keeping the property free of public nuisances. Tenants and
occupants, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the agents
of the owner.
   (C)   All entries and inspections shall be done in a lawful and reasonable
manner. If an owner, lawful occupant, or the respective agent thereof refuses
permission to enter and/or inspect, the Fire Chief of the Ross Valley Fire
Department or the duly authorized enforcement officer (collectively
hereinafter, "Fire Chief") may seek an administrative inspection warrant
pursuant to the procedures provided by Cal. Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50
through 1822.59, as may be amended from time to time, or the successor
provisions thereto.
   (D)   Whenever the Fire Chief believes a public nuisance exists, the Fire
Chief shall commence abatement proceedings.
   (E)   The Fire Chief shall cause a written notice to be issued to abate such
nuisance. Notice requiring the abatement of such nuisance shall be given by
mail to the owner of the property upon which, or in front of which, such
nuisance exists, at such owner's address as shown on the last equalized
Assessment Roll of the County of Marin. Such notice shall contain the
following:
      (1)   The street address and Assessor's Parcel Number for the affected
property.
      (2)   The date of the inspection of the property by the Fire Department
during which such nuisance was discovered.
      (3)   A description of the nuisance and its location on, or in front of,
the property.
      (4)   The abatement action which the owner is required to take and a time
limit for such abatement.
      (5)   A statement that if the owner fails to abate such nuisance within
the prescribed time and the Fire Department, or other town agent, will abate
the nuisance.
      (6)   A statement that if the Fire Department, or other town agent, is
required to abate the nuisance the cost of such abatement will be assessed as a
lien or special assessment against the property.
      (7)   A statement that the determination of the existence of a nuisance
may be appealed to the Fire Chief within the time limit to abate the nuisance.
   (F)   Abatement. Should the owner of the affected property (i) fail to abate
the nuisance; and (ii) fail to appeal the determination of the existence of a
nuisance to the Fire Chief within the period set forth in the notice requiring
abatement, the Fire Chief is authorized to perform such abatement and shall
keep an accurate account of the cost of such abatement, including
administrative costs.
   (G)   The Fire Chief shall mail written notice of the costs of the abatement
to the owner of the affected property who may, within fifteen days of the date
of such mailing, request a hearing by the Fire Chief with respect to such cost.
The Fire Chief shall hold a hearing within 30 days of receiving the request.
The Fire Chief may make any corrections or modifications if it deems the
proposed costs to be excessive or incorrect. The decision of the Fire Chief
shall be final.
   (H)   Assessment of cost. The cost of such abatement as finally fixed and
determined by the Fire Chief may be recovered in an appropriate civil action,
including costs of litigation and attorney fees, or may be enforced by a
nuisance abatement lien or special assessment against the parcel of land as
more particularly set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38773.1 and 38773.5,
respectively. At least 30 days prior to recordation of the nuisance abatement
lien, or submission of the report to the Tax Collector for collection of this
special assessment, the Fire Chief shall give notice to the record owner of the
property of the intent to collect abatement and related administrative costs
against the property. In addition to any information required by state law, the
notice shall include a summary of costs associated with enforcement of this
chapter and abatement of the nuisance.
   (I)   Emergency abatement. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
chapter, whenever the Fire Chief determines that any real property or any
building, structure or condition thereon is dangerous or constitutes an
immediate threat to public health or safety, the Fire Chief shall, without
being required to comply with the procedures of this section, immediately cause
such public nuisance to be abated, provided all other legal constitutional
requirements are complied with.
   (J)   Remedies are cumulative. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent the town from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a
public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available to it under
provisions of applicable ordinances or state law to correct hazards,
deficiencies or violations of law in real property in addition to or as
alternatives to the proceedings set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.120 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any violation of the Town Fire Code as adopted herein may be a
misdemeanor or infraction, and subject to the penalties set forth herein.
      (1)   The first citation, within a 12-month period, for a violation of
the Town Fire Code shall be treated as an infraction, punishable by a fine of
$100.
      (2)   Any subsequent citation within a 12-month period for any violation
of the Town Fire Code may be either a misdemeanor or an infraction, as
determined by the discretion of the Fire Chief. Misdemeanors shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in Sections 109 or 111 as applicable. Infractions
shall be punishable by the fines specified in Cal. Government Code § 36900.
   (B)   An administrative citation and fine may also be imposed in accordance
with
Chapter 1.10. The use of administrative citation and fine as means for
addressing violations of this code shall be in addition to criminal, civil or
other legal or equitable remedies established by law that may be pursued to
address violations of this code and may be used at the sole discretion of the
town. The amounts of the administrative citation fines are contained in §
1.10.120 of the Town Code.
   (C)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. Unless
otherwise specified, each day that a violation occurs or continues, after a
final notice has been delivered shall constitute a separate offense. The
application of both criminal and administrative penalties shall not be held to
prevent the enforcement or correction of prohibited conditions.
   (D)   Nothing contained in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be
construed or interpreted to prevent the Ross Valley Fire Department from
recovering all costs associated with a Ross Valley Fire Department response as
described in § 104.12 of the 2021 International Fire Code as amended.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.130 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person receiving an administrative citation may request an
administrative hearing pursuant to §
1.10.160 of the Town Code.
   (B)   Any person receiving a bill for Ross Valley Fire Department response
costs and expenses pursuant to Section 104.12 of the Fire Code, may file within
30 days after the date of mailing the bill, an administrative appeal against
imposition of the response costs and expenses. The appeal shall be in writing
and filed with the Fire Chief, and shall include a copy of the bill and
statement of the grounds for appeal. The Fire Chief shall conduct an
administrative hearing on the appeal, after giving the appellant at least ten
days' advance written notice of the time and place of the hearing. Within ten
days after the hearing the Chief shall give written notice of the decision to
the appellant, which decision shall be final. If the appeal is denied in part
or full, all amounts due shall be paid within 30 days after the mailing of the
notice of the decision of the hearing officer.
   (C)   Whenever the Fire Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to
grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the
Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Fire Chief to the Town Council within ten days from the date of the
decision. The Town Council shall conduct a hearing on appeal, after giving the
appellant at least ten days' advance written notice of the time and place of
the hearing. Within ten days after the hearing, the Town Council shall give
written notice of the decision to the appellant, which decision shall be final.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to corrective actions for the
clearance of brush or vegetative growth from structures as outlined in various
sections of this Code, or to matters for which an appeal is provided pursuant
to divisions (A) or (B) above.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.04.135 FEE AND PENALTY ADJUSTMENTS.
   The Town Council may, by resolution, revise the fees and penalties
established by this chapter.
(Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 804, passed 12-7-2016; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 8.06: INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE
Section
   
8.06.010   Adoption of the International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
   
8.06.011   Amendments to the 2006 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code
   
8.06.012   [Reserved]
   
8.06.013   [Reserved]
   
8.06.014   Authority to arrest and issue citations
   
8.06.015   Penalties
   
8.06.016   Appeals
   
8.06.017   Wildland-Urban Interface areas
   
8.06.020   Fee and penalty adjustments
§ 8.06.010 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE.
   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Fire
Marshal of the Ross Valley Fire Authority, being marked and designated as the
International Wildland-Urban Interface Code, 2006 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Wildland-Urban Interface
Code of the town for regulating and governing the mitigation of hazard to life
and property from the intrusion of fire from wildland exposures, fire from
adjacent structures and prevention of structure fires from spreading to
wildland fuels as herein provided; and further providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Wildland- Urban Interface
Code on file in the office of the Fire Marshal of the Ross Valley Fire
Authority are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully
set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in §
8.06.011 of which Code not less than one copy is filed in the office of the
Fire Chief of the Ross Valley Fire Authority and Building Official of the town,
and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein, and from the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the
provision thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the town.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007; Am. Ord. 774, passed 12-4-2013; Am. Ord. 842,
passed 12-4-2019; Am. Ord. 873, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 8.06.011 AMENDMENTS TO THE 2006 INTERNATIONAL WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE CODE.
   The 2006 International Wildland-Urban Interface Code is hereby amended and
changed in the following respects:
   Section 101.5 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
101.5 Additions or alterations. Additions or alterations may be made to any
building or structure without requiring the existing building or structure to
comply with all of the requirements of this code provided the additions or
alterations do not constitute a substantial remodel and, provided the addition
or alteration conforms to that required for a new building or structure.
Exception: Provisions of this code that specifically apply to existing
conditions are retroactive. See Sections 402.3, 601.1 and Appendix A.
Additions or alterations shall not be made to an existing building or structure
that will cause the existing building or structure to be in violation of any of
the provisions of this code nor shall such additions or alterations cause the
existing building or structure to become unsafe. An unsafe condition shall be
deemed to have been created if an addition or alteration will cause the
existing building or structure to become structurally unsafe or overloaded;
will not provide adequate access in compliance with the provisions of this code
or will obstruct existing exits or access; will create a fire hazard; will
reduce required fire resistance or will otherwise create conditions dangerous
to human life.
   Section 101.6 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
101.6 Maintenance. All buildings, structures, access, water supply, landscape
materials, vegetation, defensible space or other devices or safeguards required
by this code shall be maintained in conformance with the code edition under
which the same were installed. The owner or the owner's designated agent shall
be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, access roads,
water supplies, landscape materials and vegetation.
   Section 102.2 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
Section 102.2 Interpretations of Rules, Regulations and Standards. The Chief is
authorized to render interpretations of this code and to make and enforce rules
and supplemental regulations and to develop Fire Protection Standards to carry
out the application and intent of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules,
and regulations, and standards shall be in conformance with the intent and
purpose of this code. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be filed with
the Fire Chief of Ross Valley Fire Authority and shall be in effect immediately
thereafter. Additional copies shall be available for distribution to the
public.
   Section 103.3 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
103.3 Alternative materials or methods. The code official, in concurrence with
approval from the building official and fire chief, is authorized to approve
alternative materials or methods, provided that the code official finds that
the proposed design, use or operation satisfactorily complies with the intent
of this code and that the alternative material or method is, for the purpose
intended, at least equivalent to the level of quality, strength, effectiveness,
fire resistance, durability and safety prescribed by this code. Approvals under
the authority herein contained shall be subject to the approval of the building
official whenever the alternate material or method involves matters regulated
by the California Building Code.
The code official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted
to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. The details of
any action granting approval of an alternate shall be recorded and entered in
the files of the code enforcement agency.
For state fire marshal regulated occupancies, see Article 1 California Fire
Code.
   Section 104.1 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
104.1 General. To determine the suitability of alternative materials and
methods and to provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of this
code, there shall be and hereby is created a board of appeals consisting of
five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass judgment on
pertinent matters. The code official, building official and fire chief shall be
ex officio members, and the code official shall act as secretary of the board.
The board of appeals shall be appointed by the Town Council and shall hold
office at their discretion. The board shall adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render decisions and
findings in writing to the code official, with a duplicate copy to the
applicant. For state fire marshal regulated occupancies, see Article 1
California Fire Code.
   Section 105.2 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
105.2 Permits required. Unless otherwise exempted, no building or structure
regulated by this code shall be erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved,
removed, converted or demolished unless a separate permit for each building or
structure has first been obtained from the code official. For buildings or
structures erected for temporary uses, see Appendix A, Section A108.3, of this
code.
When required by the code official, a permit shall be obtained for the
following activities, operations, practices or functions within an wildland
urban interface area:
   1.   Automobile wrecking yard.
   2.   Candles and open flames in assembly areas.
   3.   Explosives or blasting agents.
   4.   Fireworks.
   5.   Flammable or combustible liquids.
   6.   Hazardous materials.
   7.   Liquefied petroleum gases.
   8.   Lumberyards.
   9.   Motor vehicle fuel-dispensing stations.
   10.   Open burning.
   11.   Pyrotechnical special effects material.
   12.   Tents, canopies and temporary membrane structures.
   13.   Tire storage.
   14.   Welding and cutting operations.
   15.   Implementation of a Fire Protection Plan.
   16.   Implementation of a Vegetation Management Plan.
   Section 105.8 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
105.8 Expiration. Every permit issued by the code official under the provisions
of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the
building, use or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180
days from the date of such permit, or if the building, use or work authorized
by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is
commenced for a period of 180 days.
When a permittee holding an unexpired permit is unable to commence work within
the time specified in this section, the permittee may make a written request
for an extension of time, which said written request shall set forth the
reasons and circumstances beyond the permittee's control that have prevented
the permittee from commencing work under the terms of the permit. If good cause
is shown by the written application, the Code Official may grant the requested
extension for a period not to exceed 180-days from the date of the expiration
of the original permit.
   Section 106.1 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
106.1 General. Plans, engineering calculations, diagrams and other data shall
be submitted in at least two (2) sets with each application for a permit. When
such plans are not prepared by an architect or engineer, the code official may
require the applicant submitting such plans or other data to demonstrate that
state law does not require that the plans be prepared by a licensed architect
or engineer. The code official may require plans, computations and
specifications to be prepared and designed by an architect or engineer licensed
by the state to practice as such even if not required by state law.
Exception: Submission of plans, calculations, construction inspection
requirements and other data, if it is found that the nature of the work applied
for is such that reviewing of plans is not necessary to obtain compliance with
this code.
   Section 106.3 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
106.3 Site plan. In addition to the requirements for plans in the California
Building Code, site plans shall include topography, width and percent of grade
of access roads, landscape and vegetation details, locations of structures or
building envelopes, existing or proposed overhead utilities, occupancy
classification of buildings, types of ignition-resistant construction of
buildings, structures and their appendages, roof classification of buildings,
and site water supply systems.
   Section 106.6 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
106.6 Other data and substantiation. When required by the code official, the
plans and specifications shall include classification of fuel loading,
according to the NWCG Aids to Determining Fuel Models for Estimating Fire
Behavior, current edition.
   Section 106.7 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
106.7 Vicinity plan. In addition to the requirements for site plans, plans
shall include details regarding the vicinity as required by the Code Official,
including other structures, slope, vegetation, fuel breaks, water supply
systems and access roads.
   Section 106.8 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
Retention of plans. All approved plans shall be maintained by the Code Official
for the life of the structure.
   Section 107.1.1 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
107.1.1 General. All construction or work for which a permit is required by
this code shall be subject to inspection by the code official and all such
construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection
purposes until approved by the code official.
It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain
accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the code official nor
the Town of Fairfax shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or
replacement of any material required to allow inspection.
Approval as a result of a plan review or an inspection shall not be construed
to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other
ordinances of the Town of Fairfax.
A survey of the lot may be required by the code official to verify that the
mitigation features are provided and the building or structure is located in
accordance with the approved plans.
   Section 108 of Chapter 1 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
SECTION 108 FINAL APPROVAL FOR OCCUPANCY
No building, structure or premises shall be used or occupied, and no change in
the existing occupancy classification of a building, structure, premise or
portion thereof shall be made until the code official has issued a "Final
Approval" for occupancy thereof. The "Final Approval" for occupancy shall not
be issued until the "Final Approval" for occupancy indicating that the project
is in compliance with this code has been issued by the code official.
Issuance of a "Final Approval" for occupancy shall not be construed as an
approval of a violation of the provisions of this code or of other pertinent
laws and ordinances of the Town of Fairfax. Certificates presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this code or other laws or
ordinances of the Town of Fairfax shall not be valid.
   Section 202 of Chapter 2 is hereby amended by adding the following
definitions:
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The officer or other designated authority charged with the
administration and enforcement of the California Building Code, or the building
officials duly authorized representative.
CDF DIRECTOR. The Director of the California Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection also known as Cal-Fire.
CODE OFFICIAL. The official designated by the Town of Fairfax to interpret and
enforce building standards of this code, shall be the Building Official. The
official designated by the Town of Fairfax to interpret and enforce fire and
life safety provisions of this code shall be the Fire Chief.
FINAL APPROVAL FOR OCCUPANCY. Written documentation from the Code Official that
the project or work for which a permit was issued has been completed in
conformance with requirements of this code.
FIRE PROTECTION PLAN. Document prepared for a specific project or development
proposed for a Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area setting forth measures taken
to minimize and mitigate potential for loss from wildfire exposure.
The Fire Protection Plan shall be in accordance with this chapter and the
California Fire Code, Article 86A. When required by the enforcing agency for
the purposes of granting modifications, a fire protection plan shall be
submitted. Only locally adopted ordinances that have been filed with the
California Building Standards Commission in accordance with Section 101.14 or
the Department of Housing and Community Development in accordance with Section
101.15 shall apply.
FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONES. Geographical areas designated in California Public
Resources Codes Sections 4201 through 4204 and classified as Very High, High,
or Moderate in State Responsibility Areas or as Local Agency Very High Fire
Hazard Severity Zones designated pursuant to California Government Code
Sections 51175 through 51189. See California Fire Code Article 86.
The California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Section 1280 entitles the maps of
these geographical areas as
"Maps of the Fire Hazard Severity Zones in the State Responsibility Area of
California."
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. As defined in the California Fire Code.
HEAVY TIMBER CONSTRUCTION. As described in the California Building Code.
IGNITION-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any product which, when tested in accordance with
UBC Standard 8-1 for a period of 30 minutes, shall have a flame spread of not
over 25 and show no evidence of progressive combustion. In addition, the flame
front shall not progress more than 10½ feet (3200 mm) beyond the centerline of
the burner at any time during the test. Materials shall pass the accelerated
weathering test and be identified as Exterior type, in accordance with UBC
Standard 23-4. All materials shall bear identification showing the fire
performance rating thereof. Such identification shall be issued by a testing
facility recognized by the State Fire Marshal having a service for inspection
of materials at the factory.
   Note: Fire-Retardant-Treated Wood as defined in CBC Section 207 meets the
intent of the above definition. The enforcing agency may use other definitions
of Ignition Resistant Material that reflect wildfire exposure to building
materials and / or the materials performance in resisting ignition.
LOCAL AGENCY VERY HIGH FIRE HAZARD SEVERITY ZONE. Area designated by a local
agency upon the recommendation of the CDF Director pursuant to Government Code
Sections 51177(c), 51178 and 51179 that is not a state responsibility area and
where a local agency, Town, county, Town and county, or district is responsible
for fire protection.
NWCG. National Wildfire Coordinating Group.
STATE RESPONSIBILITY AREA. Lands that are classified by the Board of Forestry
pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 4125 where the financial
responsibility of preventing and suppressing forest fires is primarily the
responsibility of the state.
SUBSTANTIAL REMODEL. The renovation of any structure, which combined with any
additions to the structure, affects a floor area which exceeds fifty percent of
the existing floor area of the structure. When any changes are made in the
building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders, floor or ceiling joists and
coverings, roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles or retaining walls
or similar components, the floor area of all rooms affected by such changes
shall be included in computing floor areas for purposes of applying this
definition. This definition does not apply to the replacement and upgrading of
residential roof coverings.
VMP. Shall mean Vegetation Management Plan.
WILDFIRE. An uncontrolled fire spreading through vegetative fuels that
threatens to destroy life, property, or resources as defined in Public
Resources Code Sections 4103 and 4104.
WILDFIRE EXPOSURE. Either one or a combination of radiant heat, convective
heat, direct flame contact and burning embers being projected by vegetation
fire to a structure and its immediate environment.
WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE FIRE AREA. A geographical area identified by the state
as a "Fire Hazard Severity Zone" in accordance with the Public Resources Code
Sections 4201 through 4204 and Government Code Sections 51175 through 51189, or
other areas designated by the enforcing agency as being at significant risk
from wildfires.
See Section 706A for the applicable referenced Sections of the Government Code
and the Public Resources Code.
   Section 202 of Chapter 2 is hereby amended by deleting the following
definitions:
FUEL, HEAVY. Vegetation consisting of round wood 3 to 8 inches (76 to 203 mm)
in diameter. See fuel models G, I, J, K and U described in Appendix D.
FUEL, LIGHT. Vegetation consisting of herbaceous plants and round wood less
than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) in diameter. See fuel models A, C, E, L, N, P, R and S
described in Appendix D.
FUEL, MEDIUM. Vegetation consisting of round wood 1/4 to 3 inches (6.4 mm to 76
mm) in diameter. See fuel models B, D, F, H, O, Q and T described in Appendix
D.
IGNITION-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION, CLASS 1. A schedule of additional requirements
for construction in wildland urban interface areas based on extreme fire
hazard.
IGNITION-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION, CLASS 2. A schedule of additional requirements
for construction in wildland urban interface areas based on high fire hazard.
IGNITION-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION, CLASS 3. A schedule of additional requirements
for construction in wildland urban interface areas based on moderate fire
hazard.
   Section 302.1 of Chapter 3 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
302.1 Declaration. The Town Council shall declare the wildland urban interface
areas within the Town of Fairfax. The wildland urban interface areas shall be
based on the findings of fact as prescribed by the California Health and Safety
Code. The wildland urban interface area boundary shall correspond to natural or
man-made features including but not limited to an assessment of fuel types and
physical characteristics affecting wildland fire behavior.
   Section 402.1.1 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
402.1.1 Access. New subdivisions, as determined by the Town of Fairfax, shall
be provided with fire apparatus access roads in accordance with the California
Fire Code and access requirements in accordance with Section 403.
   Section 402.2.1 is hereby deleted and the following language substituted in
its place:
402.2.1 Access. Individual structures hereafter constructed, substantial
remodels, or relocated into or within wildland urban interface areas shall be
provided with fire apparatus access in accordance with the California Fire Code
and driveways in accordance with Section 403.2. Marking of fire protection
equipment shall be provided in accordance with Section 403.5 and address
markers shall be provided in accordance with Section 403.6.
   Section 402.2.2 is hereby deleted and the following language substituted in
its place:
402.2.2 Water supply. Individual structures hereafter constructed, substantial
remodels, or relocated into or within wildland urban interface areas shall be
provided with a conforming water supply in accordance with Section 404.
Exception: Buildings containing only private garages, carports, and sheds with
a floor area of not more than 120 square feet.
   Section 403.1 is hereby deleted and the following language substituted in
its place:
403.1 Restricted access. Where emergency vehicle access is restricted because
of secured access roads or driveways or where immediate access is necessary for
life saving or firefighting purposes, the code official is authorized to
require a key access to be installed in an accessible location. The key access
shall be of a type approved by the code official and shall contain keys or an
approved key switch to gain necessary access as required by the code official.
   Section 403.2 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
403.2 Driveways. Driveways shall be provided when any portion of an exterior
wall of the first story of a building is located more than 150 feet from a fire
apparatus access road. Driveways shall provide a minimum unobstructed width of
16 feet and a minimum unobstructed height of 13 feet 6 inches. Driveways in
excess of 150 feet in length shall be provided with turnarounds. Driveways in
excess of 300 feet in length and less than 20 feet in width shall be provided
with turnouts in addition to turnarounds. A driveway shall not serve in excess
of five dwelling units.
Exception: When such driveways meet the requirements for an access road in
accordance with the California Fire Code.
Driveway turnarounds shall have inside turning radii of not less than 27 feet
and outside turning radii of not less than 45 feet. Driveways that connect with
a road or roads at more than one point may be considered as having a turnaround
if all changes of direction meet the radii requirements for driveway
turnarounds. Driveway turnouts shall be an all-weather road surface at least 10
feet wide and 30 feet long, not including the approach or departure ramps.
Driveway turnouts shall be located as required by the code official. Vehicle
load limits shall be posted at both entrances to bridges on driveways and
private roads. Design loads for bridges shall be established by the code
official.
   Section 403.6 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
403.6 Address markers. All buildings shall have a permanently posted address
clearly visible from the street with numerals illuminated and contrasting color
to their background. Where structures are not visible from the street,
addresses shall also be placed at each driveway entrance and be visible from
both directions of travel along the road.
In all cases, the address shall be posted at the beginning of construction and
shall be maintained thereafter, and the address shall be visible and legible
from the road on which the address is located.
Address signs along one-way roads shall be visible from both the direction of
travel and the opposite direction. Where multiple addresses are required at a
single driveway, they shall be mounted on a single post, and additional signs
shall be posted at locations where driveways divide.
Where a roadway provides access solely to a single commercial or industrial
business, the address sign shall be placed at the nearest road intersection
providing access to that site.
   Section 403.7 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
403.7 Grade. The gradient for fire apparatus access roads and driveways shall
not exceed 18%.
   Section 404.1 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
404.1 General. An approved water source shall have an adequate water supply for
the use of the fire protection service to protect buildings and structures from
exterior fire sources or to suppress structure fires within the wildland urban
interface area of the Town of Fairfax in accordance with this section.
Exception: Buildings containing only private garages, carports, and sheds with
a floor area of not more than 120 square feet.
   Section 404.2 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
404.2 Water sources. The point at which a water source is available for use
shall be located not more than 350 feet from the building and be approved by
the code official. The distance shall be measured along an unobstructed line of
travel. Water sources shall comply with the following:
1.   Man-made water sources shall have a minimum usable water volume as
determined by the adequate water supply needs in accordance with Section 404.5.
This water source shall be equipped with an approved hydrant. The water level
of the water source shall be maintained by rainfall, water pumped from a well,
water hauled by a tanker, or by seasonal high water of a stream or river. The
design, construction, location, water level maintenance, access, and access
maintenance of man-made water sources shall be approved by the code official.
2.   Natural water sources shall have a minimum annual water level or flow
sufficient to meet the adequate water supply needs in accordance with Section
404.5. This water level or flow shall not be rendered unusable because of
freezing. This water source shall have an approved draft site with an approved
hydrant. Adequate water flow and rights for access to the water source shall be
ensured in a form acceptable to the code official.
   Section 404.5 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
404.5 Adequate water supply. Adequate water supply shall be determined for
purposes of initial attack and flame front control as follows:
1.   One- and two-family dwellings. The required water supply for one- and two-
family dwellings shall be from a municipal supply. Required flow rates and
duration shall be determined by the code official.
Exception: If the cost of providing a municipal supply exceeds 10% of the total
construction costs (based on the building permit valuation and required site
improvements), an on-site private fire protection water supply (minimum storage
requirement to be determined by the code official and local standards, but not
less than 3,000 gallons plus 2,000 gallons dedicated to automatic fire
sprinklers and domestic water) may be permitted. If a private, on-site water
supply is installed, a fee in an amount up to and including 5% of total
building construction cost may be charged for the purpose of upgrading existing
municipal fire flow.
2.   Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings. The water supply
required for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings shall be as
determined by the code official.
Exception: If the cost of providing a municipal supply exceeds 10% of the total
construction costs (based on the building permit valuation and required site
improvements), an on-site private fire protection water supply (minimum storage
requirement to be determined by the code official and local standards, but not
less than 3,000 gallons plus 2,000 gallons dedicated to automatic fire
sprinklers and domestic water) may be permitted. If a private, on-site water
supply is installed, a fee in an amount up to and including 5% of total
building construction cost may be charged for the purpose of upgrading existing
municipal fire flow.
   Section 404.9 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
404.9 Testing and maintenance. Water sources, draft sites, hydrants and other
fire protection equipment required by this code shall be subject to periodic
tests as determined and required by the code official. All such equipment
installed under the provisions of this code shall be maintained in an operative
condition at all times and shall be repaired or replaced where defective.
Additions, repairs, alterations and servicing of such fire protection equipment
and resources shall be in accordance with approved standards and shall not be
made without approval of the Code Official.
   Section 404.10.3 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
404.10.3 Standby power. Stationary water supply facilities within the wildland
urban interface area that are dependent on electrical power to meet adequate
water supply demands shall provide standby power systems in accordance with the
CA Electrical Code to ensure that an uninterrupted water supply is maintained.
The standby power source shall be capable of providing power for a minimum of
two hours.
   Exceptions:
   1.   When approved by the code official, a standby power supply is not
required where the primary power service to the stationary water supply
facility is underground.
   2.   A standby power supply is not required where the stationary water
supply facility serves no more than one single-family dwelling.
   Section 405.2 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
405.2 Content. The plan shall be based upon a site-specific wildfire risk
assessment that includes considerations of location, topography, aspect,
flammable vegetation, climatic conditions and fire history. The plan shall
address water supply, access, building ignition and fire-resistance factors,
fire protection systems and equipment, defensible space and vegetation
management. In addition to considerations included in this section, Fire
Protection Plans shall conform to Standards developed by the Code Official.
   Section 405.4 of Chapter 4 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
405.4 Plan retention. The fire protection plan shall be retained by the code
official for the life of the building.
   Section 406 of Chapter 4 is hereby added to read as follows:
   SECTION 406 Vegetation Management Plan
406.1 General. When required by the code official, a vegetation management plan
(VMP) shall be prepared.
406.2 Content. The VMP consists of two forms: (1) blue line drawings; and (2) a
text narrative describing specific and applicable contributing factors in the
selection and design of the plan.
   VMP Contents
   The VMP shall include at the minimum:
   1.   The entire "plan content" elements described in narrative form.
   2.   Not less than two (2) complete plan sets should be submitted to the
Code Official for review.
   3.   The Hazard Assessment Matrix
   4.   The list of plants to be used and materials consistent with the
approved plant list.
   5.   Two (2) sets of blue prints showing the house, zone, plant type and
spacing.
406.3 Cost. The cost of vegetation management plan preparation and review shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
406.4 Plan retention. The vegetation management plan shall be retained by the
code official for the life of the building.
   Chapter 5 is hereby deleted in its entirety.
   Section 602 of Chapter 6 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
Section 602 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems
An approved automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all
occupancies, in new buildings, and substantial remodels. The installation of
the automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be in accordance with nationally
recognized standards and Fire Protection Standards.
   Section 603 of Chapter 6 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
   Section 603 Defensible Space
603.1 Objective. Provisions of this section are intended to modify the fuel
load, type, and configuration in areas adjacent to structures to create a
defensible space.
603.2 Fuel modification. In order to qualify as a conforming defensible space,
fuel modification shall be provided as specified in Fire Protection Standards
approved by the Chief. Distances specified in Fire Protection Standards may be
modified by the code official because of a site-specific analysis based on
local conditions and the fire protection plan. Persons owning, leasing,
controlling, operating or maintaining buildings or structures requiring
defensible spaces are responsible for modifying or removing non fire-resistive
vegetation on the property owned, leased or controlled by said person. If the
required defensible space requires fuel modification that exceeds the
boundaries of the property owned, leased or controlled by said person, said
person shall obtain the right to modify or remove non fire-resistive vegetation
on the adjacent property to the extent required. If such permission cannot be
obtained from adjacent property owners, the building or structure shall be
modified to meet construction requirements consistent with the defensible space
that can be maintained within the boundaries of the property owned, leased or
controlled.
Trees are allowed within the defensible space, provided the horizontal distance
between crowns of adjacent trees and crowns of trees and structures, overhead
electrical facilities or unmodified fuel is not less than 10 feet. Deadwood and
litter shall be regularly removed from trees.
Where ornamental vegetative fuels or cultivated ground cover, such as green
grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants are used as ground cover, they are
allowed to be within the designated defensible space, provided they do not form
a means of transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
   Table 603.2 of Chapter 6 is hereby deleted.
   Figure 603.2 of Chapter 6 is hereby deleted.
   Section 606.1 of Chapter 6 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
606.1 General. The storage of LP-gas and the installation and maintenance of
pertinent equipment shall be in accordance with the Fire Protection Standard –
Ross Valley Fire Department Standard.
   Section 606.2 of Chapter 6 is hereby deleted and the following language
substituted in its place:
606.2 Location of containers. LP-gas containers shall be located within the
defensible space in accordance with the Fire Protection Standard – Ross Valley
Fire Department Standard.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 8.06.012 [RESERVED].
§ 8.06.013 [RESERVED].
§ 8.06.014 AUTHORITY TO ARREST AND ISSUE CITATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief, Chief Officers, Fire Marshal, and Fire Inspectors
shall have authority to arrest or to cite any person who violates any provision
of this chapter involving the ICC Wildland-Urban Interface Code or the
California Building Standards Code relating to fire and panic safety as adopted
by the State Fire Marshal, in the manner provided for the arrest or release on
citation and notice to appear with respect to misdemeanors or infractions, as
prescribed by Cal. Penal Code Title 3, Part 2, Chapters 5, 5c and 5d including
§ 853.6, or as the same hereafter may be amended.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Town Council that the immunities provided in
Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 be applicable to aforementioned officers and employees
exercising their arrest or citation authority within the course and scope of
their employment pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   In lieu of the above procedures, the town shall also have the
authority to proceed under any local ordinance it may have adopted for purposes
of the administrative enforcement of its Code.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 8.06.015 PENALTIES.
   (A)   The violations of this Code as adopted herein are misdemeanors/
infractions and are subject to the penalties set forth herein.
   (B)   The first citation, within a 12-month period, for violations of the
ICC Wildland-Urban Interface Code and any amendments adopted herein shall be
treated as a civil penalty payable directly to the Ross Valley Fire Department
and is set at $150 plus the actual costs of all inspections required to gain
compliance at the rate set from time to time by the Fire Department. Said civil
penalties shall be a debt owed to the Ross Valley Fire Department by the person
responsible for the violation within 30 days after the date of mailing of the
citation unless an appeal is filed as provided in §
8.06.016. Upon failure to pay the civil penalty when due, the responsible
person shall be liable in a civil action brought by the Ross Valley Fire
Department for such civil penalty and costs of the litigation, including
reasonable attorney's fees.
   (C)   Any subsequent citations within a 12-month period for any violations
of this Code and any amendments adopted herein shall be misdemeanors/
infractions, and shall be subject to the penalties set forth herein.
   (D)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue and all such persons shall be required to
correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time and, when
not otherwise specified each day that a violation occurs or continues, after a
final notice has been delivered shall constitute a separate offense. The
application of both penalties shall not be held to prevent the enforced
correction of prohibited conditions.
   (E)   Nothing contained in divisions (A) through (F) of this section shall
be construed or interpreted to prevent the town from recovering all costs
associated with a Fire Department enforcement as described in the ICC Wildland-
Urban Interface Code, California Building Code, or the California Fire Code.
   (F)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
public nuisance and shall entitle the Fire Department to collect the costs of
abatement and related administrative costs by a nuisance abatement lien as more
particularly set forth in Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.1, and by special assessment
to be collected by the County Tax Collector as more particularly set forth in
Cal. Gov't Code § 38773.5. At least 30 days prior to recordation of the lien,
or submission of the report to the Tax Collector for collection of this special
assessment, the record owner shall receive notice from the Chief of the Fire
Department's intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs
associated with enforcement of this chapter and abatement of the nuisance. The
notice shall include a summary of costs associated with enforcement of this
chapter and abatement of the nuisance. The property owner may appeal the
Chief's decision to the Town Council within 15 days of the date of the notice
and request a public hearing prior to recordation of the lien or submission of
the report to the County Tax Collector for collection of the special
assessment. In addition to the foregoing, the Fire Department is authorized to
prosecute a civil action to collect such abatement costs from the property
owner or other person in possession or control of the affected property, and
shall be entitled to recover such abatement costs, together with the cost of
litigation, including reasonable attorney's fees. The provisions of this
section shall also apply to corrective actions for the clearance of brush or
vegetative growth from structures as outlined in Appendix A of this Code and
Section 16.2 of Appendix II-A of the 2000 Uniform Fire Code as amended.
   (G)   In lieu of the above procedures, the town shall also have the
authority to proceed under any local ordinance it may have adopted for purposes
of the administrative enforcement of its Code.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 8.06.016 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person receiving a citation for a civil penalty pursuant to §
8.06.015(B) may file within 30 days after the date of mailing the citation or
bill, an administrative appeal against imposition of the civil penalty or
response costs and expense. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the
Fire Chief, and shall include a copy of the bill and statement of the grounds
for appeal. The Fire Chief shall conduct an administrative hearing on the
appeal, after giving the appellant at least ten days' advance written notice of
the time and place of the hearing. Within ten days after the hearing the Chief
shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant, which decision
shall be final. If the appeal is denied in part or full, all amounts due shall
be paid within 30 days after the mailing of the notice of the decision of the
hearing officer.
   (B)   Whenever the Chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant
a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do
not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been
misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision
of the Chief to the Board of Directors of the Ross Valley Fire Authority within
ten days from the date of the decision. The provision of this section shall not
apply to corrective actions for the clearance of brush or vegetative growth
from structures as outlined in Item 16.2 of Appendix II-A of the 2000 Uniform
Fire Code as amended in §
8.06.015, or to matters for which an appeal is provided pursuant to division
(A) above.
   (C)   In lieu of the above procedures, the town shall also have the
authority to proceed under any local ordinance it may have adopted for purposes
of the administrative enforcement of its Code.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 8.06.017 WILDLAND-URBAN INTERFACE AREAS.
   Specific boundaries of natural or man-made features of wildland-urban
interface areas shall be as shown on the wildland area interface map on file
with the Town Clerk and hereby approved by the Town Council.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 8.06.020 FEE AND PENALTY ADJUSTMENTS.
   The Town Council may, by resolution, revise the fees and penalties
established by this
Chapter 8.06.
(Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
CHAPTER 8.08: SOLID WASTE, RECYCLABLES, AND ORGANIC WASTE
Section
   
8.08.010   Definitions
   
8.08.020   Zones
   
8.08.030   Charges
   
8.08.040   Collection containers
   
8.08.050   Duties of owners and occupants
   
8.08.060   Mechanical garbage disposal
   
8.08.070   Duty of authorized collector
   
8.08.080   Unlawful disposal
   
8.08.090   Unlawful collection
   
8.08.100   Dead animals
   
8.08.110   Contract/franchise agreement
   
8.08.120   Violation; penalty
   
8.08.130   Mandatory garbage, recycling and organic materials collection
   
8.08.130-1   Findings
   
8.08.130-2   Solid waste collection service requirements
   
8.08.130-3   Commercial generator requirements
   
8.08.130-4   Authorized collectors
   
8.08.130-5   Recycling and organic materials collection services
   
8.08.130-6   Waivers
   
8.08.130-7   Self-haulers
   
8.08.130-8   Special event solid waste management
   
8.08.130-9   Ownership/scavenging of recyclable materials and organic materials
   
8.08.130-10   Reporting
   
8.08.130-11   Commercial edible food generator requirements
   
8.08.130-12   Edible food recovery organization and service requirements
   
8.08.130-13   Implementation and enforcement
   
8.08.130-14   Other actions and remedies
   
8.08.130-15   Forms, regulations and guidelines
§ 8.08.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (commencing with
Section 40000 of the Cal. Public Resources Code), as amended, including but not
limited to, the Jobs and Recycling Act of 2011 (AB 341), SB 1016 (Chapter 343,
Statutes of 2008), the Mandatory Commercial Organics Recycling Act of 2014 (AB
1826), and the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants Bill of 2016 (SB 1383), and as
implemented by the regulations of CalRecycle.
   ANAEROBIC DIGESTION or AD. The biological decomposition of organic matter
with little or no oxygen. The anaerobic digestion technology that will
initially be utilized by the franchised hauler will be that of the Central
Marin Sanitation Agency (a public-operated treatment works) to produce energy
and to reduce the volume of solid waste that must be landfilled.
   AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR. The individual, persons, firm or corporation
collecting, and delivering for disposal, recycling or processing solid waste
originating within the town and doing so under a contract, permit or franchise
agreement with the town. AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR may be referred to as the
franchisee or franchised collector.
   BULKY WASTE. Large items of solid waste such as appliances (white goods), e-
waste (except for universal waste), furniture, tires, carpets, mattresses and
similar large items, large auto parts, trees, branches, stumps, and other
oversize wastes whose large size precludes or complicates their handling by
normal collection, processing, or disposal methods. It does not include
abandoned vehicles or household hazardous waste.
   CALRECYCLE. California Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery, which
is the department designated with responsibility for developing, implementing,
and enforcing the SB 1383 Regulations.
   CCR. The California Code of Regulations. CCR references in this chapter are
preceded with a number that refers to the relevant Title of the CCR (e.g., "14
CCR" refers to Title 14 of CCR).
   COLLECTION. To take physical possession of solid waste at, and remove from,
the place of generation for transport to a solid waste facility or other
recovery activity.
   COMMERCIAL BUSINESS or COMMERCIAL. A firm, partnership, proprietorship,
joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-profit or
nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family dwelling with
five or more dwelling units, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
(6). A multi-family residential dwelling that consists of less than five
dwelling units is not "commercial" for the purposes of this chapter.
   COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A Tier One or a Tier Two commercial edible
food generator as defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) and (a)(74). Food
recovery organizations and food recovery services are not COMMERCIAL EDIBLE
FOOD GENERATORS.
   COMMUNITY COMPOSTING. Any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in 14
CCR Section 17855(a)(4), or, as otherwise defined by 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
(8).
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS or C&D. Used or discarded materials
resulting from construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, demolition,
excavation or construction clean-up operations on any pavement or structure.
   CONTAINER or COLLECTION CONTAINER. For the purpose of this chapter, any bin,
box or cart used for the purpose of holding solid waste for collection.
   DEBRIS BOX. Any ten to 40 cubic yard container, or any compactor provided by
a solid waste generator, placed in the public right-of-way, on town property,
private property, or elsewhere in the service area, which is procured by a
solid waste generator for their use in the collection of their solid waste.
Debris boxes are serviced by means of lifting the entire container, including
all contents, onto a designated collection vehicle.
   DESIGNATED COLLECTION LOCATION. The place where an authorized collector has
contracted with either the town or a private entity to pick up separated
garbage, recyclable materials and organic materials collection containers. This
location will customarily be the curbside of a residential neighborhood or the
service alley of a commercial (or multi-family) enterprise.
   DIRECTOR. The Town Manager of the Town of Fairfax, or his or her designee.
   DISPOSAL. The final disposition of solid waste at a solid waste facility
permitted for disposal.
   DIVERSION. Activities reducing or eliminating the amount of solid waste from
solid waste disposal, and which return these materials to use in the form of
raw materials for new, reused, or reconstituted products, which meet the
quality standards necessary for commercial use, or for other purposes of reuse.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms with internal access between all rooms,
which provide complete independent living facilities for at least one family,
including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, bathing, and
sanitary facilities. Cooking facilities for purposes of this chapter shall be
defined as any combination of the following: sink, refrigerator, cupboard and/
or storage, stove, oven (including microwave and convection).
   EDIBLE FOOD. Food intended for human consumption, or as otherwise defined in
14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this chapter or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18), EDIBLE FOOD is not solid waste if it is
recovered and not discarded. Nothing in this chapter or in 14 CCR, Division 7,
Chapter 12 requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food that does not
meet the food safety requirements of the California Retail Food Code.
   ENFORCEMENT ACTION. An action of the town to address non-compliance with
this chapter including, but not limited to, issuing administrative notices,
citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies.
   FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION. An entity that engages in the collection or
receipt of edible food from commercial edible food generators and distributes
that edible food to the public for food recovery either directly or through
other entities or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(25),
including, but not limited to: A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the
Cal. Health and Safety Code; a nonprofit charitable organization as defined in
Section 113841 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code; and, a nonprofit charitable
temporary food facility as defined in Section 113842 of the Cal. Health and
Safety Code.
   FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE. A person or entity that collects and transports
edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food recovery
organization or other entities for food recovery, or as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(26). A FOOD RECOVERY SERVICE is not a commercial edible
food generator for the purposes of this chapter.
   FOOD WASTE. Food scraps and trimmings and other putrescible waste that
result from food production, preparation, cooking, storage, consumption or
handling. FOOD WASTE includes but is not limited to meat, fish and dairy waste,
fruit and vegetable waste and grain waste. FOOD WASTE does not include exempt
waste.
   FRANCHISE AGREEMENT. an agreement between the town and the authorized
collector for the collection and delivery of solid waste for disposal,
recycling or processing originating within the town.
   GARBAGE. All non-recyclable packaging and other waste attributed to normal
activities of a service unit. Garbage must be generated by and at the service
unit wherein the garbage is collected. GARBAGE does not include recyclable
materials, organic materials, construction and demolition debris, large items,
e-waste, universal waste, hazardous waste, household hazardous waste or exempt
waste.
   GENERATOR(S). For the purpose of this chapter, GENERATOR means a person or
entity, including a commercial generator or residential generator who is
responsible for the initial creation of recyclable materials and/or organic
materials, or as otherwise defined as "Organic Waste Generator" in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(48). GENERATOR may also include tenants, property managers for
facilities with leased space, employees and contractors of a generator, as well
as a responsible party for special events. GENERATOR also includes the town,
its facilities, its non-residential properties and its special events,
including sponsors and/or co-sponsors.
   HAULER. A person who collects material from a generator and delivers it to a
reporting entity, end user, or a destination outside of the state. HAULER means
the authorized collectors, food waste self-haulers, and self-haulers as defined
in this chapter. A person who transports material from reporting entity to
another person is a transporter, not a hauler.
   INSPECTION. A site visit where the town, its designee, or the authorized
collector reviews records, containers, and an a entity's collection, handling,
recycling, or disposal of solid waste or edible food handling to determine if
the entity is complying with requirements set forth in this chapter, or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(35).
   MECHANICAL GARBAGE DISPOSAL. Any garbage disposal unit, approved by the
Health Officer of the town, which grinds or prepares garbage to such an extent
as to permit the garbage to be disposed of through the sewer drains.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS or MULTI-FAMILY. Five or more residential
dwelling units located on a single parcel of land and any mobile home park
located in the town utilizing a common garbage bin for the accumulation and
set-out of garbage.
   ORGANIC MATERIAL PROCESSING FACILITY. Any facility selected by the
authorized collector that is approved by the town, or specifically designated
by the town, operated and legally permitted for the purpose of receiving and
processing organic materials.
   ORGANIC MATERIALS or ORGANIC WASTE. Solid wastes containing material
originated from living organisms and their metabolic waste products, including
but not limited to food waste, green material, landscape and pruning waste,
organic textiles and carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and
writing paper, manure, biosolids, digestate, and sludges or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(46).
   PREMISES. Includes a tract or parcel of land with or without habitable
buildings or appurtenant structures. For purposes of this chapter, the word
PREMISES includes residential and commercial uses of the land, whether owned,
leased, subleased, including every dwelling house, dwelling unit, apartment
house or multiple-dwelling building, trailer or mobile home park, store,
restaurant, rooming house, hotel, motel, office building, department store,
manufacturing, processing or assembling shop or plant, warehouse and every
other place or premises where any person resides, or any business is carried on
or conducted within the town.
   PROHIBITED CONTAINER CONTAMINANTS. Includes (1) discarded materials placed
in the designated recyclables container that are not identified as acceptable
source separated recyclables; (2) discarded materials placed in the designated
organic materials collection container that are not identified as acceptable
source separated organic materials; and (3) discarded materials placed in the
garbage container that are acceptable source separated recyclables and/or
source separated organic materials, and (4) excluded waste placed in any
container.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS or RECYCLABLES. Any material designated to be separated
from the waste stream for purposes of recycling. This designation shall be made
by the town and the franchisee/authorized collector based upon the provisions
of the franchise agreement, on good public practice, ability to receive an
acceptable economic return, and feasibility of separating the material from the
waste stream at the point of collection. RECYCLABLE MATERIALS may include, but
are not limited to, paper, glass, cardboard, plastics, ferrous metal, and
aluminum.
   RECYCLING. The process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and
reconstituting materials that would otherwise become garbage and returning them
for use or reuse in the form of raw materials for new, used or reconstituted
products which meet the quality standard necessary to be used in the
marketplace. RECYCLING does not include transformation as defined in Cal.
Public Resources Code § 40201. (14 CCR Section 17225.54).
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The individual or entity responsible for the generator's
management of solid waste, recyclable materials and/or organic materials at the
generator's commercial facility or special event.
   SB 1383. SB 1383 (Chapter 395, Statutes of 2016), establishing methane
emissions reduction targets in a statewide effort to reduce emissions of short-
lived climate pollutants as amended, supplemented, superseded, and replaced
from time to time.
   SB 1383 REGULATIONS. The regulations developed by CalRecycle and contained
within 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and the amended portions of 14 CCR and 27
CCR.
   SELF-HAULER. A person who hauls recyclables or organic waste or recovered
material they have generated using the generator's own vehicles, equipment and
employees to another person. SELF-HAULER also includes a person who back-hauls
waste. "Back-haul" means generating and transporting organic materials to a
destination owned and operated by the generator using the generator's own
employees, vehicles and equipment.
   SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40191, which defines solid waste as all putrescible and non-putrescible solid
and semisolid wastes, including garbage, recyclable materials, organic
materials, construction and demolition debris, bulky waste, discarded home and
industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid wastes,
and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes with the exception that solid
waste does not include any of the following wastes: (1) hazardous waste, as
defined in the Cal. Public Resources Code § 40141; (2) radioactive waste
regulated pursuant to the State Radiation Control Law (Chapter 8 (commencing
with § 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code);
and, (3) medical waste regulated pursuant to the State Medical Waste Management
Act (Part 14 (commencing with § 117600) of Division 104 of the Cal. Health and
Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a solid waste
landfill, as defined in Cal. Public Resources Code §
40195.1. Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be solid waste shall
be regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the Cal. Public Resources Code.
Recyclable materials and organic materials are a part of solid waste.
   SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE. A business enterprise in any form that
obtains or receives solid waste from a commercial generator, residential
generator, or other non-residential establishment for the primary purpose of
removal or hauling such material for ultimate disposal or recycling.
   SOLID WASTE FACILITY. A permitted solid waste transfer or processing station
including material recovery facilities, a composting facility, a gasification
facility, a transformation facility, an engineered municipal solid waste
conversion facility, and a disposal facility. SOLID WASTE FACILITY additionally
includes a solid waste operation that may be carried out pursuant to an
enforcement agency tier notification, as provided in regulations adopted by
CalRecycle, or otherwise set forth in the Act.
   SOURCE REDUCTION. Any action which causes a net reduction in the generation
of solid waste. SOURCE REDUCTION includes, but is not limited to, reducing the
use of non-recyclable materials, replacing disposable materials and products
with reusable materials and products, reducing packaging, reducing the amount
of yard wastes generated, establishing garbage rate structures with incentives
to reduce the amount of wastes that generator produce, and increasing the
efficiency of the use of paper, cardboard, glass, metal, plastic, and other
materials. SOURCE REDUCTION does not include steps taken after the material
becomes solid waste or actions which would impact air or water resources in
lieu of land, including, but not limited to, transformation.
   SOURCE SEPARATE. The process of removing recyclable materials and organic
materials from solid waste at the place of generation, prior to collection, and
placing such materials into separate containers designated for recyclable
materials and organic materials, or as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
17402.5(b)(4).
   SPECIAL EVENT. A community, public, commercial, recreational or social event
which may serve food or drink, and which may require a permit from the town.
SPECIAL EVENTS may include the temporary or periodic use of a public street,
publicly owned site or facility, or public park.
   TIER ONE COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following as defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a):
      (1)    Supermarkets with gross annual sales of $2,000,000 or more.
      (2)    Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
10,000 square feet.
      (3)    Food service provider, which means an entity primarily engaged in
providing food services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or
industrial locations of others based on contractual arrangements with these
types of organizations.
      (4)    Food distributor, which means a company that distributes food to
entities including, but not limited to, supermarkets and grocery stores.
      (5)   Wholesale food vendor, which means a business or establishment
engaged in the merchant wholesale distribution of food, where food (including
fruits and vegetables) is received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution
to a retailer, warehouse, distributor, or other destination.
   TIER TWO COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR. A commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following:
      (1)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size equal
to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
      (2)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms.
      (3)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more beds.
      (4)   Large venue, which means a permanent venue facility that annually
seats or serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of
the facility per day of operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this
chapter and implementation of the SB 1383 regulations, a venue facility
includes, but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or
operated stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or
civic center, zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts
center, fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For
purposes of this chapter and implementation of the SB 1383 regulations, a site
under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that
is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue.
      (5)   Large event, which means an event, including, but not limited to, a
sporting event or a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is
operated by a local agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000
individuals per day of operation of the event, at a location that includes, but
is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot,
golf course, street system, or other open space when being used for an event.
      (6)   A state agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet.
      (7)   A local education agency facility, which means a school district,
charter school, or county office of education that is not subject to the
control of town or county regulations related to solid waste, or as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(40), with an on-site food facility.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax, California.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.010) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.020 ZONES.
   The Town of Fairfax, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be divided into
two areas, designated respectively as the “hill” and “flat” areas. The areas
are presently established upon that certain map entitled “Map Showing Flat Area
and Hill Area of the Town of Fairfax for Establishing Garbage Collection Rates”
available for inspection in the office of the Town  Clerk, and the areas may be
changed and amended from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.020) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.030 CHARGES.
   (A)   Solid waste collection service charges shall be payable in amounts as
established from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. Payment of
fees for solid waste collection shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
premises from which the solid waste is taken, but the fees may be received from
the occupant for the account of the owner.
   (B)   Solid waste collection service started after the tenth day of the
calendar month shall be prorated on a monthly rate basis.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.030) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.040 COLLECTION CONTAINERS.
   (A)   All collection containers shall have tightly fitting covers.
   (B)   The collection containers may be set out the night before pickup at
the designated collection location and must be removed from the town right-of-
way within 24 hours after pickup.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.040) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 573, passed - -
1988; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.050 DUTIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Every owner or occupant of every residential and commercial premise in
the town where solid waste is accumulated, shall:
      (1)   Use solid waste collection service as often as necessary to keep
the premises clean and free from odor and, in any event, shall arrange for not
less than weekly solid waste collection service;
      (2)   Arrange for a size, quantity and collection frequency of collection
containers to adequately store all solid waste generated in connection with the
premise between the times designated for collection service. The town and/or
franchisee shall have the right to review the number and size of such
collection containers to evaluate the adequacy of capacity provided for each
type of collection service and to review the separation and containment of
materials. Generators shall adjust service levels for their collection services
as requested by the town in order to meet the standards set forth in this
chapter;
      (3)   Utilize collection containers provided by the franchisee/authorized
collector and place the collection containers in a designated collection
location on the premises at a point not more than 200 feet from the street;
      (4)   If the collection container is for use on commercial premises, keep
the same at a suitable location at ground level, unless the authorized
collector agrees to a different location;
      (5)   Keep the collection container clean and sanitary;
      (6)   Put no more than the established weight limit of solid waste in
each collection container for any one collection;
      (7)   Pay all fees when due as provided in this chapter and by
resolutions of the Town Council;
      (8)   Keep the occupied premises free and clear of solid waste at all
times; and
      (9)   Source separate recyclable materials and organic materials from
garbage. Place source separated organic materials, including food waste, in the
organic materials collection container; place source separated recyclable
materials in the recyclable materials collection container; and place garbage
in the approved garbage collection container. Generators shall not place
prohibited container contaminants into the garbage collection container,
organic materials collection container or recyclable materials collection
container. The Director may excuse or waive violations of this requirement as
described in §
8.08.130-6. For the first and second violations under this paragraph, the
Director will refer offenders to an educational training program. Subsequent
violations shall be subject to
Chapter 1.10 "Administrative Citation and Hearing Process Enforcement."
   (B)   It is unlawful for any owner or occupant to fail or refuse to comply
with any of the requirements set forth in division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.050) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 813, passed 12-6-
2017; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.060 MECHANICAL GARBAGE DISPOSAL.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, an occupant of any premises, or an
owner of any regularly and duly installed mechanical garbage disposal, may
dispose of his or her food waste by the use of the mechanical garbage disposal,
but shall nonetheless be required to use or take regular solid waste collection
service on at least a weekly basis, in accordance with §
8.08.130.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.060) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.070 DUTY OF AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR.
   The authorized collector(s) of the town shall:
   (A)   Empty all solid waste containers in the town at least once each week,
and in addition thereto, as often as may be requested by the owner or occupant,
or as may be necessary to dispose of all solid waste as provided for in this
chapter;
   (B)   Use only collection containers and vehicles over the streets of the
Town of Fairfax for the hauling of solid waste that are watertight, and the
authorized collector shall not permit any solid waste to fall or remain on any
street in the town;
   (C)   Dispose of all solid waste in a lawful manner outside the boundaries
of the town; and
   (D)   Keep all collection containers and vehicles used by the authorized
collector in the hauling of solid waste in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.070) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.080 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.
   Solid waste shall be collected and disposed of only as provided for in this
chapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person to burn, bury, throw away,
carry over any street in the town, or otherwise dispose of solid waste contrary
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.080) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.090 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION.
   It is unlawful for any person, except the authorized collector or the
authorized agents and employees thereof, to collect solid waste from within the
town.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.090) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.100 DEAD ANIMALS.
   Dead animals must be disposed of in a lawful manner by the owner thereof
outside the boundaries of the town. Should any owner fail or refuse to so
dispose of the dead animal, then the town may do so and collect the charge or
cost therefor from the owner thereof, and it is the duty of the owner to pay
the cost or charge forthwith on being notified of the amount thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.100) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.110 CONTRACT/FRANCHISE AGREEMENT.
   The Town Council may, with or without inviting bids therefor, enter into a
contract with any responsible individual, firm or corporation for the
collection, removal and delivery for disposal, recycling or processing of solid
waste collected and accumulated within the town, under the terms and conditions
as may be prescribed by the Town Council; and the right to make the collection
shall be exclusive to the contractor, who shall be designated as the
franchisee/authorized collector under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.110) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.120 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   Any individual, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment
of not more than six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of
this chapter occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in
division (A) above.
(Prior Code, § 8.08.120) (Ord. 556, passed - -1986; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-
2021)
§ 8.08.130 MANDATORY GARBAGE, RECYCLING AND ORGANIC MATERIALS COLLECTION.
§ 8.08.130-1 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The town finds that the State of California through its California
Waste Management Act of 1989 ("Act"), Cal. Public Resources Code § 40000, et
seq., as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to time), as
implemented by regulations of CalRecycle, require the town to reduce, reuse,
and recycle (including composting), solid waste generated in the town to the
maximum extent feasible before any incineration or landfill disposal of waste,
to conserve water, energy, and other natural resources, and to protect the
environment. The Act and Alternative Compliance Act of 2008 (SB 1016, Statutes
of 2008), requires that each local jurisdiction in the state to divert 50% of
discarded materials from the landfill on a per capita basis.
   (B)   The town finds that every city and county in California, including the
town, could face fines for not meeting the above mandated goal.
   (C)   The town finds that Mandatory Commercial Recycling was one of the
measures adopted in the Assembly Bill 32 Scoping Plan by the Air Resources
Board (ARB) pursuant to the California Global Warming Solutions Act (Chapter
488, Statutes of 2006). The Mandatory Commercial Recycling Measure focuses on
increased commercial waste diversion as a method to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. It is designed to achieve a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of
5,000,000 metric tons of carbon dioxide (CO2) equivalents. To achieve the
measure’s objective, an additional 2,000,000 to 3,000,000 tons of materials
annually will need to be recycled from the commercial sector by the year 2020
and beyond.
   (D)   AB 341 (Chapter 476, Statutes of 2011) that required any business that
generates four cubic yards or more of commercial solid waste per week or is a
multi-family residential dwelling with five or more units to arrange for
recycling collection services.
   (E)   Assembly Bill 1826 of 2014 requires businesses and certain multi-
family property owners that generate a specified threshold amount of solid
waste, recycling, and organic materials per week to arrange for recyclable
materials and organic waste collection services for that waste and requires the
town to implement a mandatory commercial organics recycling program for
designated commercial property owners.
   (F)   SB 1383 required CalRecycle to develop regulations to reduce organics
in landfills and methane emissions. The SB 1383 Regulations require the town,
residential households, commercial businesses, commercial edible food
generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery organizations, and food
recovery services to support achievement of statewide organic waste disposal
reduction targets.
   (G)   The town continues to make progress in maintaining the disposal
reduction requirements of the state recycling law, but additional efforts,
particularly in the diversion of organic materials and the recycling of paper,
cardboard, glass, and other recyclable materials generated by commercial
businesses, will assist the town in maintaining and exceeding the goal of
diverting waste from landfill disposal. The town desires to implement a program
to further the Marin County Hazardous and Solid Waste Management Joint Powers
Authority (JPA) goal to increase the diversion of materials from the landfill
and transformation facilities to achieve an 94% diversion goal by 2025, ensure
that resources are used to their highest potential, reduce upstream waste and
reduce Marin's ecological footprint.
   (H)   The town finds that organic materials that are buried in the anaerobic
conditions of landfills creates methane gas and leachate that may impact air
and water quality. Reductions or capture of methane is critical as methane gas
from the decomposition of waste is a source of renewable energy, but if not
collected and controlled is at least 21 times as potent as carbon dioxide in
contributing to climate change.
   (I)   The town finds that reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from solid
waste management can be realized by recovering traditional recyclable materials
from the waste stream to use in the manufacturing of products from these
materials. Traditional recyclable materials have significant intrinsic energy
value that displaces fossil fuel energy requirements when introduced back into
the manufacturing cycle. Additionally, by remanufacturing products using
recycled materials, additional reductions in greenhouse gas emissions are
realized through reduced fossil fuel demands in transportation and avoided
methane emissions at landfills.
   (J)   The town finds that efforts by the town and the private sector to
encourage voluntary diversion of commercial and special event recyclables
materials have not achieved desired levels of diversion.
   (K)   The town finds that mandatory commercial recycling programs in other
cities and counties in California, similar to the one implemented by this §
8.08.130, have proven successful.
   (L)   The town agrees to be subject to the terms of this chapter for all of
the town's commercial facilities and properties, including parks and town
buildings, as well as town-sponsored or partnered special events.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-2 SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each generator shall be responsible for ensuring and demonstrating its
compliance with the requirements of this section. Each generator shall:
      (1)   Source separate recyclable materials and organic materials from
garbage; and place source separated organic materials, including food waste, in
the organic materials collection container; place source separated recyclable
materials in the recyclable materials collection container; and place garbage
in the approved garbage collection container. Generators shall not place
prohibited container contaminants into the garbage collection container,
organic materials collection container or recyclable materials collection
container.
      (2)   Subscribe to a basic level of solid waste collection service that
includes, at a minimum, the collection of garbage, recyclable materials and
organic materials by the authorized collector. Generators shall arrange for a
size, quantity and collection frequency of collection containers to adequately
store all solid waste generated in connection with the premise between the
times designated for collection service. The town or authorized collector shall
have the right to review the number and size of such collection containers to
evaluate the adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service
and to review the separation and containment of materials. Generators shall
adjust service levels for their collection services as requested by the town or
authorized collector in order to meet the standards set forth in this chapter.
      (3)   A self-hauler may self-haul source separated recyclable materials
and source separated organic materials in accordance with §
8.08.130-7 after completing and retaining on-site a self-hauling form
certifying that all self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance
with this section and any other applicable law or regulation. A copy of such
form shall be available to the Director and the authorized collector upon
request.
   (B)   Each generator shall use collection containers provided by the
authorized collector to collect and store recyclable materials and organic
materials and shall designate areas to collect and/or store such materials.
   (C)   Each generator shall prominently post and maintain one or more signs
in maintenance or work areas or common areas where recyclable materials and/or
organic materials are collected and/or stored that specify the materials to be
source separated in addition to collection procedures for such materials.
   (D)   All recyclable materials shall be placed for collection in covered
collection containers conforming to the following requirements. No container
shall be loaded beyond its capacity. It shall be the generator's responsibility
to keep the containers used for the storage and collection of recyclable
materials generated on the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. No
material or container shall be kept or handled in such a manner as to become a
nuisance. No putrescible materials shall be commingled with recyclable
materials. No recyclable materials shall be allowed to become odoriferous or a
producer of vermin. Lids on collection containers shall remain closed at all
times while stored or placed for collection. The Director is specifically
authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding any and all recyclable
materials containers including as related to the recyclable materials to be
placed therein, the placement and maximum weight of high-density materials for
collection and the proper use of collection containers.
   (E)   Each generator shall ensure that recyclable materials and organic
materials generated at the generator's site if self-hauled will be taken only
to an approved solid waste facility to ensure that the materials are recycled
or composted and not delivered to a landfill for disposal. No generator shall
dispose of, or arrange for disposal of, recyclable materials and organic
materials by placement in a landfill except in an emergency situation, or when
no viable markets or recycling facilities are available, as determined by the
Director.
   (F)   All recycling and organic materials collection service agreements,
subject to the terms of this chapter and the franchise agreement, and other
recycling documents entered into between a generator and an authorized
collector shall be available for inspection by the Director or his or her
designee, at the principal location of the generator's commercial facility or
special event during normal business hours.
   (G)   No franchisee/authorized collector shall be held liable for the
failure of its customers to comply with this section, unless otherwise
specified in the relevant franchise, contract or permit issued by the town.
   (H)   Generators shall provide or arrange for access during all inspections
and investigations (with the exception of a private residential dwelling unit)
and cooperate with the town or authorized collector during such inspections and
investigations as described in §
8.08.130-13.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-3 COMMERCIAL GENERATOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Commercial generators shall comply with the following requirements.
      (1)   Each commercial generator, including all multi-family residential
dwellings that consist of five dwelling units or more, large events and large
venues shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements of this
section.
      (2)   Each commercial generator shall subscribe to a level of service
with an authorized collector that is sufficient to handle the volume of
garbage, recyclable materials and organic materials generated or accumulated on
the premises. Additionally, each commercial generator shall ensure the proper
separation of solid waste, as established by the authorized collector, by
placing each type of material in designated collection containers, and ensure
that employees, contractors, volunteers, customers, visitors, and other persons
on-site conduct proper source separation of solid waste.
      (3)   Supply and allow access to adequate number, size, and location of
collection containers with sufficient labels or colors, conforming with
requirements of this section, for employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers, consistent with the solid waste collection service.
      (4)   Annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants,
and customers about organic materials recovery requirements and about proper
sorting of solid waste.
      (5)   Provide educational information before, or within, 14 days of
occupation of the premises to new tenants that describes requirements to keep
source separated organic materials and source separated recyclable materials
separate from garbage (when applicable) and the location of collection
containers and the rules governing their use at each property.
      (6)   Accommodate and cooperate with the authorized collector's
monitoring program for inspection of the contents of containers for prohibited
container contaminants, to evaluate generator's compliance.
      (7)   If a commercial generator self-hauls, the commercial generator
shall meet the self-hauler requirements of §
8.08.130-7.
   (B)   Commercial generators, excluding multi-family residential dwellings
consisting of five or more dwelling units, shall comply with the following
requirements.
      (1)   Provide containers for the collection of source separated organic
materials and source separated recyclable materials in all indoor and outdoor
areas where garbage containers are provided for customers, for materials
generated onsite. Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a
commercial generator does not generate any of the materials that would be
collected in one type of collection container, then it is not required to
provide that type of container in all areas where disposal collection
containers are provided for customers. Pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b),
the indoor and outdoor containers shall have either:
         (a)   A body or lid that is gray or black for collection of garbage,
blue and/or brown for collection of recycling, and green for collection of
organic materials. A commercial generator is not required to replace functional
containers, including containers purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do
not comply with the requirements of this subsection prior to the end of the
useful life of those containers, or prior to January 1, 2036, whichever date is
earlier.
         (b)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or
both, indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials
prohibited in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic
images that indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials
prohibited in the container. Pursuant 14 CCR Section 18984.8, the container
labeling requirements are required on new containers commencing January 1,
2022.
      (2)   To the extent practical through education, training, inspection,
and/or other measures, prohibit employees from placing materials in a container
not designated for those materials per the solid waste collection service.
      (3)   Periodically inspect organic materials, recycling, and garbage
containers for contamination and inform employees if containers are
contaminated and of the requirements to keep contaminants out of those
containers pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b)(3).
      (4)   Commercial generators that are commercial edible food generators,
as defined in §
8.08.010, shall comply with commercial edible food generator requirements,
pursuant to §
8.08.130-11.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-4 AUTHORIZED COLLECTORS.
   (A)   No person shall provide services as a hauler of recyclable materials
or organic materials within the boundaries of the town without either being an
authorized collector.
   (B)   The town's franchisee/authorized collector providing residential,
commercial, or industrial collection services to generators within the town's
boundaries shall meet the following requirements and standards as a condition
of approval of a contract, agreement, or other authorization with the town to
collect organic materials and/or recyclable materials:
      (1)   Through written notice to the town annually on or before January 1,
2022, identify the facilities to which they will transport organic materials
including facilities for source separated recyclable materials and source
separated organic materials. Notice is deemed given under the terms of the
approved franchise agreement.
      (2)   Subject to the terms of the franchise agreement, transport source
separated recyclable materials and source separated organic materials to a
facility, operation, activity, or property that recovers organic materials as
defined in 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2.
      (3)   Obtain approval from the town to haul organic materials, unless it
is transporting source separated organic materials to a community composting
site in a manner that complies with 14 CCR Section 18989.1. Approval is deemed
given under the terms of the approved franchise agreement.
   (C)   The franchisee shall provide collection containers to residential and
commercial generators in conformance with the color and labeling requirements
set forth in 14 CCR Section 18784.7 and 14 CCR Section 18784.8 or as specified
in the franchise agreement.
   (D)   Franchisee/authorized collector shall provide collection service and
collection containers for recyclable materials and organic materials sufficient
to accommodate the quantity and types of recyclable materials and organic
materials to all of its customers and shall provide solid waste services as
described in §
8.08.130-5.
   (E)   Franchisee/authorized collector shall identify collection containers
for garbage, recyclable materials and organic materials with its name,
recognizable corporate or company logo, and phone number of the franchisee.
   (F)   Subject to the terms of the franchise agreement, franchisee/authorized
collector shall equip and provide collection containers for recyclable
materials and organic materials, with locks and/or other suitable features,
where feasible, to prevent scavenging, and shall conduct all activities in
accordance with this section, applicable laws, town codes and regulations and
best management practices. Vehicles and equipment and containers shall be kept
in a clean and well-maintained condition.
   (G)   Franchisee/authorized collector shall maintain a copy of its service
agreements, if applicable, and all receipts documenting that its customers'
recyclable materials and organic materials have been properly delivered to
solid waste facilities identified in division (B), as well as any documentation
evidencing an event of force majeure which prevented the proper delivery of any
such materials. Such documents shall be available for inspection by the
Director at the place of business during normal business hours and maintained
for not less than three years.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-5 RECYCLING AND ORGANIC MATERIAL COLLECTION SERVICES.
   The recycling services provided by franchisee/authorized collector shall
include, at a minimum, all of the following:
   (A)   Collection of recyclable materials and organic materials at a minimum
of once per week, or more often as specified by the applicable contract,
license or permit;
   (B)   Collection of recyclable materials and organic materials as identified
by the Director;
   (C)   Utilization of collection containers which comply with town standards;
   (D)   Appropriate signage on all collection containers, chutes and/or
enclosures which allows users to clearly and easily identify which containers
to use for recyclable materials, organic materials and garbage and be color-
coded.
   (E)   Occupant education. For multi-family residential dwellings, the
authorized collector shall provide information about recycling services as
follows:
      (1)   Types of recyclable materials and organic materials accepted, the
location of recycling containers, and the occupant's responsibility to recycle
pursuant to this section. This information shall be distributed to all property
managers or owners at least annually.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-6 WAIVERS.
   (A)   The town may grant waivers for physical space limitations and/or de
minimis volumes. Waiver requests shall be submitted on a form specified by the
Director. After reviewing the waiver request, and after an on-site review, if
applicable, the Director may either approve or deny the following waiver
requests.
      (1)   De minimis waivers: The town may waive a commercial business'
obligation to comply with some or all the requirements of §
8.08.130-3 if the commercial business meets the following requirements:
         (a)   Submit an application specifying the type of waiver requested
and provide documentation as described below.
         (b)   Provide documentation that the commercial business (but
excluding multi-family residential dwellings) generates 32 gallons (or the
minimum level of service as defined in the rate schedule) of solid waste per
week and can demonstrate upon request by the town or hauler that they do not
exceed the 32 gallon threshold and have a reasonable alternative to disposing
of their recyclable materials or organic waste (e.g., sharing with adjacent
business). This exemption does not apply to special events unless the generator
demonstrates to the Director that the event will produce less than the
threshold amount.
         (c)   Notify the town if circumstances change such that subsections
(a) and (b) no longer apply, in which case the waiver will be rescinded.
         (d)   Provide written verification of eligibility for de minimis
waiver every five years if the town has approved de minimis waiver.
         (e)   The commercial business (but excluding multi-family residential
dwellings) may be exempt from the requirement of this section if the commercial
business demonstrates to the Director that there are no recyclable materials
and/or organic waste being generated by any activities in the commercial
business.
      (2)   Physical space waivers: The town may waive a commercial business'
or property owner's obligations to comply with some or all of the recyclable
materials and/or organic materials collection service requirements if the town
has evidence from its own staff, a hauler, licensed architect, or licensed
engineer demonstrating that the premises lacks adequate space for the
collection containers required for compliance with the collection service
requirements. If, after reviewing the site, the Director determines that it is
feasible for collection containers for recyclable materials and/or organic
materials to be placed either on-site or shared with an adjoining business or
property, then the generator will not be exempted from these requirements and
will be responsible for full compliance with this section. A commercial
business or property owner may request a physical space waiver through the
following process:
         (a)   Submit an application form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which they are requesting a waiver from mandatory collection
service.
         (b)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
the approved recyclable materials collection containers and approved organic
materials collection containers including documentation from its authorized
collector, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
         (c)   Provide written verification to the town that it is still
eligible for physical space waiver every five years if the town has approved
application for a physical space waiver.
   (B)   If a generator seeks an exemption, an application for such exemption
shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the Director. After reviewing the
exemption request, and after an on-site review, if applicable, the Director
shall either approve or disapprove the exemption request and shall notify the
authorized collector if a waiver has been approved.
   (C)   Donation. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any generator from
donating its recyclable materials or organic materials to any non-profit
charitable organization.
   (D)   Organic materials may be fed to animals on the premises where such
organic materials is produced, provided that the premises are always kept in a
sanitary condition to the satisfaction of the Director; and provided further
that the keeping and feeding of such animals shall at all times conform to the
applicable regulations of those entities governing the same now in force or
which thereafter may be enacted or promulgated.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a generator from preventing or
source reducing waste generation, managing organic waste on site, or using a
community composting site, provided that such conforms to the applicable
regulations of those entities governing the same now in force or which
thereafter may be enacted or promulgated.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-7 SELF-HAULERS.
   (A)   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated recyclable materials to
a facility that recovers those materials and haul their source separated
organic materials to a solid waste facility or a chipping/ grinding operation
that processes or recovers source separated organic materials.
   (B)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses shall keep a record of the
amount of organic materials delivered to each solid waste facility and/or
chipping and grinding operation that processes or recovers organic materials.
This record shall be subject to inspection by the town. The records shall
include the following information:
      (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste. If the material is transported to an entity that does not have scales
on-site or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's vehicle in a
manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials received, the self-
hauler is not required to record the weight of material but shall keep a record
of the entities that received the organic materials.
      (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
   (C)   A self-hauler must retain on-site a self-hauling form certifying that
all self-hauling activities will be completed in accordance with this section
or any other applicable law or regulation. The self-hauling form shall be made
available to the Director or his or her designee and to the authorized
collector upon request. At a minimum, the generator shall provide the following
information on the self-hauling form:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the generator's
representative that will be signing the self-hauling form.
      (2)   A list of the types of recyclable materials that are being
transported.
      (3)   For each type of recyclable material, an estimate of the amount
that will be self-hauled to a materials recovery facility on a quarterly basis.
      (4)   The name and address of the materials recovery facility.
      (5)   A written statement, signed by the generator or representative,
certifying that the generator is in compliance with the requirements of this §
8.08.130-7.
   (D)   The Director may restrict or prohibit self-hauling by a generator if
the Director determines, after providing notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, that the generator's self-hauling activities violate the provisions of
this section or any other applicable law or regulation.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-8 SPECIAL EVENT SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   For a special event expected to have 500 or more attendants, in
addition to any other conditions the town requires as part of the special event
permit, the responsible party shall provide collection containers for
recyclable materials and organic materials throughout the event location to
make source separation of recyclable materials, organic materials and garbage
convenient for the employees, volunteers, contractors, and customers of the
food vendors and attendees of the event. However, the town may at its
discretion require a special event with less than 500 attendees to provide some
level of recycling and organic materials collection service as a condition of
approval of the special event permit.
   (B)   The minimum number of collection containers designated for recyclable
materials and organic materials shall equal or exceed the number of collection
containers designated for garbage. The collection containers for garbage,
recyclable materials and organic materials shall be placed as close together as
possible throughout the event location in order to provide equally convenient
access to users.
   (C)   All of the collection containers must have appropriate signage and be
color coded to identify the type of solid waste to be deposited and meet any
additional design criteria established by the town by regulation.
   (D)   Food vendors must have at least one separate collection container
designated for each recyclable materials, organic materials, and garbage for
use by customers and visitors. Multiple food vendors that provide disposable
food service ware and share a common eating area may share an appropriate
number, size, and placement of collection containers designated for recyclable
materials, organic materials and garbage for convenient use by customers or
visitors or have common access to such a container which shall be located
within a reasonable proximity of the vendors.
   (E)   The types of recyclable materials suitable for deposit into designated
collection containers shall include, at a minimum, plastic bottles and
containers, paper, cardboard, glass, newspaper, metal containers, and cans.
Each recycling collection container shall be clearly identified as a recycling
collection container and shall display a list of types of recyclable materials,
which may be deposited into the recycling collection container. Each organic
materials collection container shall be clearly identified as an organic
materials collection container and shall display a list of the types of organic
materials, which may be deposited into the organic materials collection
container.
   (F)   The responsible person shall ensure that the recyclable materials
deposited into the recycling collection containers and organic materials
depositing into the organic materials collection container are delivered to a
solid waste facility that can accept such materials for recycling. The solid
waste facility may be located at a landfill, but recyclable materials shall not
be delivered to a landfill for disposal.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-9 OWNERSHIP/SCAVENGING OF RECYCLABLE MATERIALS AND ORGANIC
MATERIALS.
   (A)   All recyclable materials and organic materials placed in collection
containers provided by any authorized collector sufficient to accommodate the
quantity and types of materials generated by generators shall be considered
owned by and be the responsibility of the authorized collector. Without
permission of either the authorized collector, no person shall collect
recyclable materials or organic materials placed in such collection containers
by generators.
   (B)   No person, other than the authorized collector under contract with the
generator of the recyclable materials and organic materials to collect the
recyclable materials and organic materials, shall remove solid waste which has
been placed at a designated collection location. Except for self-haulers
authorized under §
8.08.130-7, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
collecting, removing or transporting, or otherwise organizing or directing the
collection, removal or transportation of recyclable materials and organic
materials without being an authorized collector.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-10 REPORTING.
   (A)   Each authorized collector shall provide bi-annual reports on the dates
described below to the Director identifying, at a minimum, the following
information, including special events:
      (1)   The total number of generators it has in the town, the name and
address of the facility serviced, and the name of the responsible party for
solid waste management;
      (2)   The frequency of collection service provided to the generator;
      (3)   The amount of garbage, recyclable materials and organic materials
collected per month by volume in cubic yards and tons, measured by the size of
applicable containers of and removed by them within the town during the
previous year;
      (4)   The location of the solid waste facility (facilities) to which the
garbage, recyclable materials and organic materials were taken during the
previous quarter; and
      (5)   Information about non-compliance by generators.
      (6)   The quarterly reporting periods shall be as follows:
 
Reporting Period        Due Date
January 1 - March 30    May 1
April 1 - June 30       August 1
July 1 - September 30   November 1
October 1 - December 31 February 1
 
   (B)   If the quarterly report is not filed by the due dates above, the
report shall be deemed delinquent after 15 days, and the authorized collector
shall pay to the town a delinquent report  charge in the amount of $100. If the
report remains delinquent for more than 30 days, the amount shall be increased
to $200. The Director may, at his/her sole discretion, waive the delinquent
charge and/or change the quarterly reporting period to a longer time frame
(e.g., bi-annual).
   (C)   An authorized collector’s failure to file the reports required by this
section shall, at the option of the Director, constitute cause for termination
or suspension of its right to collect recyclable materials and organic
materials under this section.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-11 COMMERCIAL EDIBLE FOOD GENERATOR REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Tier One commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this section January 1, 2022, and Tier Two commercial edible
food generators must comply commencing January 1, 2024, pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18991.3.
   (B)   Large venue or large event operators not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this section, commencing January 1, 2024.
   (C)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Contract with or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for: (a) the collection of edible food
for food recovery; or (b) acceptance of the edible food that the commercial
edible food generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food
recovery.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow the town's designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records pursuant to
14 CCR Section 18991.4.
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information, or as
otherwise specified in 14 CCR Section 18991.4:
         (a)   A list of each food recovery service or organization that
collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         (b)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         (c)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            1.   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization.
            2.   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled to
the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            3.   The established frequency that food will be collected or self-
hauled.
            4.   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per month,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to SB 557 (Chapter 285, Statutes of 2017) as amended from
time to time.
(Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-12 EDIBLE FOOD RECOVERY ORGANIZATION AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(1):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
      (4)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (B)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the
following records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(2):
      (1)   The name, address, and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The name, address, and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (C)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the town and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) shall annually report to the town it is located in
the total pounds of edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from
the Tier One and Tier Two commercial edible food generators they have
established a contract or written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR Section
18991.3(b) no later than April 1.
   (D)   In order to support edible food recovery capacity planning assessments
or other studies conducted by the county, town, joint powers authority that
provides solid waste collection services, or the town's designated entity, food
recovery services and food recovery organizations operating in the town shall
provide information and consultation to the town, upon request, regarding
existing, or proposed new or expanded, food recovery capacity that could be
accessed by the town and its commercial edible food generators. A food recovery
service or food recovery organization contacted by the town shall respond to
such request for information within 60 days unless a shorter timeframe is
otherwise specified by the town.
(Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-13 IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Beginning January 1, 2022 and through December 31, 2023, the Town will
conduct inspections, remote monitoring, route reviews or waste evaluations, and
compliance reviews, depending upon the type of regulated entity, to determine
compliance with the SB 1383 regulations, and if the town determines that
organic waste generator, self-hauler, hauler, Tier One commercial edible food
generator, food recovery organization, food recovery service, or other entity
is not in compliance, it shall provide educational materials to the entity
describing its obligations under this chapter and a notice that compliance is
required by January 1, 2022, and that violations may be subject to
administrative civil penalties starting on January 1, 2024.
   (B)   The Director is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this §
8.08.130, beginning with §
8.08.130-1 and following. The Director or anyone designated by the Director to
be an enforcement officer may exercise such enforcement powers. To the extent
permitted by law, the Director, authorized collector, or town's designee is
authorized to conduct any inspections, remote monitoring, or other
investigations as reasonably necessary to further the goals of this chapter,
subject to applicable laws. This may include inspections and investigations, at
random or otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle load, or
transfer, processing, or disposal facility to confirm compliance with this
chapter, subject to applicable laws. For the purposes of inspecting collection
containers for compliance, the town or authorized collector may conduct
container inspections for prohibited container contaminants using remote
monitoring, and generators shall accommodate and cooperate with the remote
monitoring. A commercial business (excluding private residential dwelling
units) shall cooperate with the town or authorized collector during such
inspections and investigations. Such inspections and investigations may include
confirmation of proper placement of materials in containers, inspection of
edible food recovery activities, review of required records, or other
verification or inspection to confirm compliance with any other requirement of
this chapter. Failure to provide or arrange for: (i) access to the premises;
(ii) installation and operation of remote monitoring equipment, if a remote
monitoring program is adopted; or (iii) access to records for any inspection or
investigation is a violation of this chapter and may result in penalties.
Nothing herein shall be read or interpreted to restrict franchisee/authorized
collector from conducting curbside audits of residential or commercial
containers that have been set out for collection.
   (C)   Any records obtained by the town, authorized collector, or town's
designee during inspections, investigations, remote monitoring and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the California Public Records Act as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 6250 et seq. 
   (D)   Unless otherwise expressly provided by the town's Code, any person
adversely and directly affected by any determination made or action taken by
the Director pursuant to the provisions of this section may file an
administrative appeal. If no appeal is filed within the time prescribed and
consistent with the town's procedures in the town's Code, the determination or
action of the Director shall be final.
   (E)   Incremental notification and enforcement.
      (1)    If an authorized collector first finds prohibited container
contaminants in a collection container, it shall notify the generator by
written notice attached to the collection container identifying the prohibited
container contaminants and describing what action must be taken for the
materials to be collected.
      (2)   If an authorized collector finds prohibited container contaminants
in a collection container a second time, they shall notify the generator by a
written "second notice" attached to the collection container and identifying
the prohibited container contaminants and describing what action must be taken
for the materials to be collected.
      (3)   After an authorized collector has already left two or more notices
for that customer and that type of collection container, the authorized
collector may refuse to empty the container if prohibited container
contaminants are found a third time, subject to 14 CCR Section 17331, or as
determined by the Director. If the collection container is not emptied, the
authorized collector must leave a tag and send a written notice to the
generator, identifying the prohibited container contaminants and describing
what action must be taken for the materials to be collected; provided, however,
that an authorized collector may not refuse on this basis to empty collection
containers from a multi-family residential dwelling or other commercial premise
with multiple tenants and joint account collection service due to prohibited
container contaminants, but may manage contaminated loads as garbage and charge
the generators accordingly.
      (4)   The authorized collector shall, in addition to the above, upon
request, provide to the Director a list of the names and addresses of those
generators who have received tags or notices or whose collection containers
have not been emptied due to non-compliance with this section, and copies of
the tags or notices. The authorized collector shall also provide to the
Director, upon request, a list of the names, addresses, and service levels of
the generators and any additional information required by the Director.
      (5)   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an
infraction and will be grounds for issuance of a notice of violation and
assessment of an administrative citation and penalty by the town's enforcement
officer or its designated enforcement agency.
      (6)   Enforcement actions under this chapter are issuance of an
administrative citation and assessment of a fine. The town's procedures on
imposition of administrative citations and fines as contained in Municipal Code
Chapter 1.08,
1.10,
1.12 and
1.16 shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection, and review of
administrative citations and fines issued to enforce this chapter and any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. Any section of this chapter may
be enforced by the town or, if agreed to, by its designated enforcement agency.
      (7)   A violation may be punishable by:
         (a)   A fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation;
         (b)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same
provision of this code within any 12 consecutive month period;
         (c)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation of the
same provision of this code within any 12 consecutive month period. Any
citation issued after the issuance of a third citation or violation of the same
provision of this code within any 12 consecutive month period may be charged as
a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 1.08 of this code.
      (8)   The town or designated enforcement agency may issue a notice of
violation requiring compliance within 60 days or sooner of issuance of the
notice.
      (9)   Absent compliance by the respondent within the deadline set forth
in the notice of violation, the town or designated enforcement agency may
commence an action to impose penalties, via an administrative citation and
fine, pursuant to the town's standard procedures or the standard procedures of
its designated enforcement agency.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-14 OTHER ACTIONS AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   No other powers affected. This §
8.08.130 does not do any of the following:
      (1)   Otherwise affect the authority of the Director or designee to take
any other action authorized by any other provision of law.
      (2)   Restrict the power of a town attorney, district attorney or the
Attorney General to bring, in the name of the people of California, any
criminal proceeding otherwise authorized by law.
      (3)   Prevent the Director or designee from cooperating with, or
participating in, a proceeding specified in §
8.08.130-14(A)(2) above.
   (B)   Cumulative remedies. Any remedy provided under this section is
cumulative to any other remedy provided in equity or at law. Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to limit the right of the town or its authorized
collection agent(s) to bring a civil action or prosecution as a misdemeanor or
infraction; nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a
civil action brought by the town or its authorized collection agent(s). The
fees and penalties imposed under this section shall constitute a civil debt and
liability owing to the town from the persons, firms or corporations using or
chargeable for such services and shall be collectible in the manner provided by
law. The town may pursue civil actions in the California courts to seek
recovery of unpaid administrative citations and fines.
   (C)   Liability. Nothing in this §
8.08.130 shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the town or upon any of
its officers or employees including without limitation under the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA).
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 8.08.130-15 FORMS, REGULATIONS AND GUIDELINES.
   (A)   After public notice and a public hearing, the Director may adopt
necessary forms, rules, regulations, and guidelines which may be necessary or
desirable to aid in the administration or enforcement of the provisions of this
§
8.08.130, including all necessary policies and procedures for the issuance of
the permits, administration of this §
8.08.130, collection of fees and bonds and/or indemnities, or proof(s) of
insurance.
   (B)   The town shall provide information on its website regarding what
materials are accepted as recyclable materials, organic materials and garbage
under this section.
   (C)   The town, authorized collector or designee shall accept written
complaints from persons regarding an entity that may be potentially non-
compliant with this chapter.
(Ord. 772, passed 11-6-2013; Am. Ord. 859, passed 12-1-2021)
CHAPTER 8.12: LITTER
Section
   
8.12.010   Definitions
   
8.12.020   Deposit in public places
   
8.12.030   Prevention of scattering
   
8.12.040   Sidewalks; duty of property owners
   
8.12.050   Sidewalks; duty of merchants
   
8.12.060   Throwing from vehicles prohibited
   
8.12.070   Truck loads causing litter
   
8.12.080   Parks
   
8.12.090   Bodies of water
   
8.12.100   Posting notices
   
8.12.110   Occupied private property
   
8.12.120   Owner to maintain premises free of litter
   
8.12.130   Vacant lots
   
8.12.140   Notice to property owner to remove litter
   
8.12.150   Non-compliance; abatement by town
   
8.12.160   Abatement by town; charge added to tax bill
   
8.12.170   Prohibition against the release of balloons
§ 8.12.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized in Chapter 8.08 of this title.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined in this section, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as prohibited in this
chapter, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other
public area in the town, owned or used by the town and devoted to active or
passive recreation.
   PERSON. A natural person, firm, co- partnership, association or corporation.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall
include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox
belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid wastes, except body
wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Non-putrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, overgrown grass, brush and weeds, wood, glass,
bedding, crockery and similar materials.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.030)
§ 8.12.020 DEPOSIT IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the town, except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection or in official town dumps.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.031)
§ 8.12.030 PREVENTION OF SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.032)
§ 8.12.040 SIDEWALKS; DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free of litter.
   (B)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the town the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.033)
§ 8.12.050 SIDEWALKS; DUTY OF MERCHANTS.
   (A)   Persons owning or occupying places of business within the town shall
keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter.
   (B)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the town the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.034)
§ 8.12.060 THROWING FROM VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the town or upon private
property.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.035)
§ 8.12.070 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER.
   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the town
unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents
or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public
place; nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the town,
the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or
other public place mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of
any kind.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.036)
§ 8.12.080 PARKS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the town, except
in public receptacles and in a manner that the litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon
any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided,
all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible
for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.037)
§ 8.12.090 BODIES OF WATER.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the town.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.035)
§ 8.12.100 POSTING NOTICES.
   No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device,
calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as
may be authorized or required by law.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.039)
§ 8.12.110 OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the town, whether owned by the person or not, except that the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in a manner that litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public
place or upon any private property.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.040)
§ 8.12.120 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner or person in control of any private property shall, at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that, this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.041)
§ 8.12.130 VACANT LOTS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the town, whether owned by the person or not.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.042)
§ 8.12.140 NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNER TO REMOVE LITTER.
   The Town Manager is authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open
or vacant private property within the town or the agent of the owner to
properly dispose of litter located on the owner’s property which is dangerous
to public health, safety or welfare. The notice shall be by registered mail,
addressed to the owner at his or her last known address.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.043(a))
§ 8.12.150 NON-COMPLIANCE; ABATEMENT BY TOWN.
   Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified to
properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare
within 15 days after receipt of the written notice provided for in §
8.12.140, or within 30 days after the date of the notice in the event the same
is returned to the town’s Post Office Department because of its inability to
make delivery thereof, provided the same
was properly addressed to the last known address of the owner or agent, the
Town Manager is authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of the litter
or to order its disposal by the town.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.043(b))
§ 8.12.160 ABATEMENT BY TOWN; CHARGE ADDED TO TAX BILL.
   When the town has effected the removal of the dangerous litter or has paid
for its removal, a certified copy of the actual cost thereof, plus accrued
interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the completion of the
work, if not paid by the owner prior thereto, shall be sent to the County
Auditor. The cost of the removal of the litter shall constitute a lien on the
property and shall be charged to the owner of the property on the next regular
tax bill sent out by the county. The charge shall be due and payable by the
owner at the time of payment of the bill.
(Prior Code, § 8.12.043(c))
§ 8.12.170 PROHIBITION AGAINST THE RELEASE OF BALLOONS.
   The uncontrolled release of balloons into the environment, whether they are
biodegradable or not, constitutes litter within the meaning of this chapter and
no person shall intentionally release balloons into the environment within the
town for any purpose.
(Ord. 766, passed 8-1-2012)
CHAPTER 8.14: COLLECTION, RECYCLING, AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE GENERATED FROM
CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION, AND RENOVATION PROJECTS
Section
   
8.14.010   Findings
   
8.14.020   Definitions
   
8.14.030   C&D diversion report required
   
8.14.040   C&D diversion report exemptions
   
8.14.050   Certified C&D recovery facilities
   
8.14.060   Use of avoided disposal fees
   
8.14.070   Severability
§ 8.14.010 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The town finds that the State of California through its California
Waste Management Act of 1989, Assembly Bill 939 (AB 939 passed and signed into
law in 1989) and Alternative Compliance Act of 2008 (SB 1016 passed and signed
into law in 2008), requires that each local jurisdiction in the state divert
50% of discarded materials from landfill garbage disposal on a per capita
basis.
   (B)   The town finds that every city and county in the state, including the
town, could face fines up to $10,000 a day for not meeting the above mandated
goal.
   (C)   The town finds that the state through its California Global Warming
Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32 passed and signed into law in 2006), requires that
commercial generators statewide participate in recycling programs.
   (D)   The town finds that in recent years, inerts and mixed construction and
demolition (C&D) debris constituted approximately 16% of the materials
landfilled in Marin County and a similarly large portion of the waste stream in
the town. These materials have significant potential for waste reduction and
recycling.
   (E)   The town finds that reusing and recycling C&D debris is essential to
further the town’s efforts to reduce waste and comply with AB 939, AB 32 and
other waste reduction goals.
   (F)   The town finds that C&D debris waste reduction and recycling have been
proven to reduce the amount of such material in landfills, increase site and
worker safety, be cost effective, and thereby assist in the protection of
public health, safety and welfare.
   (G)   The town finds that, except in unusual circumstances, it is feasible
to divert on average 100% asphalt and concrete, and at least 70% of all
remaining C&D debris from most construction, demolition, and renovation
projects.
   (H)   The town desires to implement a program to encourage the Marin County
Hazardous and Solid Waste Management Joint Powers Authority (JPA) goal to
increase the diversion of materials from landfill and transformation facilities
to achieve 80% diversion goal by 2012 and zero waste by 2025, ensure that
resources are used to their highest potential, reduce upstream waste, and
reduce the county’s ecological footprint.
   (I)   The town finds that, to ensure compliance with this chapter and to
ensure that those contractors that comply with the chapter are not placed at a
competitive disadvantage, it is necessary to impose a financial incentive as
set forth by resolution of the Town Council.
   (J)   The town finds that, to ensure compliance with this chapter,
facilities will be evaluated annually through an extensive certification
process conducted by the JPA.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
§ 8.14.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE DAILY COVER (ADC). Disposal facility cover material, other than
organic waste and at least six inches of earthen material, placed on the
surface of the active face of the refuse fill area at the end of each operating
day to control vectors, fires, odor, blowing litter and scavenging, as defined
in Cal. Code of Regulations Title 27, § 20164.
   APPLICANT. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, association,
partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry,
public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to
the town for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition
or renovation project within the town.
   AVOIDED DISPOSAL FEE. Three percent of the value of the project, not to
exceed $10,000.
   CERTIFIED RECYCLING FACILITY. A recycling, composting, materials recovery or
re-use facility determined to process incoming C&D materials to divert from
landfill or transformation for which the certifying agency has issued a
certification.
   CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE (C&D WASTE). The discarded building
materials from C&D activities, including but not limited to, fully-cured
asphalt, concrete, brick, rock, soil, lumber, gypsum wallboard, cardboard, and
other associated packaging, roofing materials, ceramic tile, carpeting and
padding, fixtures, plastic pipes, metals, tree stumps and other vegetative
matter resulting from land clearing and landscaping. This does not include
hazardous waste or garbage and rubbish disposal under Chapter 8.08 of this
code.
   C&D DIVERSION REPORT. A report submitted by an applicant, on a form issued
by the Director, which contains an estimate of the amount of C&D waste
generated by the project, documentation of the diversion of C&D waste including
recycling, reuse, and certified recycling facility receipts, and such
additional information deemed necessary by Director to document accomplishment
of the requirements of this chapter.
   DECONSTRUCTION PROJECT. A process to carefully dismantle or remove usable
materials from structures, as an alternative to demolition.
   DIRECTOR. The Town Manager, including his or her designee.
   DIVERSION or DIVERTED. A reduction of the amount of waste being disposed in
a landfill by any of the following methods:
      (1)   Use of new construction methods, as described in regulations
promulgated by Director, that reduce the amount of waste generated.
      (2)   On-site re-use of the waste.
      (3)   Delivery of the waste from the site to a certified recycling
facility described in §
8.14.040.
      (4)   Other methods as approved in regulations promulgated by the
Director.
   JOINT POWERS AUTHORITY or JPA. Marin County Hazardous and Solid Waste
Management Joint Powers Authority.
   PROJECT. A construction, demolition or renovation project for which a
building permit is required under Chapter 15.04 of this code.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Segregated residential, commercial or industrial by-
products of some potential economic value, set aside, handled, packaged, or
offered for collection in a manner different from refuse. RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
include, but are not limited to, paper, glass, cardboard, plastics, ferrous
metal, aluminum and green waste.
   RECYCLING. A subset of solid waste and means the collection of recyclable
materials which would otherwise be discarded without receiving compensation and
returning them to the economy in the form of raw materials for new, reused, or
reconstituted products in compliance with AB 939 diversion requirements.
   REUSE. Using an object or material again, either for its original purpose or
for a similar purpose, without significantly altering the physical form of the
object or material.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
§ 8.14.030 C&D DIVERSION REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, on or after the
effective date of this chapter, each person who applies for a building permit
pursuant to
Chapter 15.04 of this code shall complete a C&D diversion report, and no
building permit shall be issued unless the applicant submits the C&D diversion
report.
   (B)   Except as otherwise specified in this chapter, on or after the
effective date of this chapter, each person who applies for a building permit
pursuant to
Chapter 15.04 of this code shall remit a C&D diversion report prior to final
inspection and issuance of occupancy permit. An avoided disposal fee may be
imposed if a permitted facility is not used or recycling/reuse receipts are not
submitted prior to final inspection and issuance of occupancy permit to ensure
compliance and to fund enforcement. The avoided disposal fee shall be based on
3% of the value of the project, not to exceed $10,000.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
§ 8.14.040 C&D DIVERSION REPORT EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   A C&D diversion report shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   Work for which a building permit is not required under
Chapter 15.04 of this code.
      (2)   Residential alterations of less than $2,000 in value.
      (3)   Non-residential alterations of less than $5,000 in value.
      (4)   Work for which only a plumbing permit, only an electrical or only a
mechanical permit is required.
      (5)   Seismic tie-down projects.
      (6)   The installation or replacement of shelves.
      (7)   Installation of pre-fabricated patio enclosures and covers where no
foundation or other structural building modifications are required.
      (8)   Installation of swimming pools and spas, provided that the
exemption shall apply only to (a) the area to be excavated for the installation
of the pool or spa and (b) the area for the pad for the pool/spa equipment that
does not exceed 16 square feet; and shall not apply to any related construction
or alterations necessary for any other equipment or accessories, nor to any
other portion of the project.
      (9)   Installation of pre-fabricated accessories such as signs or
antennas where no structural building modifications are required.
   (B)   It is unlawful to split or separate a project into small work projects
for the purpose of evading the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
§ 8.14.050 CERTIFIED C&D RECOVERY FACILITIES.
   (A)   The JPA shall issue a certification only if the owner or operator of
the facility submits the following documentation satisfactory to the JPA’s
designee:
      (1)   The facility has obtained all applicable federal, state, and local
permits, and is in full compliance with all applicable regulations; and
      (2)   The percentage of incoming waste from construction, demolition, and
alteration activities that is diverted from landfill disposal, transformation
and use as ADC meets a required minimum of 70% or other amount as set forth in
regulations promulgated by the JPA.
   (B)   The town shall make available to each building permit applicant a
current list of certified C&D recovery facilities, reuse facilities, and
certified C&D haulers.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
§ 8.14.060 USE OF AVOIDED DISPOSAL FEES.
   Moneys received by the town as avoided disposal fees shall be used only for:
   (A)   Costs of administration of the program established by this chapter;
   (B)   Cost of programs whose purpose is to divert the waste from
construction, demolition, and alteration projects from landfill disposal,
transformation and use as ADC; and
   (C)   Costs of programs whose purpose is to develop or improve the
infrastructure needed to divert the waste from construction, demolition and
alteration projects from disposal in a landfill, transformation facility or use
as ADC.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
§ 8.14.070 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The Town Council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter irrespective
of that fact that one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid or
effective. To this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be
severable.
(Ord. 783, passed 9-3-2014)
CHAPTER 8.16: POLYSTYRENE FOAM, DEGRADABLE AND RECYCLABLE FOOD PACKAGING
Section
   
8.16.010   Findings and purpose
   
8.16.020   Definitions
   
8.16.030   Prohibited food packaging (polystyrene foam)
   
8.16.040   Regulations applicable to all food vendors
   
8.16.050   Administrative exemptions
   
8.16.060   Existing contracts exempted
   
8.16.070   Town prohibitions
   
8.16.080   Town Manager’s powers
   
8.16.090   Liability and enforcement
   
8.16.100   Severability
   
8.16.110   Preemption
§ 8.16.010 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The Council finds as follows.
   (A)   California’s Integrated Waste Management Act requires all counties and
cities in California to develop and implement programs to divert from the
wastestream 25% of solid waste generated by 1995 and 50% by 2000; and solid
waste that is non- degradable or non-recyclable poses an acute problem for any
environmentally and financially responsible program of solid waste management.
   (B)    Products which are biodegradable or recyclable offer environmentally
sound alternatives to non-biodegradable and non-recyclable products currently
used. By decaying into their constituent substances, biodegradable products are
less of a danger to the natural environment, and less of a permanent blight on
the landscape.
   (C)   Take-out food packaging constitutes a major source of litter in
Fairfax and contributes to the total amount of waste entering the town’s waste
stream.
   (D)   Disposable plastic containers and wrappers used for take-out foods are
essentially not biodegradable and, as waste, do not decompose over time in the
natural environment; the use of these containers and wrappers has increased
annually. Polystyrene foam litter, in particular, is highly durable, buoyant
and non-biodegradable and therefore persists and detracts from the appearance
of the area longer than many other types of litter.
   (E)   Plastic litter, including polystyrene foam, poses a potential threat
to wildlife. It enters the marine and natural environment and is ingested by,
or entangles, aquatic wildlife, frequently causing death and damages the
ecological balance.
   (F)   Polystyrene foam is a petroleum processing by-product. Oil is a non-
renewable resource, which can only be obtained by increasingly hazardous
methods, such as off-shore drilling, which poses significant dangers to the
environment. Alternative products which are degradable or recyclable pose far
less overall hazards than continued and expanded reliance on oil-based
products.
   (G)   It is in the interest of the health, safety and welfare of all who
live, work and do business in the town that the amount of litter on the public
streets, parks, waterways, public places and open spaces be reduced.
   (H)   Although the waste stream within Marin County is large and diverse,
steps at the local level, no matter how small, can significantly support waste
management programs in lieu of landfilling.
   (I)   The provisions of this chapter are consistent with the county’s Solid
Waste Management Plan, and the legislative findings and intent of AB939.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.010) (Ord. 623, passed  11-2-1993 )
§ 8.16.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTOMER. Anyone purchasing food or beverages from a restaurant or retail
food vendor.
   FOOD PACKAGING. All bags, sacks, wrapping, containers, bowls, plates, trays,
cartons, cups, straws and lids which are not intended for reuse, on or in which
any foods or beverages are placed or packaged on a restaurant’s or retail food
vendor’s premises.
   FOOD VENDOR. Any restaurant or retail food vendor.
   PERSON or ANYONE. Any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or
other organization or group however organized.
   POLYSTYRENE FOAM. Any styrene or vinyl chloride polymer which is blown into
a foam-like material.
   POLYSTYRENE FOAM FOOD PACKAGING. Any food packaging which contains any
polystyrene foam.
   PREPARED FOOD. Foods or beverages which are prepared on the vendor’s
premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing or squeezing.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment located within the Town of Fairfax, selling
prepared food to be eaten on or about its premises by customers. RESTAURANT
includes a sidewalk food vendor.
   RETAIL FOOD VENDOR. Any store, shop, sales outlet or other establishment,
including a grocery store or a delicatessen, other than a restaurant, located
within the Town of Fairfax, which sells take-out food.
   TAKE-OUT FOOD. Foods or beverages which are prepared on the vendor’s
premises by cooking, chopping, slicing, mixing, freezing or squeezing, and
which are intended for consumption off the food vendor’s premises.
   TOWN or TOWN OF FAIRFAX. All that territory within the incorporated area of
the Town of Fairfax, County of Marin, State of California.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.020) (Ord. 623, passed  11-2-1993 )
§ 8.16.030 PROHIBITED FOOD PACKAGING (POLYSTYRENE FOAM).
   (A)   Restaurants. Except as provided in §§
8.16.050 and
8.16.060, no restaurant shall provide prepared food to its customers in any
polystyrene foam food packaging, nor shall any restaurant purchase, obtain or
keep any polystyrene foam food packaging for such purpose.
   (B)   Retail food vendors. Except as provided in §§
8.16.050 and
8.16.060, no retail food vendor shall sell take-out food in any polystyrene
foam take-out food packaging, nor shall any retail food vendor purchase, obtain
or keep any polystyrene foam packaging for this purpose.
   (C)   For public health and safety purposes, the sale of polystyrene (EPS)
foam coolers and ice chests is prohibited within the Town of Fairfax. Coolers
and ice chests that do not have exposed polystyrene foam and that are designed
for reuse are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.030) (Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993; Am. Ord. 877, passed 4-5-
2023)
§ 8.16.040 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL FOOD VENDORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any food vendor to make any misstatement of
material fact to the Town Manager or his or her agents regarding the use or
non-use of polystyrene foam to package any food prepared on their premises.
   (B)   Food vendors shall state that they are in compliance with this chapter
on their annual business license renewal forms.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.040) (Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.050 ADMINISTRATIVE EXEMPTIONS.
   The Town Manager may exempt a retail food vendor or restaurant from the
requirements of the provisions of this chapter for a one-year period; and
subsequent exemptions may be granted by action of the Town Council, upon a
showing by the applicant that the conditions of this chapter would cause undue
hardship. The phrase "undue hardship" may be construed to include, but not be
limited to:
   (A)   Situations where there are no acceptable alternatives to polystyrene
foam food packaging for reasons which are unique to the retail food
establishment.
   (B)   Situations where compliance with the requirements of this chapter
would deprive a person of a legally protected right.
(Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.060 EXISTING CONTRACTS EXEMPTED.
   Food packaging required to be purchased under a contract entered into prior
to the effective date of the initiative measure is exempt from the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.070 TOWN PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   The Town of Fairfax shall not purchase any polystyrene foam food
packaging, nor shall any town- sponsored event use the packaging.
   (B)   No organization using the Town of Fairfax premises or facilities shall
use polystyrene foam food packaging while using Town of Fairfax premises or
facilities.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.050) (Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.080 TOWN MANAGER'S POWERS.
   The Town Manager is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and
all other actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including,
but not limited to, inspecting any vendor's premises to verify compliance.
(Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.090 LIABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Anyone violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of
the Fairfax Town Code.
   (B)   The Town Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable
relief to enforce this chapter.
   (C)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and
not exclusive.
(Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.100 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable and if any
provision, sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter is held illegal,
invalid, unconstitutional or inapplicable to any person or circumstances, the
illegality, invalidity or unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections
or parts of this chapter or their application to persons and circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.060) (Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
§ 8.16.110 PREEMPTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be null and void on the day that
California statewide legislation or federal legislation goes into effect,
incorporating either the same or substantially similar provisions as are
contained in this chapter, or in the event that a pertinent California state or
federal administrative agency issues and promulgates regulations, preempting
the action by the Town of Fairfax. The Town Council shall determine, by
ordinance, whether or not identical or substantially similar statewide
legislation has been enacted for the purposes of triggering the provisions of
this section.
(Prior Code, § 8.10.070) (Ord. 623, passed 11-2-1993)
CHAPTER 8.18: PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION
Section
   
8.18.010   Findings
   
8.18.020   Short title
   
8.18.030   Definitions
   
8.18.040   Mandatory use of recyclable or reusable checkout bags
   
8.18.050   Implementation
   
8.18.060   Notification, enforcement and penalties
   
8.18.070   Operative date
   
8.18.080   No conflict with federal or state law
   
8.18.090   Undertaking for the general welfare
§ 8.18.010 FINDINGS.
   (A)   General findings.
      (1)   Globally the production and use of plastic bags has significant
environmental impacts each year, including the use of over 12 million barrels
of oil, and the deaths of thousands of marine animals through ingestion and
entanglement.
      (2)   Each year, an estimated 500 billion to one trillion plastic bags
are used worldwide, which is over one million bags per minute, many of which
end up as litter each year.
      (3)   Most plastic carry-out bags do not biodegrade, but instead photo-
degrade, which means that the bags break down into smaller and smaller toxic
bits that enter the food web when animals mistake those materials for food.
      (4)   Because plastic does not biodegrade, every piece of plastic that
has found its way from California shores to the Pacific Ocean for the past 50
years still remains in the ocean or has been accumulating in the central
Pacific gyre and a "Pacific Garbage Patch" now exists made up of floating
plastic and Styrofoam debris. The remaining plastic is deposited on local or
distant shores.
      (5)   Plastic fragments act as "sponges" for dangerous compounds such as
Dichloro- diphenyldichloroethylene (DDE), Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB), and
other toxic materials in ocean water. Plastics have been found to concentrate
these toxic chemicals at levels of up to one million times the levels found in
sea water.
      (6)   These highly contaminated fragments have been shown to cause
hormone disruption in the fish that ingest them, and in the humans that ingest
the fish.
      (7)   Data collected from the state's annual Coastal Cleanup and the 1999
Pilot Litter Study by the Department of Conservation "indicates that disposable
retail bags represent some of the most commonly littered items. Plastic bags
are easily carried by wind from uncovered trash and dumpsters, vehicles and
solid waste facilities including landfills."
      (8)   The US Marine Mammal Commission estimates that "257 marine species
have been reported entangled in or having ingested marine debris...the plastic
constricts the animals' movements and kills marine animals through starvation,
exhaustion or infection from deep wounds caused by tightening material. The
animals may starve to death as the plastic clogs their intestines preventing
them from obtaining vital nutrients. Toxic substances present in plastics are
known to cause death or reproductive failure in fish, shellfish and wildlife."
      (9)   The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reports that over 52,000
tons of disposable bags were used in California in 2000 and less than 50 tons
were recovered for recycling.
      (10)   According to Californians Against Waste, over 19 billion
disposable plastic bags are generated in California every year, resulting in
over 147,000 tons of waste. An estimated 60% of these bags are generated by
grocery stores. These bags represent a disproportionately large share of litter
and marine debris according to a 1999 Department of Conservation study.
      (11)   The economics of recycling plastic bags are difficult to sustain,
due to the logistics of sorting, contamination of inks, and the overall low
quality of the plastic used in plastic bags, resulting in an estimated rate of
1% to 3% of all plastic bags being recycled in any way.
      (12)   Many plastic bags collected for recycling never get recycled but
instead get shipped to third world countries where less stringent environmental
laws permit cheap incineration which emits toxic chemicals which are known to
cause harm and injury to human health.
      (13)   While there are many serious negative environmental impacts from
the use of paper grocery bags as well, nonetheless, 45% of all paper products
are recycled while less than 5% of plastics are recycled.
      (14)   Almost all curbside pickup and recycling centers allow customers
to mix paper bags with newspapers for recycling but very few accept plastic
bags for recycling.
      (15)   The proliferation of plastic carry-out bags at retail stores of
all kinds is unmitigated, and recent state legislation mandating that grocery
stores provide bins for plastic bag recycling (AB 2449) is not expected to have
significant impact on reducing the use of plastic bags (and may not improve
recycling rates, given the difficult logistics and poor economics of recycling
plastic bags).
      (16)   The EPA estimates that disposal costs for single-use retail bags
in the state exceeds $51,000,000 annually.
      (17)   The nation of Ireland imposed a $.17 surcharge on carry-out
plastic bags which resulted in a 90% decrease in consumption of plastic bags.
      (18)   State law does not prohibit local ordinances from seeking to
remedy this problem by banning plastic bags outright in favor of re-usable
cloth bags or paper bags or adding a surcharge for paper-carry out bags.
      (19)   Alternatives to plastic bags are readily available and include re-
usable cloth bags, paper bags, and grocery stores could do more to provide for
sale and encourage their customers to use such bags, making plastic
unnecessary.
      (20)   State law does not prohibit the adoption, implementation, or
enforcement of any local ordinance, resolution, regulation or rule governing
curbside or drop off recycling programs operated by, or pursuant to a contract
with a city, county or other public agency, including any action relating to
fees for these programs.
      (21)   The town has a duty to protect the natural environment, the
economy, and the health of its citizens.
      (22)   The town has adopted town-wide goals of 80% landfill diversion by
2012 and zero waste by 2020.
      (23)   The expansive usage of plastic shopping bags and their typical
disposal creates an impediment to Fairfax's landfill diversion goals.
      (24)   Plastic shopping bags are difficult to recycle and currently
contaminate, or will contaminate, material that is processed through Fairfax's
recycling and anticipated composting programs.
      (25)   Plastic shopping bags create significant litter problems in
Fairfax's neighborhoods and also its streets, parks, creeks and open space
lands.
      (26)   It is the intent of the State Legislature, in enacting Cal. Public
Resources Code Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 5.1 (commencing with § 42250), to
encourage the use of reusable bags by consumers and retailers and to reduce the
consumption of single-use bags.
   (B)   Therefore, a need exists to adopt regulations to reduce the use of
plastic bags in Fairfax.
(Ord. 722, passed 8-1-2007; Am. Ord. 726, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. approved
by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 8.18.020 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be entitled the "Plastic Bag Reduction Ordinance."
(Ord. 722, passed 8-1-2007; Am. Ord. 726, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. approved
by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 8.18.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
   CHECKOUT BAG. A carryout bag intended to convey or protect goods, products
or packaged food products provided by a store, eating place, shop, food vendor
or retail food vendor to a customer at the point of sale.
   EATING PLACE. A retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
prepared food and drinks for consumption on the premises as defined under
Municipal Code §
17.008.020 located within the geographical limits of the town.
   FOOD VENDOR. Any restaurant or retail food vendor as defined under Municipal
Code §
8.18.030.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
cooperative, partnership, or association.
   RECYCLABLE. Material that can be sorted, cleansed, and reconstituted using
the town's available recycling collection programs for the purpose of using the
altered form in the manufacture of a new product. Recycling does not include
burning, incinerating, converting, or otherwise thermally destroying solid
waste.
   RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG. A paper bag that is 100% recyclable overall and
contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content.
   RETAIL FOOD VENDOR. Any store, shop, sales outlet or other establishment,
including a grocery store or a delicatessen, other than a restaurant, located
within the town, which sells take-out food as defined under Municipal Code §
8.16.020 located within the geographical limits of the town.
   REUSABLE BAG. A bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and is either made of cloth or other machine
washable fabric.
   SHOP. A use devoted primarily to the sale of a service or a product or
products, but the service is performed or the product to be sold is prepared in
its finished form on the premises as defined under Municipal Code §
17.008.020 located within the geographical limits of the town. Notwithstanding
the foregoing, dry cleaning establishments are excluded from the definition of
SHOP.
   STORE. A public establishment devoted exclusively to the retail sale of a
commodity or commodities as defined under Municipal Code §
17.008.020 located within the geographical limits of the town.
(Ord. 722, passed 8-1-2007; Am. Ord. 726, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. approved
by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 8.18.040 MANDATORY USE OF RECYCLABLE OR REUSABLE CHECKOUT BAGS.
   (A)   All stores, shops, eating places, food vendors and retail food
vendors, shall provide only the following as checkout bags to customers:
recyclable paper bags, or reusable bags.
   (B)   Violation of the requirements set forth in division (A) of this
section shall subject stores, shops, eating places, food vendors and retail
food vendors to penalties set forth in Municipal Code §
8.18.060.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be read to preclude stores, shops,
eating places and retail food vendors from making reusable bags available for
sale to customers.
(Ord. 722, passed 8-1-2007; Am. Ord. 726, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. approved
by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 18.18.050 IMPLEMENTATION.
   The Town Council, after a public hearing, may adopt and may amend
guidelines, rules, regulations and forms to implement and enforce this chapter.
(Ord. approved by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 18.18.060 NOTIFICATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
      (A)   The town shall provide a copy of this chapter to every new store,
shop, eating place, food vendor and retail food vendor that applies for a
business license in the town. Thirty days before this chapter becomes
operative, the town shall mail or deliver a copy of it to every store, shop,
eating place, food vendor and retail food vendor within the town.
   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee will have primary
responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The Town Manager or his or her
designee is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other
actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not
limited to, entering the premises of any affected retail store to verify
compliance.
   (C)   Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction.
If charged as an infraction, upon conviction thereof, said person shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding $100 for a first violation, a fine not
exceeding $200 for a second violation within the same year, and a fine not
exceeding $500 for each additional violation within the same year.
   (D)   In the event that the town adopts an ordinance creating a procedure
for imposing and reviewing Administrative Penalties pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code
§ 53069.4, the town may impose Administrative Penalties for violation of this
chapter as follows:
      (1)   In an amount not exceeding $100 for the first violation;
      (2)   In an amount not exceeding $200 for the second violation in the
same year; and
      (3)   In an amount not exceeding $500 for each subsequent violation in
the same year.
   (E)   The Town Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable
relief to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. approved by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 8.18.070 OPERATIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become operative six months after its effective date.
(Ord. approved by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 8.18.080 NO CONFLICT WITH FEDERAL OR STATE LAW.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any
requirement, power or duty in conflict with any federal or state law.
(Ord. 722, passed 8-1-2007; Am. Ord. 726, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. approved
by voters 11-4-2008)
§ 8.18.090 UNDERTAKING FOR THE GENERAL WELFARE.
   In undertaking the implementation of this chapter, the town is assuming an
undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it
imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is
liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately
caused injury.
(Ord. 722, passed 8-1-2007; Am. Ord. 726, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. approved
by voters 11-4-2008)
CHAPTER 8.19: PAPER BAG REDUCTION
Section
   
8.19.010   Short title
   
8.19.020   Definitions
   
8.19.030   Checkout bag charge
   
8.19.040   Implementation
   
8.19.050   Penalties
   
8.19.060   Operative date
   
8.19.070   No conflict with state or federal law
§ 8.19.010 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be entitled the “Paper Bag Reduction Ordinance.”
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
§ 8.19.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
   CHECKOUT BAG. A carryout bag intended to convey or protect goods, products
or packaged food products provided by a store to a customer at the point of
sale. A CHECKOUT BAG does not include a product bag or a bag provided by a
pharmacy pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code Division 2, Chapter 9,
commencing with § 4000, to a customer purchasing a prescription medication.
   PERSON. An individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
cooperative, partnership, or association.
   PAPER BAG. A checkout bag that is made entirely or mostly from paper.
   PRODUCT BAG. Any bag without handles used exclusively to carry produce,
meats, or other food items such as bulk foods to the point of sale inside a
store or to prevent such food items from coming into direct contact with other
purchased items.
   RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG. A paper bag that is 100% recyclable overall and
contains a minimum of 40% post-consumer recycled content.
   REUSABLE BAG. A checkout bag with handles that is specifically designed and
manufactured for multiple reuse and is either made of cloth or other machine
washable fabric.
   STORE. A public establishment at least 5,000 square feet in size (including
outdoor sales or service space) that is devoted exclusively to the retail sale
of a commodity or commodities as defined under §
17.008.020 of this code and located within the geographical limits of the town
or a supermarket, food, or grocery store located within the geographical limits
of the town.
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
§ 8.19.030 CHECKOUT BAG CHARGE.
   (A)   No store shall provide a paper bag or recyclable paper bag to a
customer at the point of sale, unless the customer is charged at least $0.10
per checkout bag. The Town Council may increase the checkout bag charge by
adoption of a resolution to that effect if it determines that a charge in a
greater amount is necessary to accomplish the goals of this chapter.
   (B)   All stores must indicate on the customer receipt the number of
checkout bags provided and the total amount charged for checkout bags.
   (C)   All stores must post signage clearly indicating the per bag charge for
checkout bags.
   (D)   No store shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer any portion of
the minimum charge required by division (A) above, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
   (E)   Exceptions.
      (1)   A store may provide reusable bags to customers at no cost only when
combined with a time limited promotional program, not to exceed 12 days per
year.
      (2)   All stores must provide at the point of sale, free of charge,
either reusable bags or recyclable paper bags or both, at the store’s option,
to any customer participating either in the California Special Supplemental
Food Program for Women, Infants, and Children pursuant to Cal. Health and
Safety Code Division 106, Part 2, Chapter 1, Article 2, commencing with §
123275, or in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Cal. Welfare and
Institutions Code Division 9, Part 3, Chapter 10, commencing with § 15500.
      (3)   Any owner or operator of a store may petition the Town Manager, or
his or her duly authorized designee, for a full or partial waiver of the
requirements of this section, for a period of up to one year, if the owner or
operator can demonstrate that application of this section would create undue
hardship or practical difficulty for the store not generally applicable to
other stores in similar circumstances.
   (F)   All monies collected by a store for checkout bags under this chapter
may be used by the store for any lawful purpose.
   (G)   Violation of the requirements set forth in division (A) of this
section shall subject the store or store owner to penalties set forth in §
8.19.050 of this code.
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
§ 18.19.040 IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   The town shall provide a copy of this chapter to every new store that
applies for a business license in the town. Thirty days before this chapter
becomes operative, the town shall mail or deliver a copy of it to every store
within the town.
   (B)   The Town Manager or his or her designee will have primary
responsibility for enforcement of this chapter. The Town Manager or his or her
designee is authorized to promulgate regulations and to take any and all other
actions reasonable and necessary to enforce this chapter, including, but not
limited to, creating forms, investigating violations, issuing fines, and
entering the premises of any store during business hours.
   (C)   The Town Council may increase the $0.10 minimum charge by resolution.
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
§ 18.19.050 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction,
punishable in accordance with
Chapter 1.08 of this code.
   (B)   Administrative citation and fine may also be imposed in accordance
with
Chapter 1.10. The town may impose administrative fines for violation of this
chapter as follows:
      (1)   In an amount not exceeding $100 for the first violation;
      (2)   In an amount not exceeding $200 for the second violation in the
same year; and
      (3)   In an amount not exceeding $500 for each subsequent violation in
the same year.
   (C)   The Town Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or other equitable
relief to enforce this chapter. The remedies and penalties provided in this
section are cumulative and not exclusive.
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
§ 8.19.060 OPERATIVE DATE.
   This chapter is effective 30 days after adoption, with enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter commencing on January 1, 2015.
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
§ 8.19.070 NO CONFLICT WITH STATE OR FEDERAL LAW.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended to create any requirement, power or duty
that is in conflict with any federal or state law.
(Ord. 784, passed 10-1-2014)
CHAPTER 8.20: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
8.20.010   Policy declaration; nuisance declared
   
8.20.020   Definitions
   
8.20.030   Compliance by town departments
   
8.20.040   Complaint investigation; noise measurement procedure
   
8.20.050   Exterior noise limits
   
8.20.060   Prohibited acts
   
8.20.070   Exemptions
   
8.20.080   Prima facie violation
   
8.20.090   Notice of violation
   
8.20.100   Violation; penalty
   
8.20.110   Additional remedies
   
8.20.120   Exception procedure
   
8.20.130   Declared emergency
§ 8.20.010 POLICY DECLARATION; NUISANCE DECLARED.
   (A)   In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise in the
town, it is declared to be the policy of the town to prohibit the noise
generated from or by all sources as specified in this chapter. It is the policy
of the town to maintain quiet in those areas which exhibit low noise levels and
to implement programs aimed at reducing noise in those areas within the town
where noise levels are above acceptable values.
   (B)   It is determined that certain noise levels are detrimental to the
public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to public interest.
Therefore, the town does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing
or allowing to be created, caused or maintained, any noise in a manner
prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a
public nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.010) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.020 DEFINITIONS.
   All terminology used in this chapter, not defined in this section, shall be
in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
   A WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL. The sound level in decibels as measured on a sound
level meter using the A weighted network. The level so read is designated dB(A)
or dBA.
   AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL. The composite of noise from all sources near and far.
In this context, the ambient noise level constitutes the normal or existing
level of environmental noise at a given location.
   COMMERCIAL AREA. Any part of the areas designated as commercial zones by the
zoning ordinance of the town.
   CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair,
alteration or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way,
structures, utilities or similar property.
   DECIBEL. A unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to 20 times
the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
   DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of
structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces or similar
property.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
emergency.
   FIXED NOISE SOURCE. A stationary device which creates sounds while fixed or
motionless, including, but not limited to residential, agricultural, industrial
and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air
conditioners and refrigeration equipment.
   IMPULSIVE SOUND. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with
an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include
explosions, drop forge impacts and the discharge of firearms.
   NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which, as judged by the Chief of Police or his
or her designated representative, violates the limits set forth in the table of
§
8.20.050 of this chapter. Compliance with this chapter shall constitute
elimination of a noise disturbance.
   NOISE ZONE. Any defined areas or regions of a generally consistent land use
as shown on Exhibit A, Noise Zones of the Town of Fairfax, attached to the
ordinance codified in this chapter and available for inspection in the office
of the Town Clerk.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and
includes, any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of a
state or any political subdivision of a state.
    PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any real property or structures thereon which are
owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
   PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property or structures thereon which are owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
   PURE TONE. Any sound which can be judged as audible as a single pitch or a
set of single pitches by the Chief of Police or his or her designated
representative. In case of dispute, a PURE TONE shall exist if the one-third-
octave band sound pressure level in the band with the tone exceeds the
arithmetic average of the sound pressure levels of the two contiguous one-
third-octave bands by five decibels for center frequencies of 500 Hertz and
above and by eight decibels for center frequencies between 160 and 40 Hertz and
by 15 decibels for center frequencies less than or equal to 125 Hertz.
   REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its
vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from
that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property
divisions.
   RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any part of the areas designated as residential zones by
the zoning ordinance of the town.
   SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any device for the amplification of the human
voice, music or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used
and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed,
and, as used in this chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles
or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety
purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL METER. An instrument, including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of sound
levels, which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for type S2A meters
in American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications for sound level
meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.
   SOUND TRUCK. Any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive
power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon or attached
thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment.
   WEEKDAY. Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a legal holiday.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.020) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.030 COMPLIANCE BY TOWN DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   All departments of the town shall carry out their activities in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Each department whose duty it is to review and approve new projects,
or changes to existing projects, which result or may result in the emission of
noise shall make the finding that the project complies with the provisions of
this chapter prior to project approval.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.030) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.040 COMPLAINT INVESTIGATION; NOISE MEASUREMENT PROCEDURE.
    Upon receipt of a complaint from a citizen, the Chief of Police or his or
her designated representative, equipped with a sound level meter, shall
investigate the complaint. The investigation shall consist of a measurement and
the gathering of data to define adequately the noise problem and shall include
the following.
   (A)   Non-acoustic data.
      (1)   Type of noise source;
      (2)   Location of noise source relative to complainant’s property;
      (3)   Time period during which noise source is considered by complainant
to be intrusive;
      (4)   Total duration of noise produced by noise source; and
      (5)   Date and time of noise measurement survey.
   (B)   Noise measurement procedure:
      (1)   Utilizing the A weighting scale of the sound level meter and the
“slow” meter response (use “fast” response for impulsive type sounds), the
noise level shall be measured at a position or positions at any point on the
complainant’s property line.
      (2)   In general, the microphone shall be located four to five feet above
the ground, ten feet or more from the nearest reflective surface, where
possible; however, in those cases where another elevation is deemed
appropriate, the latter shall be utilized. Calibration of the measurement
equipment, utilizing an acoustic calibrator, shall be performed immediately
prior to recording any noise data.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.040) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 529, passed - -
1984)
§ 8.20.050 EXTERIOR NOISE LIMITS.
   (A)   Maximum permissible sound levels by receiving land use.
      (1)   The noise standards for the various noise zones as presented in the
following table shall, unless otherwise specifically indicated, apply to all
such property within a designated zone.
      (2)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound
at any location within the incorporated town, or allow the creation of any
noise on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by the
person, which causes the noise level when measured at the complainant’s
property line to exceed the limits in the table below for more than seven and
one-half minutes in a 15- minute period. Those seven and one-half minutes need
not be continuous.
      (3)   If the measured ambient level differs from that permissible, the
allowable noise exposure standard shall be adjusted in five-decibel increments
in each category as appropriate to encompass or reflect the ambient noise
level.
      (4)   If the measurement location is on a boundary between two different
zones, the noise level limit applicable to the lower noise zone shall apply.
   (B)   Correction for character of sound.
      (1)   In the event the alleged offensive noise, as judged by the Chief of
Police or his or her designated representative, contains a steady, audible tone
such as a whine, screech or hum, or is a repetitive noise such as hammering or
riveting, or contains music or speech, the standard limits set forth in the
table below shall be reduced by five decibels.
Exterior Noise Limits
(Levels not be be exceeded more than 7.5 minutes in any 15-minute
period)
Noise Zone            Time Period                  Noise Level (dBA)
A (Residential)       Night 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 40
                      Day   7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 50
B (Multiple Dwelling, Night 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 50
Residential)          Day   7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 55
C (Commercial)        Night 10:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 55
                      Day   7:00 a.m. - 10:00 p.m. 60
 
      (2)   These zones are illustrated on Exhibit A, “Noise Zones, Town of
Fairfax,” attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter. Areas that are
not covered on the map are included in Zone A.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.050) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 529, passed - -
1984)
§ 8.20.060 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   Street sales.
      (1)   Offering for sale, selling anything or advertising by shouting or
outcry within any residential or commercial area or noise-sensitive zone of the
town is prohibited, except by permit issued by the town.
      (2)   The provisions of this division (A) shall not be construed to
prohibit the selling, by outcry, of merchandise, food and beverages at licensed
sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similar licensed public
entertainment events.
   (B)   Animals and birds.
      (1)   Owning, possessing or harboring any animal which makes noise which
is detectable on the complainant’s property, and which is repeated
intermittently for a duration of 15 minutes or more, is prohibited.
      (2)   In addition to being subject to the penalties of this chapter,
animal noise disturbance cases will also be referred to the Humane Society.
   (C)   Construction/demolition domestic power tools.
      (1)   The operation of any tools or equipment used in construction or
demolition work or in property maintenance work between the hours of 6:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday or on weekends and holidays between the
hours of 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. such that the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance is prohibited.
      (2)   Operating or permitted the operation of any mechanically powered
tools between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Monday through Friday and
between 4:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays is prohibited.
   (D)   Machinery. Any motor, machinery or pump, such as swimming pool
equipment and the like, shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and
maintained so as not to create a noise or disturbance.
   (E)   Motor vehicle horns. It is unlawful for any person to sound a
vehicular horn, except as a warning signal, pursuant to Cal. Motor Vehicle Code
§ 27001.
   (F)   Motorized recreational vehicles operating off public right-of-way.
      (1)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motorized
recreational vehicle off a public right-of-way in a manner that the sound
levels emitted therefrom violate the provisions of §
8.20.050.
      (2)   This division (F) applies to all motorized recreational vehicles,
whether or not duly licensed and registered, including, but not limited to
commercial or noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, go-carts, campers and
dune buggies.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.060) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 770, passed 11-6-
2013)
Editor’s Note:
   Nighttime limits shall apply to these time periods.
§ 8.20.070 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the
existence of an emergency; or
      (2)   The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
   (B)   Warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, as, for
example, burglar alarms, police, fire and ambulance sirens and the fire horn,
are exempted from the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to occasional outdoor
gatherings, public dances, shows and sporting and entertainment events,
provided the events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the
town relative to the staging of the events.
   (D)   Operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered
tools or equipment for construction, demolition or property maintenance work
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. on weekends and holidays are exempt.
   (E)   Anyone operating mechanically powered tools during permitted hours
shall use best practices to minimize flying dust and debris and to protect
neighbors, pedestrians and others nearby from disturbed particulate matter.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.070) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 731, passed 2-6-
2008; Am. Ord. 770, passed 11-6-2013)
§ 8.20.080 PRIMA FACIE VIOLATION.
   Any noise exceeding the noise level limits specified in §
8.20.050 shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.080) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.090 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   At the discretion of a police officer, the owner or operator of a noise
source, which, upon investigation, has been found to exceed permitted limits,
shall be informed of the violation and asked to take corrective action to
eliminate the violation. If the owner or operator fails to eliminate the
violation, he or she may be cited for a misdemeanor violation.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.090) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.100 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not
to exceed $500, or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not to exceed
six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment. Each day the violation is
committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and
shall be punishable as such.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.100) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.110 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device,
instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter,
which operation or maintenance causes or creates sound levels exceeding the
allowable limits as specified in this chapter, shall be subject to abatement as
provided by law or by a restraining order or injunction, issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   By resolution, the Town Council may declare the expense of the
abatement to be a lien against the property on which the nuisance is
maintained, and the lien shall be made a personal obligation of the property
owner.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.110) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981)
§ 8.20.120 EXCEPTION PROCEDURE.
   The owner or operator of a noise source which exceeds any of the provisions
of this chapter may apply for an exception from the regulations designated in
this chapter, on the basis of undue hardship.
   (A)   Administration.
      (1)   The Planning Director shall process and act on exceptions to this
chapter.
      (2)   The Planning Director shall:
         (a)   Review and act upon all applications for exceptions;
         (b)   Review and act upon appeals from staff interpretation of this
chapter;
         (c)   Approve a set of rules of procedure for processing exceptions;
         (d)   Establish the dates, times and place of meetings for official
action under his or her authority;
         (e)   Prescribe any reasonable requirements deemed necessary to
minimize adverse effects on the community or the surrounding neighborhood as a
condition to the exception; and
         (f)   Prescribe a time limitation for the exception.
      (3)   (a)   Decisions of the Planning Director may be appealed to the
Town Council by any interested party, within ten working days of the action, on
a form prescribed by the Town Clerk.
         (b)   The appeal shall be filed with a fee adopted by resolution of
the Town Council.
      (4)   (a)   The application shall be filed on a form prescribed by the
Planning Director and accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the Town
Council.
         (b)   A separate application shall be filed for each noise source;
provided, however, that, several mobile sources under common ownership or
several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one
application.
   (B)   Reports of meetings. Within ten days of any action taken, the Planning
Director shall submit a written report to the Town Council, setting forth the
nature of the application acted on, the action taken, the basis of the action
taken and a reasonable time period for which the exception shall be effective.
   (C)   Exception criteria. The Planning Director may grant the exception as
applied for only if it is found that:
      (1)   Additional time is reasonable and necessary for the applicant to
alter or modify the activity; or
      (2)   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with this chapter.
   (D)   Application. An application for an exception shall remain subject to
prosecution under the terms of this chapter until an exception is granted.
(Prior Code, § 8.16.120) (Ord. 481, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 770, passed 11-6-
2013)
§ 8.20.130 DECLARED EMERGENCY.
   In the case of any event that is declared by the Town Council, Town Manager,
Police Chief, or Fire Chief to be a town wide or localized emergency, the
limits on the hours of operation of all power tools shall be lifted.
(Ord. 770, passed 11-6-2013)
CHAPTER 8.24: ABATEMENT OF FIRE HAZARDS ASSOCIATED WITH FLAMMABLE VEGETATION
AND OTHER MATERIALS
Section
   
8.24.010   Nuisance declared
   
8.24.020   Notice to abate
   
8.24.030   Abatement and assessment of cost
§ 8.24.010 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   All rubbish, weeds, dry brush, dry grass and other rank growth, and all
trimmings and cuttings thereof, or of trees, and all dead trees and all bushes,
brush or grass or other matter which is in such state or condition as to be or
become a fire menace because of the dryness thereof, or which are otherwise
dangerous as a fire menace and which are on any lot or premises in the town, or
on the sidewalk area in front of the lot or premises or adjacent thereto, are
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.010) (Ord. 642, passed - -1995)
§ 8.24.020 NOTICE TO ABATE.
   (A)   The Fire Chief is authorized to require the abatement of any nuisance
condition described in §
8.24.010. Notice requiring the abatement of the nuisance shall be given by mail
to the owner of the property upon which, or in front of which, the nuisance
exists at the owner’s address as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of
the County of Marin.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   The street address and Assessor’s parcel number for the affected
property;
      (2)   The date of inspection of the property by the Fire Department
during which the nuisance was discovered;
      (3)   A description of the nuisance and its location on, or in front of,
the property;
      (4)   The abatement action which the owner is required to take and a time
limit for the abatement;
      (5)   A statement that if the owner fails to abate the nuisance within
the prescribed time the Fire Department, or other town agent, will abate the
nuisance; and
      (6)   A statement that if the Fire Department, or other town agent, is
required to abate the nuisance, the cost of the abatement will be assessed as a
lien against the property.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.020) (Ord. 642, passed - -1995)
§ 8.24.030 ABATEMENT AND ASSESSMENT OF COST.
   (A)   Should the abatement of the nuisance not be accomplished by the owner
of the affected property within the period set forth in the notice requiring
abatement, the Fire Chief is authorized to perform the abatement and shall keep
an accurate account of the cost of the abatement.
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Chief shall mail written notice of the cost to the
owner of the affected property who may, within 15 days of the date of the
mailing, request a hearing by the Fire Chief with respect to the cost.
      (2)   The decision of the Fire Chief shall be final.
      (3)   The cost of abatement, as finally fixed and determined by the Fire
Chief, shall constitute a special assessment against the affected property.
      (4)   The Fire Chief shall also file a copy of the order confirming the
assessment with the County Auditor and the amount of the assessment shall,
thereafter, be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary property
taxes.
   (C)   If delinquent, the amount of the assessment shall be subject to the
same penalties and procedure for foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary,
property taxes.
(Prior Code, § 8.20.030) (Ord. 642, passed - -1995)
CHAPTER 8.28: WATERCOURSES
Section
   
8.28.010   Creek defined
   
8.28.020   Nuisance declared
   
8.28.030   Placing debris in creeks unlawful
   
8.28.040   Duty of landowners
   
8.28.050   Removal of obstructions by Director of Public Works
   
8.28.060   Abatement by Council resolution
   
8.28.070   Abatement; notice; hearing; Council decision final
   
8.28.080   Abatement; order to proceed; owner’s right to do work
   
8.28.090   Abatement costs; report; posting
   
8.28.100   Abatement costs; confirmation; collection
   
8.28.110   Construction or removal work; permit required
   
8.28.120   Permit; application
   
8.28.130   Permit; application; review
   
8.28.140   Permit; issuance subject to conditions; appeal; hearing
   
8.28.150   Preparation of plans and specifications
§ 8.28.010 CREEK DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CREEK. San Anselmo Creek, all its tributaries, Fairfax Creek, or any other
creek, channel or watercourse wherein, during the rainy season of the year or
any other time, water runs in a defined channel.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.010)
§ 8.28.020 NUISANCE DECLARED.
   It is declared that each creek in the town and the free and unobstructed
flow thereof is essential to the proper drainage of the town and to the
protection of life and property in the town. Any weeds, trees, debris, rubbish,
rank growth or thing whatsoever in any creek which at any time interferes with
the free and unobstructed flow of water in the creek constitutes a public
nuisance and is subject to summary abatement as provided by law or as provided
in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.020)
§ 8.28.030 PLACING DEBRIS IN CREEKS UNLAWFUL.
   It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or place any rubbish,
debris, garbage or other personal property in any creek, or to in any way
obstruct the free flow of water, in any creek at any time.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.030)
§ 8.28.040 DUTY OF LANDOWNERS.
   Every owner of property in the town shall, at all times, keep free and clear
of weeds, trees, debris, rubbish or any other obstruction all creeks or
portions thereof which flow upon, over or across the property of the owner, and
the failure to do so shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.040)
§ 8.28.050 REMOVAL OF OBSTRUCTIONS BY DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director shall ascertain whether any creek is being
obstructed and may remove any such obstructions to creeks, and for that purpose
may enter upon any private property in the town.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works may widen, straighten and deepen the
channel in any creek in the town to such an extent as to provide a channel that
will carry all water normally flowing in the creek during seasonal rains.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.050)
§ 8.28.060 ABATEMENT BY COUNCIL RESOLUTION.
   In addition to the provision for summary abatement in §
8.28.050 of any obstruction to a creek as a nuisance, and as a supplementary
method of removal of same, the Town Council may, by resolution, declare any
weeds, trees, dirt, debris, rubbish, rank growths or any other thing found in
any creek to be a public nuisance. The resolution shall refer to the nature of
the public nuisance and describe the property upon which the nuisance exists by
giving the lot and block number or other description of the same, according to
the official maps of the town, or the description on the assessment roll of the
town used for describing property on tax bills. No other description shall be
required.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.060)
§ 8.28.070 ABATEMENT; NOTICE; HEARING; COUNCIL DECISION FINAL.
   (A)   (1)   After the adoption of any such resolution as provided in §
8.28.060, the Director of Public Works shall prepare three copies of a notice
entitled “NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE,” which notice shall describe with
reasonable certainty the nature, description and location of the nuisance, and
shall contain a time and date when the owner of the property upon which the
nuisance exists may appear
before the Town Council and show reason why such condition does not constitute
a nuisance and is not an obstruction to any creek.
      (2)   Two of the notices shall be posted on the property described
therein, and a third copy shall be mailed by registered mail, postage prepaid,
to the person appearing upon the records of the Town Assessor as the owner of
the property, at his or her last known address as shown by the records.
      (3)   The mailing and posting shall be done at least five days before the
hearing.
   (B)   At the time and place stated in the notice, the Town Council shall
hear all persons interested in the matter and consider all objections to the
removal of any such nuisance or obstruction. Upon the conclusion of the
hearing, the Town Council, by resolution, shall allow or overrule any or all
objections, whereupon the Town Council shall be deemed to have acquired
jurisdiction to proceed to order the removal of any such obstruction or the
widening, deepening or straightening of any channel of any creek in the town.
The decision of the Town Council on the matter shall be deemed final and
conclusive.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.070)
§ 8.28.080 ABATEMENT; ORDER TO PROCEED; OWNER’S RIGHT TO DO WORK.
   After the hearing provided for in §
8.28.070, the Town Council may, by resolution, order the Director of Public
Works to abate any such nuisance and remove any obstruction referred to in the
proceedings, and the Director of Public Works and his or her deputies are
expressly authorized to enter upon private property for that purpose. Any
property owner shall have the right to have any such obstruction or nuisance
removed at his or her own expense, providing the same is done prior to the date
set forth for the removal by the Director of Public Works or his or her
representative.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.080)
§ 8.28.090 ABATEMENT COSTS; REPORT; POSTING.
   The Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate account of the cost of
abating the nuisance and the removal of any such obstruction, and shall render
an itemized report in writing to the Town Council, showing the cost of the
removal and abatement; provided that, before the report is submitted to the
Town Council, a copy of same shall be posted for at least three days prior
thereto on the property from which the obstruction was removed or nuisance
abated, together with a notice of the time when the report shall be submitted
to the Town Council for confirmation.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.090)
§ 8.28.100 ABATEMENT COSTS; CONFIRMATION; COLLECTION.
   (A)   At the time fixed for receiving and confirming the report of the
Director of Public Works, the Town Council shall hear the same, together with
any objection which may be raised by any property owner liable to be assessed
for the work of abating the nuisance or removal of the obstruction, and the
Town Council shall thereupon make the modification in the report as they may
deem necessary, after which, by resolution, the report shall be confirmed.
   (B)   The amounts of the cost for abating the nuisance or removal of the
obstruction from any property mentioned in the report shall constitute a
special assessment against the parcel of land, and after thus made and
confirmed, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the
assessment. After confirmation of the report, a copy thereof shall be turned
over to the Assessor and the Tax Collector, whereupon it shall be the duty of
the officers to add the amounts of the assessment to the next regular bill for
taxes levied against the lot or parcel for municipal purposes, and the lien
shall be collected in the same manner as other general municipal taxes. The
amount of costs for removal hereinabove mentioned shall be and constitute the
personal obligation of the owner of the property, and the Town Council may
enforce the obligation by suit at law.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.100)
§ 8.28.110 CONSTRUCTION OR REMOVAL WORK; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to build, construct or reconstruct any retaining wall, crib
wall, bulkhead, bridge or other structure in, over, across or upon any creek,
or to remove any tree within the flood level of any creek in the town, without
first securing a permit.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.110) (Ord. 496, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 499, passed - -
1982)
§ 8.28.120 PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)    Any person who desires to build, construct or maintain any structure
described in §
8.28.110 shall apply for a permit therefor to the Building Inspector. The
application shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   An affidavit in writing by the applicant, stating the following:
         (a)    The structure to be built shall not intrude into the creek
beyond the point of any structure which it replaces or beyond the creekbed’s
previous bank; and
         (b)   The applicant/owner agrees to hold the town harmless from the
claims of any and all persons who may assert any damage by reason of the
placement of the structure.
      (2)   An affidavit in writing by the project engineer stating that, in
the opinion of the engineer,
the structure will not significantly change the course of the creek in a manner
which creates a hydraulic impact on other property according to accepted
engineering standards.
   (B)   An application for a tree removal permit shall be made pursuant to
Chapter 12.44 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.120) (Ord. 496, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 499, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 511, passed - -1983)
§ 8.28.130 PERMIT; APPLICATION; REVIEW.
   Forthwith, the Building Inspector shall refer each application to a
designated staff member who will check the project for compliance with design
criteria adopted from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. These
design criteria may impose reasonable restrictions, such as requiring textured
treatment of exposed concrete and suitable landscaping of fill and excavation
made in the construction of the structures, including, but not limited to
redwood timbers.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.130) (Ord. 496, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 499, passed - -
1982)
§ 8.28.140 PERMIT; ISSUANCE SUBJECT TO CONDITIONS; APPEAL; HEARING.
   If the Building Inspector finds and determines that the proposed structure
will not, in any way, impede and/or improperly divert the passage of water
within the creek, he or she shall approve the plans and issue the permit
subject to such conditions as he or she believes necessary to ensure the
continued flow of water and including conditions imposed by the adopted design
criteria. Any person dissatisfied with any action of the Building Inspector in
this connection may appeal the same to the Planning Commission in writing
within ten days after notification of the action of the Building Inspector. The
Planning Commission shall conduct a hearing on the appeal, and its decision
shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.140) (Ord. 496, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 499, passed - -
1982)
§ 8.28.150 PREPARATION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Should the Building Inspector determine that the construction proposed does
not require any special skill or knowledge, and that the structure is of such a
small nature as to make expensive design impracticable, the Building Inspector
may waive the requirement that plans and specifications are to be prepared by a
duly licensed civil engineer, and may accept plans prepared by the applicant or
his or her agents.
(Prior Code, § 8.24.150) (Ord. 496, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 499, passed - -
1982)
CHAPTER 8.32: URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION PREVENTION
Section
   
8.32.010   Title, purpose and general provisions
   
8.32.020   Discharge regulations and requirements
   
8.32.030   Inspection and enforcement
§ 8.32.010 TITLE, PURPOSE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the "Town of Fairfax Urban
Runoff Pollution Prevention Ordinance" and may be so cited.
   (B)   Purpose and intent.
      (1)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety
and general welfare of Town of Fairfax citizens and to protect and enhance
watercourses, fish and wildlife habitat by:
         (a)   Minimizing discharges other than storm runoff to storm drains or
watercourses;
         (b)   Responding to the discharge of spills, preventing and
controlling the discharge of spills to storm drains or watercourses and
prohibiting dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater;
         (c)   Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum
extent practicable;
         (d)   Requiring operators of construction sites, new or redeveloped
land, and industrial and commercial facilities to install, implement, or
maintain appropriate best management practices (BMPs); and
         (e)   Maintaining pre-development stormwater runoff rates and
preventing nonpoint source pollution whenever possible, through stormwater
management controls and ensuring that these management controls are properly
maintained.
      (2) The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water
quality of the state's, and the nation's watercourses, water bodies and
wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act. (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Cal.
Water Code §§ 13000 et seq.), and the Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm
Sewer System (MS4) National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
Permit, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001—DWQ, General Permit No. CAS000004
(Phase II Stormwater Permit) and subsequent revisions and amendments thereto.
   (C)   Definitions. Any terms defined in the Phase II Stormwater Permit, the
federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and acts amendatory thereof
or supplementary thereto, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater
discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency on
November 16, 1990, as may from time to time be amended, as used in this chapter
shall have the same meaning as in the Act or regulations. In the event of any
conflict, the relevant state or federal law definition will prevail over the
definitions contained herein and shall be incorporated by reference into this
chapter. The terms include, but are not limited to the following:
      AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. The Town Manager and his/her designee
are hereby appointed authorized enforcement official(s) of this chapter.
      BASMAA POST CONSTRUCTION MANUAL. The most recent version of the Bay Area
Stormwater Management Agencies (BASMAA) Post Construction Manual which provides
design guidelines for reducing stormwater pollutant discharges through the
construction, operation and maintenance of source control measures, low impact
development design, site design measures, stormwater treatment measures and
hydromodification management measures.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. Schedules of activities, prohibitions
of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention
practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or
reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the
United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures
and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
recycling or disposal or drainage from raw material storage.
      CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Any activity that involves soil disturbing
activities including, but not limited to, clearing, paving, grading,
disturbances to ground such as stockpiling, and excavation.
      DISCHARGE OF A POLLUTANT.
         (a)   The addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to
waters of the United States from any point source; or
         (b)   Any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to
the waters of the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than
a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of
transportation. The term includes additions of pollutants to waters of the
United States from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by man;
discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances owned by a State,
municipality, or other person which do not lead to a treatment works; and
discharges through pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately
or publicly owned treatment works.
      ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any device or method that conveys non-stormwater to a
municipal separate storm sewer (storm drain) system (MS4) or receiving water.
      ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to a municipal separate storm sewer
(storm drain) system (MS4) that is prohibited under local, state, or federal
statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. The term illicit discharge
includes all non-stormwater discharges not composed entirely of stormwater and
discharges that are identified under the discharge regulations and requirements
section of this chapter. The term illicit discharge does not include discharges
that are regulated by an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for
discharges from the MS4).
      INCIDENTAL IRRIGATION RUNOFF.  Unintended amounts (volume) of runoff,
such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the
landscaped area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is not
considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to
excessive application, if it is due to intentional overflow or application, or
if it is due to negligence.
      LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID). A sustainable practice that benefits water
supply and contributes to water quality protection. LID uses site design and
stormwater management to maintain the site's pre-development runoff rates and
volumes. The goal of LID is to mimic a site's predevelopment hydrology by using
design techniques that infiltrate, filter, store, evaporate, and detain runoff
close to the source of rainfall.
      MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP). The minimum required performance
standards, BMPs, control techniques and systems, design and engineering
methods, and such other provisions as the Environmental Protection Agency
Administrator or the State determines appropriate for reducing pollutants in
stormwater. MEP is the cumulative effect of implementing, evaluating, and
making corresponding changes to a variety of technically appropriate and
economically feasible BMPs, ensuring that the most appropriate controls are
implemented in the most effective manner. This process of implementing,
evaluation, revising, or adding new BMPs is commonly referred to as the
iterative process.
      MCSTOPPP. The Marin County Stormwater Pollution Prevention Program.
      NPDES PERMIT. A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State
Water Resources Control Board, or a California Regional Water Quality Control
Board pursuant to the Clean Water Act that authorizes discharges to waters of
the United States.
      NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge that is not entirely composed of
stormwater.
      PHASE II STORMWATER PERMIT. The NPDES general stormwater permit
applicable to the County of Marin, Water Quality Order No. 2013-0001—DWQ,
General Permit No. CAS000004, and any subsequent amendment, reissuance or
successor to this NPDES permit.
      POLLUTANT. Dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, pet wastes, manure, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or
discarded equipment, sediment, cellar dirt, dumped yard wastes, and industrial,
municipal and agricultural waste; or sand and gravel placed in such a way as to
be carried away by stormwater into the storm drains or watercourses of the
town.
      PREMISES. Any building, lot parcel, real estate or land or portion of
land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking
strips.
      STORM DRAINS. Includes, but is not limited to those stormwater drainage
conveyance facilities within the town by which stormwater may be conveyed to
waters of the United States, including any roads with drainage systems,
municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or
storm drains, which are not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) pt. 122.2.
      STORMWATER or STORM RUNOFF. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and
surface runoff and drainage.
      STORMWATER CONTROL PLAN. A plan that meets those criteria contained in
the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.
      STORMWATER FACILITIES OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN. A plan identifying
the locations and characteristics of stormwater management facilities on a
newly developed or redeveloped site and describing maintenance activities,
schedules, and responsibilities to ensure the ongoing proper operation of those
facilities.
      STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY. Any device designated to detain, retain,
filter, or infiltrate stormwater, including, but not limited to, bioretention
facilities.
      TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
      URBAN RUNOFF. Stormwater runoff from an urbanized area including streets
and adjacent domestic and commercial properties that carries pollutants of
various types into the storm drainage system and receiving waters.
      WATERCOURSE. Any natural or once natural flowing river, creek, stream,
swale or drainageway, whether perennial, intermittent or ephemeral. Includes
natural waterways that have been channelized but does not include channels,
ditches, culverts or other above or below ground constructed conduits, i.e.,
storm drains.
   (D)   Responsibility for administration. This chapter shall be administered
for the town by the authorized enforcement official. In administering this
chapter, the authorized enforcement official has the authority to request and
require the submittal of information deemed necessary to assess compliance with
this chapter and the Phase II Stormwater Permit.
   (E)   Construction and application. This chapter shall be construed to
assure consistency with the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act (33
U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and acts amendatory thereof or supplementary thereto,
and applicable implementing regulations, including the current and future
versions of the water quality control plan for the San Francisco Bay basin and
the Phase II Stormwater Permit.
(Prior Code, § 8.26.010) (Ord. 623, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 791, passed 6-3-
2015)
§ 8.32.020 DISCHARGE REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Discharge of pollutants. The discharge of non-stormwater discharges to
the town storm drain system is prohibited. All discharges of material other
than stormwater must be in compliance with an NPDES permit issued for the
discharge.
   (B)   Exceptions to discharge prohibition. The following discharges are
exempt from the prohibition set forth in division (A) of this section:
      (1)   Discharges regulated under another NPDES permit issued to the
discharger and administered by the State of California under authority of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is
in full compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable
laws or regulations.
      (2)   Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities unless they are
identified as significant sources of pollutants to waters of the United States.
      (3)   Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a
source of pollutants to waters of the US when properly managed, provided any
pollutants in the discharges are identified and appropriate control measures to
minimize the impacts of such discharges are developed and implemented.
         (a)   Water line flushing;
         (b)   Individual residential car washing;
         (c)   Diverted stream flows;
         (d)   Rising groundwaters;
         (e)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40
C.F.R. § 5.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;
         (f)   Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
         (g)   Discharges from potable water sources;
         (h)   Foundation drains;
         (i)   Air conditioning condensation;
         (j)   Springs;
         (k)   Water from crawl space pumps;
         (i)   Footing drains;
         (m)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (n)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; and
         (o)   Incidental irrigation runoff from landscaped areas provided the
conditions in division (B)(4) of this section are met.
      (4)   Incidental irrigation runoff is the unintended amounts of runoff
that leave the area of application such as minimal overspray. Water leaving the
intended area of application is not incidental if it is due to the design,
excessive application, or intentional overflow or application. Irrigation
systems must be designed to conserve water and prevent water leaving the area
of application. Property owners and persons responsible shall control
irrigation systems to prevent excessive irrigation runoff by implementing the
following BMPs:
         (a)   Detect and repair leaks from the irrigation system within 72
hours of discovering the leak;
         (b)   Properly design and aim sprinkler heads to only irrigate the
planned application area;
         (c)   Do not irrigate during precipitation events; and
         (d)    Where recycled water is used for irrigation, design and manage
holding ponds such that no discharge occurs unless it is the result of the 25
year-24 hour storm event. Any releases from holding ponds must be reported to
the Regional Water Board and the county within 24 hours of the discharge.
   (C)   Discharge in violation of permit.
      (1)   Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of
the Phase II Stormwater Permit and any amendment, revision or reissuance
thereof, either separately considered or when combined, with other discharges,
is prohibited.
      (2)   Liability for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the
person(s) so causing or responsible for the discharge and the persons shall
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the town in any administrative or judicial
enforcement action relating to the discharge.
   (D)   Illicit discharges and illicit connections.
      (1)   The establishment, use, maintenance or continuance of illicit
connections to the town storm drains or watercourse, and/or the commencement or
continuance of illicit discharges to the town storm drains or watercourse is
prohibited.
      (2)   This prohibition is expressly retroactive and applies to
connections made in the past, regardless of whether made under a permit or
other authorization or whether permissible under the law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection.
      (3)   Any person responsible for a discharge, spill, or pollutant release
shall promptly cease and desist discharging and/or cleanup and abate such a
discharge as directed by the authorized enforcement official.
      (4)   Any person responsible for an illicit connection shall promptly
remove the connection as directed by the authorized enforcement official.
      (5)   The town may perform clean-up and abatement work and recover its
costs from the responsible person as provided in §
8.32.030.
   (E)   Reduction of pollutants in urban runoff. Any person engaged in
activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drains
shall undertake all practicable measures to cease the activities, and/or
eliminate or reduce the pollutants. The activities shall include, but not be
limited to ownership and use of parking lots, gasoline stations, industrial
facilities, commercial facilities, ground disturbing activities, and stores
fronting town streets.
      (1)   Littering.
         (a)   Except for pollutants lawfully disposed of by way of containers
or at a licensed dumping ground, no person shall throw, deposit, leave,
maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained,
any refuse, rubbish, garbage or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles
and accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet,
catch basin, conduit or other drainage structures, business place or upon any
public or private lot of land or other premises in the town, so that the same
might be or become a pollutant discharged to water.
         (b)   The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant,
the owner, lessee or proprietor of any premises in the Town of Fairfax in front
of which there is a paved sidewalk shall maintain the sidewalk free of dirt or
litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not
be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but
shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on the real property as required
for the recycling or disposal of garbage.
      (2)   Standard for parking lots and similar structures. Persons owning or
operating a parking lot, gas station, area of pavement or similar structure
shall clean those structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a
manner that does not result in discharge of pollutants to the town storm drain
system or watercourse.
      (3)   Construction-phase best management practices.
         (a)   Any person performing construction activities in the town shall
implement appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge of construction wastes or
contaminants from construction materials, tools, and equipment from entering
the storm drain system or watercourse.
         (b)   The town has the authority to review designs and proposals for
construction activities to determine whether adequate BMPs will be installed,
implemented, and maintained during construction and after final stabilization.
         (c)   Construction-phase BMPs include erosion and sediment controls
and pollution prevention practices. Erosion control BMPs may include, but are
not limited to, scheduling and timing of grading activities, timely
revegetation of graded areas, the use of hydroseed and hydraulic mulches, and
installation of erosion control blankets. Sediment control may include properly
sized detention basins, dams, or filters to reduce entry of suspended sediment
into the storm drain system and watercourses, and installation of construction
entrances to prevent tracking of sediment onto adjacent streets. Pollution
prevention practices may include designated washout areas or facilities,
control of trash and recycled materials, tarping of materials stored on-site,
and proper location of and maintenance of temporary sanitary facilities. The
combination of BMPs used, and their execution in the field, must be customized
to the site using up-to-date standards and practices. The agency will provide
references to current guidance manuals and BMP information on request.
      (4)   Erosion and Sediment Control Plan requirements.
         (a)   When required by the Phase II Stormwater Permit or by the town,
a project shall have an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (ESCP) which
addresses erosion and sediment control and pollution prevention during the
construction phase as well as final stabilization control measures. The ESCP
and the specific control measures to be utilized shall be subject to the review
and approval of the town. The ESCP shall be implemented year round and shall be
revised to reflect changing conditions on the project site. The town shall
require modifications of an approved ESCP if during the course of construction
at a site unanticipated conditions occur or the plans prove inadequate for the
intended purpose. Revisions of the approved ESCP shall be submitted to the town
for review and approval. An Erosion and Sediment Control Plan (ESCP) shall be
required for any project:
            1.   Subject to a grading permit under
Chapter 12.20 Excavations Generally;
            2.   Subject to a building permit or other permit that has the
potential for significant erosion and/or significant non-stormwater discharges
of sediment and/or construction site waste;
            3.   As required by the town considering factors such as whether
the project involves hillside soil disturbance, rainy season construction,
construction near a creek or an intermittent or ephemeral drainageway, or any
other condition or construction site activity that could lead to a non-
stormwater discharge to a storm drain if not managed by effective
implementation of an ESCP.
         (b)   The ESCP shall be submitted for review and approval by the town.
The project applicant shall follow the most recent version of the MCSTOPPP
Construction Erosion and Sediment Control Plan Applicant Package. At a minimum,
the ESCP shall include:
            1.   Description of the proposed project and soil disturbing
activity;
            2.   Site specific construction-phase Best Management Practices
(BMPs);
            3.   Rationale for selecting the BMPs;
            4.   List of applicable outside agency permits associated with the
soil disturbing activity, such as: Construction General Permit (CGP); Clean
Water Act § 404 Permit; Clean Water Act § 401 Water Quality Certification;
Streambed/Lake Alteration Agreement (1600 Agreements).
         (c)   If the project requires coverage under the CGP issued by the
State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB), Permit Registration Documents must
be filed with the SWRCB for said coverage and a copy of the Waste Discharge
Identification Number shall be submitted to the town prior to issuance of a
permit for construction. The applicant may submit the Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) required by the General Construction Activity
Stormwater Permit in lieu of the ESCP provided it meets the requirements of the
ESCP.
         (d)   Financial security may be required to ensure that temporary
measures to control stormwater pollution are implemented and maintained during
construction and after construction for a period determined by the town.
Financial security shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash
deposit, or performance bond as determined by the town.
         (e)   Implementation of an approved ESCP shall be a condition of the
issuance of a building permit, a grading permit, or other permit issued by the
town for a project subject to this section. The ESCP shall be implemented year
round and must be updated to reflect changing conditions on the project site.
Any modifications to the ESCP shall be submitted to the town for review and
approval.
      (5)   Permanent stormwater controls for new development and
redevelopment. The town may require, as a condition of project approval,
permanent structural controls designed for the removal of sediment and other
pollutants and for control on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff from the
project's added or replaced impervious surfaces. These controls may include
limits on impervious area. The selection and design of such controls shall be
in general accordance with criteria established or recommended by federal,
state, and local agencies, and where required by the BASMAA Post Construction
Manual. Where physical and safety conditions allow, the preferred control
measure is to retain drainage ways above ground and in as natural a state as
possible or other biological methods such as bioretention areas. Where required
by the Phase II Stormwater Permit Provision E.12, or where required by the
nature and extent of a proposed project and where deemed appropriate by the
agency, every applicant shall develop, submit and implement a Stormwater
Control Plan (SOP) as described below:
         (a)   The SCP shall follow the appropriate SCP template, based on
project type, in the most recent version of the BASMAA Post Construction
Manual.
         (b)   The specific practices proposed in the SCP shall be subject to
the review and approval of the town and shall be in general accordance with the
BASMAA Post Construction Manual, and the Phase Il Stormwater Permit.
         (c)   The SCP is separate and distinct from the ESCP requirements
described in §
8.32.020(E)(4).
         (d)   All stormwater management facilities shall be designed in a
manner to minimize the need for maintenance and reduce the chances of failure.
Design guidelines are outlined in the BASMAA Post Construction Manual.
         (e)   Where required by the town, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit a preliminary
Stormwater Facilities Operation and Maintenance Plan (O&M Plan). The approval
of the O&M Plan by the town is required prior to final inspection and approval
of building permit closure.
         (f)   All stormwater management facilities shall be maintained
according to the approved O&M Plan. The person(s) or organization(s)
responsible for maintenance shall be designated in the O&M Plan. The O&M Plan
shall require that stormwater management facilities be inspected by those
responsible for maintenance at least annually. The O&M Plan shall also describe
how the maintenance will be funded. Upon the failure of a responsible person to
maintain the stormwater management facilities in accordance with the O&M Plan,
the town may perform the maintenance and recover its costs from the responsible
person as provided in §
8.32.030.
         (g)   Where deemed appropriate by the town, the town shall have access
to stormwater management facilities for inspections, as provided in §
8.32.030, and through such means as may be appropriate, including, but not
limited to, legal agreements, recorded covenants or easements, shall be
provided by the property owner.
         (h)   All project proponents and their successors, or successors in
fee title, in control of project that is located within the town and that is
defined as a Regulated Project in Provision E.12.c. of the Phase Il Stormwater
Permit, or where required by the town, shall submit one of the following as a
condition prior to final inspection and approval of building permit closure:
            1.   The project proponent's signed statement accepting
responsibility for the operations and maintenance of stormwater management
facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;
            2.   Written conditions in the sales or lease agreements or deed
for the project that requires the buyer or lessee to assume responsibility for
the operations and maintenance of the stormwater management facilities until
such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;
            3.   Written text in project deeds, or conditions, covenants and
restrictions for multi-unit residential projects that require the homeowners
association or, if there is no association, each individual owner to assume
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management
facilities until such responsibility is legally transferred to another entity;
or
            4.   Any other legally enforceable agreement or mechanism, such as
recordation in the property deed, that assigns the operation and maintenance of
the stormwater management facilities to the project owner(s) or the town.
         (i)   Financial security may be required to ensure that stormwater
management facilities operate and are maintained following construction for a
period which may be determined by the agency. Financial security shall consist
of an irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or performance bond as
determined by the agency.
      (6)   Notification of intent and compliance with general permits.
         (a)   Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with
construction activity or other discharger, described in any general stormwater
permit addressing such discharges, as may be adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency, the state's Water Resources Control Board or
the Regional Water Quality Control Board, shall provide Permit Registration
Documents, comply with, and undertake all other activities required by any
general stormwater permit applicable to the discharges.
         (b)   Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit
relating to stormwater discharges shall comply with and undertake all
activities required by the permit.
      (7)   Compliance with best management practices. Where best management
practices guidelines or requirements have been adopted by any federal, State of
California, regional and/or local agency for any activity, operation or
facility that may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination,
illicit discharges and/or discharge of non-stormwater to the storm drain
system, every person undertaking the activity or operation or owning or
operating the facility shall comply with the guidelines or requirements as may
be identified by the authorized enforcement official.
   (F)   Watercourse protection.
      (1)   Every person owning, occupying, leasing, renting or in control of
premises through which a watercourse passes, shall:
         (a)   Keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the
property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other
obstacles which would and/or could pollute, contaminate or significantly retard
the flow of water through the watercourse;
         (b)   Maintain existing privately-owned structures within or adjacent
to a watercourse, so that the structures will not become a hazard to the use,
function or physical integrity of the watercourse; and
         (c)   Not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually
necessary for the maintenance, nor remove the vegetation in a manner as to
increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.
      (2)   No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the
following acts, unless a written permit has first been obtained from the Town
of Fairfax:
         (a)   Discharge into or connect any pipe or channel to a watercourse;
         (b)   Modify the natural flow of water in a watercourse;
         (c)   Deposit in, plant in or remove any material from a watercourse
including its banks, except as required for necessary maintenance; and
         (d)   Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change or remove any
structure in a watercourse; or place any loose or unconsolidated material
adjacent to or within a watercourse so as to cause a diversion of the flow, or
to cause a probability of the material being carried away by storm waters
passing through the watercourse.
   (G)   When any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, the authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by
notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to
be done. Such work shall stop until the authorized enforcement official
authorizes the work to proceed. This remedy is in addition to and does not
supersede or limit any and all other remedies, both civil and criminal provided
in the Fairfax Town Code.
(Prior Code, § 8.26.020) (Ord. 623, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 791, passed 6-3-
2015)
§ 8.32.030 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violations constitute a public nuisance; abatement; restoration. Any
condition caused or allowed to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter, constitutes a threat to the public health, safety and welfare,
and is deemed and declared to be a public nuisance. This public nuisance may be
summarily abated, and/or the property restored to its original condition, and/
or enjoined or otherwise be compelled to cease and desist, by the authorized
enforcement official, or by actions taken by the Town Attorney.
      (1)   Abatement procedure; costs; lien. The abatement of any public
nuisance under this chapter shall follow the procedures as set forth in Chapter
8.28 of the Fairfax Town Code. The cost of the abatement and/or restoration of
the property to its original condition shall be the responsibility of the owner
of the property. The costs shall be a lien upon and against the property and
shall continue in existence until it is paid. The lien shall be imposed and
collected in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and this
code.
      (2)   Inspections and sampling; authority and procedure.
         (a)   The authorized enforcement official has the duty and the
responsibility to inspect any and all locations for any violation of the
provisions of this chapter. The authorized enforcement official may, within the
limitations of applicable state and federal laws, enter any building or any
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or any facilities,
equipment, practices, or operations for any or all of the following situations,
as determined by the authorized enforcement official:
            1.   Routine inspections to ensure implementation of BMPs and other
requirements of this chapter;
            2.   Active or potential stormwater discharges;
            3.   Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there
exists any condition which constitutes a violation of the provisions of this
chapter or the Phase Il Stormwater Permit;
            4.   Actual violations of this chapter or the Phase II Stormwater
Permit;
            5.   Whenever necessary to enforce any of the provisions of this
chapter or the Phase II Stormwater Permit; or
            6.   To perform any duty imposed upon the official by this chapter.
         (b)   The authorized enforcement official must present proper
credentials to, and obtain consent from the owner or occupant to enter. In the
event the owner and/or occupant refuses entry, the official shall request
assistance of the Town Attorney to obtain an administrative warrant for the
premises, pursuant to the provisions of state law.
         (c)   The authorized enforcement official has the right to, and shall
conduct, routine sampling and monitoring on or adjacent to the premises under
review. The cost of the routine sampling and/or monitoring activities,
including test reports and results, shall be borne by the local agency. The
authorized enforcement official may, within the limitations of law, enter the
premises at reasonable times to conduct sampling and monitoring operations,
provided that the official presents proper credentials to, and obtains consent
from the owner or occupant to enter. In the event the owner and/or occupant
refuses entry, the official shall request assistance of the Town Attorney to
obtain an administrative warrant for the premises, pursuant to the provisions
of state law.
         (d)   Whenever the authorized enforcement official has reasonable
cause to believe that the owner and/or occupant of a premises is engaged in an
activity and/or operating a facility that is causing or contributing to
stormwater pollution or contamination, illicit discharges and/or the discharge
of non-stormwater or other unlawful material, to the storm drain system, the
official may require the owner and/or occupant to conduct sampling and/or
monitoring activities on the premises, and to furnish the test results and
reports as the official may determine. The burden and cost of undertaking the
sampling and monitoring activities, including test results and reports, shall
be borne by the owner of the premises under review. The type and method of
sampling and monitoring shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for
testing and monitoring and to the benefits to be obtained, as determined by the
enforcement official.
         (e)   Whenever a condition is found to exist in violation of this
chapter that presents an immediate and present danger to the public health,
safety and welfare requiring immediate remedial action to prevent injury to
persons or property, the authorized enforcement official shall take whatever
reasonable and appropriate action is necessary to neutralize the danger,
including, but not limited to entry upon private premises for inspection,
sampling and monitoring and abatement.
   (B)   Violations; misdemeanors or infractions; punishment. The violation of
any provision of this chapter, or failure to comply with any of the mandatory
requirements of this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor, except that,
notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any such violation of this
chapter may, in the discretion of the enforcement authority, constitute an
infraction. If convicted of a misdemeanor, a person shall be subject to payment
of a fine, imprisonment, or both, not to exceed the limits set forth in Cal.
Gov't Code § 36901. If convicted of an infraction, a person shall be subject to
payment of a fine, not to exceed the limits set forth in Cal. Gov't Code §
36900. A person, firm, corporation or organization shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation
of this chapter is committed, continued or allowed by the person, firm,
corporation or organization, and shall be punishable accordingly.
   (C)   Violations; civil action for enforcement. The violation of any
provision of this chapter, or the failure to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter, may be enforced by a civil action brought by the
Town Attorney in any court having appropriate jurisdiction. In any such action,
the town may seek any or all of the following remedies:
      (1)   A temporary or permanent injunction;
      (2)   Costs of investigation, inspection, sampling or monitoring
activities concerning the violation and costs of suit;
      (3)   Costs of restoration of the premises from its condition resulting
from the violations back to its original condition; and
      (4)   Compensatory damages including, but not limited to loss and/or
destruction of water quality, wildlife, fish, aquatic habitat and other adverse
environmental effects. Damages recovered under this division shall be paid to
the town and shall be used exclusively for costs of sampling and monitoring, or
establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems, and of
implementing and/or enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Violations; administrative enforcement action. In addition to any
other enforcement powers and/or remedies provided in this chapter, an
authorized enforcement official may issue an order to a person to cease and
desist from the discharge, practice, operation or other activity causing or
likely to cause a violation of this chapter. The order shall be directed to
those persons in violation of the chapter stating clearly and concisely the
nature of the violation, the requirements for compliance, a timetable for
compliance, and such other remedial and/or preventive action as may be
necessary. Upon the violator's failure to comply with the order, the town shall
take further enforcement action as specified in this chapter, or in accordance
with any other appropriate provision of local, state or federal law. At the
discretion of the authorized enforcement official, orders to cease and desist
may take the following form:
      (1)   Warning letters and orders to abate pollution;
      (2)   Warning letters with requirements to submit written reports; or
      (3)   Formal violations and legal action as described in this chapter and
as authorized by
Chapter 1.10 of the Town of Fairfax Municipal Code.
   (E)   Remedies not exclusive. The enumerated remedies provided in this
chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit all other remedies,
both civil and criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative
to, and not exclusive of, each other.
   (F)   Authority to arrest and issue citations.
      (1)   The authorized enforcement official shall have the authority to
arrest or to cite any person who violates any provision of this chapter in the
manner provided by the California Penal Code for the arrest or release on
citation of misdemeanors or for citation of infractions and notice to appear,
as prescribed by Cal. Penal Code Title 3, Part 2, Chapters 5, 5C, and 5D,
including § 853.6, or as the same may be hereinafter amended.
      (2)   It is the intent of the Town Council that the immunities provided
in Cal. Penal Code § 836.5 be applicable to public officers or employees acting
within the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.26.030) (Ord. 623, passed - -1993; Am. Ord. 791, passed 6-3-
2015)
CHAPTER 8.36: TREES
Section
   
8.36.010   Purpose
   
8.36.020   Definitions
   
8.36.030   Tree Advisory Committee
   
8.36.040   Tree removal or alteration; permit required
   
8.36.050   Permit application; contents
   
8.36.055   Notice
   
8.36.060   Tree Advisory Committee Hearing
   
8.36.070   Qualified Arborist report; contents
   
8.36.080   Construction; Tree Protection Plan
   
8.36.090   Subdivisions and other development projects
   
8.36.100   Appeal
   
8.36.110   Effective date of permit
   
8.36.120   Emergency tree removal
   
8.36.130   Tree planting near power lines and public property
   
8.36.140   Violations/administrative fines
   
8.36.150   Hearings on the imposition of Administrative fines; appeals
   
8.36.160   Administrative fines - debt to town; enforcement
§ 8.36.010 PURPOSE.
   The town derives much of its character and beauty from its large trees and
natural setting. Significant portions of the town are forested with redwood,
oak, bay, madrone, Douglas fir, pine and other native tree species. The
preservation of these trees enhances the town's natural scenic beauty and
enhances the quality of the community. In addition, these trees help prevent
the erosion of topsoil, protect against flood and landslides, reduce carbon
dioxide, counteract the pollutants in the air, create wildlife habitat,
maintain the climatic balance, and decrease wind velocities. Therefore, it is
necessary for the health and welfare of the citizens of the town to enact
regulations controlling removal and preservation of trees within the town.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BREAST HEIGHT. Four and one-half feet above lowest grade. All circumference
measurements shall be taken at Breast Height.
   CIRCUMFERENCE BREAST HEIGHT. The circumference of a tree at four and one-
half feet above lowest grade at the base of a tree.
   COMMITTEE. The Tree Advisory Committee.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT. The diameter of a tree trunk at four and one-half
feet above the lowest grade at the base of the tree.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Planning and Building Services, or, in his or her
absence, another member of the Planning and Building Services Department as
designated by the Town Manager.
   EMERGENCY. An immediate threat to life or an immediate and significant
threat to property.
   HERITAGE TREES.  Significant, locally native tree species that are critical
to urban and wildland forest habitats.
   Heritage trees include the following:
Bigleaf Maple (Acer macrophyllum)       25 "circumference/ approx. 8"diameter
Bishop Pine (Pinus muricata)            38" circumference/ approx. 12" diameter
California Bay Laurel (Umbellularia     50" circumference/ approx.16: diameter
californica)
California Buckeye (Aesculus            25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
californica)
California Nutmeg (Torreya California)  12" circumference/ approx. 4" diameter
California sycamore (Platanus recemosa) 25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Coast Redwood (Sequoia sempervirens)    38" circumference/ approx. 12" diameter
Douglas Fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)     38" circumference/ approx. 12" diameter
Giant Chinquapin (Castanopsis           12" circumference/ approx. 4" diameter
chrysophylla)
Madrone (Arbutus menziesii)             25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Oak (Quercus-all native species)        25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Oregon Ash (Fraxinus latifolia)         25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Red Alder (Alnus oregona)               25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Sargent cypress (Cupressus sargentii)   25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Tanbark Oak (Lithocarpus densiflora)    25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
Toyon (Heteromues arbutifolia)          12" circumference/ approx. 4" diameter
White Alder (Alnus rhombiflora)         25" circumference/ approx. 8" diameter
 
   QUALIFIED ARBORIST. A Certified Arborist, a Certified Urban Forester, a
Registered Consulting Arborist, or a Registered Professional Forester (RPF).
Arborists must be certified by the International Society of Arborists (ISA). A
Qualified Arborist must have a Fairfax Business License and be insured.
   SPECIMEN TREE. Trees that, while not heritage trees, nonetheless make a
significant aesthetic or environmental contribution to their immediate
surroundings. SPECIMEN TREES can be undesirable tree species.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
   TREE. Any woody perennial plant characterized by having one or more trunks,
any one of which has a diameter of four inches (circumference of 12 inches) or
more, measured at four and one-half feet above existing lowest grade at the
base of the tree.
   TREE ALTERATION. Actions taken by cutting or pruning any tree (branches,
trunks, roots), or by filling, surfacing, grading, compacting or changing the
drainage pattern of the soil around any tree in a manner that threatens to
diminish the vigor of the tree; provided that, as used in this chapter, the
term ALTERATION does not include:
      (1)   Normal seasonal trimming, shaping, thinning or pruning of a tree
necessary to its health and growth, and within national pruning standards as
defined in the ANSI 300A Standards and by the International Society of
Arboriculture pruning standards;
      (2)   Trimming, pruning or clearance of tree branches from lines of any
public utility necessary to the maintenance of the lines; and
      (3)   Trimming, clearing or pruning by the Director of Public Works of
any tree necessary for:
         (a)   The clearance of streets for pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
         (b)   Compliance with fire, building and wildland urban interface
codes as adopted by the town.
      (4)   Trimming, clearing or pruning required by the fire department to
meet fire or wildland urban interface code requirements as adopted by the town.
   TREE REMOVAL. Complete removal of a tree or any action resulting in the
death of a tree or permanent damage to its health, or removal of more than one-
fourth of the tree's foliage in any 12-month period.
   UNDESIRABLE TREE SPECIES. Tree species that cannot be classified as heritage
trees regardless of size due to their rapid growth (three feet per year) or
their invasive, structurally hazardous, or flammable nature.
   UNDESIRABLE TREES SPECIES.  Include, but are not limited to, the following:
   Acacia Trees (Acacia spp.)
   Black Cottonwood (Populus trichocarpa)
   Blue Gum Eucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus)
   Fremont's Cottonwood (Populus fremontii)
   Liquidambar (Liquidambar styracflua)
   Lombardy Poplar (Populus nigra 'italica')
   Monterey Pine (Pinus radiata)
   Monterey Cypress (Cupressus macrocarpa)
   Pines (Pinus spp.)
   Princess Tree (Paulownia tomentosa )
   Privet (Ligustrum japonica)
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.030 TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Tree Advisory Committee shall consist of one member of the Parks
and Recreation Commission, one member of the Planning Commission, and one
member of the Open Space Committee to be selected by their respective bodies,
and two at-large members to be appointed by the Town Council; provided,
however, the Town Council may appoint additional at-large members to serve at
the pleasure of the Council in the event one or more of the above-referenced
bodies do(es) not select one of its members to serve on the Tree Advisory
Committee within 30 days of a vacancy or other failure to appoint a member.
Should one of the above-referenced bodies wish to appoint a member after the
Council has appointed the additional at-large member, the appointment shall be
made pursuant to the Council's adopted Committee Interview and Appointment
policy. Terms of all at-large members of the Tree Committee shall be
established by the Town Council by resolution.
   (B)   The Tree Committee shall receive subdivision or development project
applications that propose tree removals or alterations in the same manner that
the town routes application to other affected agencies. The Tree Committee will
provide recommendations to the decision-making body on the applications within
30 days.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009; Am. Ord. 789, passed 5-6-2015; Am. Ord. 822, passed
11-7-2018; Am. Ord. 850, passed 2-3-2021)
§ 8.36.040 TREE REMOVAL OR ALTERATION; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful to remove or alter any tree without a permit except as
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The Director may grant a permit ministerially where the Director
determines that one of the following conditions exists:
      (1)   The tree to be removed is dead or extremely diseased. The Director
may require that the applicant provide an analysis by a Qualified Arborist to
support this determination.
      (2)   A public utility company proposes removing or altering a tree that
it has determined has or will have an adverse effect on utilities within the
foreseeable future.
      (3)   The tree is of an undesirable species and has been deemed a fire
hazard by the Fire Department.
   (C)   Any interested party may appeal determinations of the Director
pursuant to this section to the Committee.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
 § 8.36.050 PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Any person or entity whatever, including the town, or agent or
employee of any such person, desiring to remove or alter one or more trees on
any parcel in the town, shall apply, in writing, to the Director for permission
to remove or alter the particular tree or trees. The application shall describe
the number, location, and species of the tree(s) to be removed or altered and a
brief statement of the reason for removal or alteration, as well as such other
pertinent information as required by the Director. The application shall be
accompanied by the applicable filing fee as set by resolution of the Town
Council, and shall be submitted to the Director, who will then submit it to the
Committee. The Director shall inform the applicant of the date of the Committee
hearing.
   (B)   At the time of submitting the application to the Director, the
applicant shall clearly mark each tree to be considered for removal with a
bright colored ribbon. Where applicable and feasible, the perimeter outline of
proposed buildings, and all underground utilities, drainage facilities, areas
to be graded and retaining walls, shall be staked on the building site. Notice
shall be posted on the property pursuant to §8.36.055 of this chapter. The
Committee may inspect the premises. Refusal to allow the inspection of the
premises may result in denial of the permit.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.055 NOTICE.
   (A)   All trees for which a permit is requested shall be tagged with orange
ribbon a minimum of ten days prior to the meeting date.
   (B)   The applicant shall post a notice, provided by the Planning and
Building Services Department, of the intent to alter or remove the marked tree
(s). The notice shall be displayed in a prominent location visible along the
frontage of the affected property.
   (C)   A public notice of the Committee hearing date and time, including a
list of the tree removal requests to be reviewed, shall be posted at least ten
days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the town,
including, but not limited to, the bulletin board at Town Hall, the bulletin
board at the Fairfax Women's Club and the bulletin board at the Fairfax Post
Office.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.060 TREE ADVISORY COMMITTEE HEARING.
   (A)   The Committee may require the applicant to submit his or her
application to a Qualified Arborist designated by the town for a report and
recommendation. The applicant shall bear all expenses in conjunction with this
report. If the Committee reasonably determines that the Qualified Arborist
report is not credible, the Committee may require that the applicant submit his
or her application and Qualified Arborist report, at the town's expense, for
peer review by an additional Qualified Arborist selected by the Committee. The
Committee may also request that the applicant provide computer generated
simulations of the potential impacts of the proposed tree removal or plantings.
   (B)   After reviewing the application and accompanying materials and
inspecting the premises, the Committee shall grant or deny the permit based
upon the following considerations:
      (1)   Whether the alteration or removal of the tree(s) is necessary to
protect the public health and safety and prevent damage to property. The
Committee may consider the condition of the tree(s) with respect to disease,
danger of structural failure, potential fire hazards, and proximity to existing
or proposed structures, and whether the alteration or removal of the tree(s)
will prevent or correct damage to property or infrastructure. The Committee
should also consider whether the alteration or removal of the tree(s) is
necessary in order to prevent the obstruction or interference with public
utility facilities, sanitary sewer facilities, storm drains, water supply
facilities, or watercourses.
      (2)   The character of the surrounding neighborhood and the effect of the
proposed tree alteration or removal upon aesthetics, privacy, shade, and
property values in the area. The Committee may consider whether the over-all
tree density and canopy cover is consistent with the existing character of the
town, or whether the tree has matured to such an extent that it is determined
to be out of scale with adjacent structures and utilities, or other landscape
features.
      (3)   Whether the tree is a heritage tree, specimen tree, undesirable
tree, or other species.
      (4)   Whether the proposed tree alteration or removal is necessary to
allow the owner to reasonably develop and use the subject property. The
Committee may consider whether reasonable revisions to a proposed project would
allow an owner to reasonably develop and use the subject property without
requiring removal or alteration of a healthy heritage tree or multiple trees.
Where the Committee determines that the tree alteration or removal is necessary
to allow reasonable development of the property, the approval of the tree
permit shall be conditioned on the issuance of all necessary approvals from the
Planning Commission and Town Council.
      (5)   The topography of the land and whether the tree alteration or
removal will have an adverse effect on erosion, soil retention, and the
diversion or increased flow of surface water. The Committee may consider
whether adequate provisions to avoid these impacts have been made.
      (6)   Whether the proposed tree alteration or removal would have a
detrimental effect on the health of surrounding trees, or whether the proposed
action would enhance the health of the subject tree or adjacent trees.
      (7)   Where tree alteration is proposed, whether the alteration would
harm or diminish the vigor of the tree.
   (C)   The Director shall grant or deny the permit based on the findings and
direction of the Committee.
   (D)   Reasonable conditions of approval may be attached to any tree removal
permit including, but not limited to, the replacement of removed trees. In
general, removed trees shall be replaced at a minimum ratio of 1:1. The Tree
Committee shall have the authority to specify the ratio, where necessary after
considering of any fire hazard risk. The site or sites for replacement may be
specified by the Committee. Replacement trees shall be of a reasonable size as
determined by the Committee based on the recommendation. Drought tolerant,
native species that are not susceptible to Sudden Oak Death Syndrome shall be
preferred as replacement trees. Security and maintenance measures may be
required in order to ensure the successful establishment of replacement trees.
Notwithstanding this section, the Committee may authorize the planting of a
lesser number of trees of a greater size where this would further the purposes
of this chapter.
   (E)   Approval of a tree permit by the Committee shall not constitute
approval of project or the issuance of a permit for building or grading.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.070 QUALIFIED ARBORIST REPORT; CONTENTS.
   A report by a Qualified Arborist, as described in §
8.36.060, shall:
   (A)   Describe the tree(s) to be altered or removed, including species,
height, diameter Breast Height, and approximate age.
   (B)   Clearly describe and identify any disease or structural defect
affecting the tree and any threat or hazard to people or property presented by
the tree(s), including, where applicable, a clear description of the threatened
structure and the condition(s) of the tree(s) that give rise to the threat.
   (C)   Discuss what measures could be considered to preserve the tree(s) or
mitigate the risk to property and the relative feasibility of such
alternatives.
   (D)   Include a completed Tree Hazard Evaluation Form, as developed by the
ISA (International Society of Architects).
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.080 CONSTRUCTION; TREE PROTECTION PLAN.
   (A)   In order to protect trees during construction of a project, and to
maximize chances for their subsequent survival, a Tree Protection Plan
(hereafter TPP) shall be required for all applications for a tentative map, use
permit, variance, design review, encroachment permit, or building permit where
proposed construction would be located near any tree for which a tree
alteration or removal permit would be required by the provisions of this
chapter, whether on the subject property or an adjoining property.
   (B)   The TPP shall be prepared by a Qualified Arborist. The TPP shall
include:
      (1)   The size, species, state of health, structural condition, crown
diameter, and accurate trunk location and architectural structure of all trees
within, and directly adjacent to, the proposed development are, including any
area where trenching is proposed, whether on the subject property or on
adjoining property; and
      (2)   A description of all proposed measures to ensure the survival of
remaining trees throughout the entire development process.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.090 SUBDIVISIONS.
   A subdivider or an applicant for any development permit under Title 17 need
not obtain a separate tree removal permit to alter or remove a tree designated
as "To Be Removed" on an approved subdivision map (tentative map or parcel map)
or other development plan, provided that the tree alteration or removal and a
Tree Protection Plan have been reviewed and approved by the decision-making
body for the subdivision map or development plan based on the criteria in §
8.36.060(B) and §
8.36.080 of this chapter. The subdivision map or other development plans
required by this code shall clearly designate type, size, and location of any
tree upon the property that is to be altered or removed. The decision-making
body may also require the applicant to submit a report by a Qualified Arborist
as provided in §
8.36.060(A).
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009; Am. Ord. 822, passed 11-7-2018)
§ 8.36.100 APPEAL.
   The determination of the Committee may be appealed to the Town Council
pursuant to §
17.020.120. Appeals shall be submitted to the Town Clerk in writing, on the
appeal form provided by the Town, within ten days of the Committee
determination. The appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal, and shall be
accompanied by the filing fee established by resolution of the Town Council.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.110 EFFECTIVE DATE OF PERMIT.
   No permit issued under this chapter shall be effective until the lapse of
time within which an appeal may be taken, or if taken, until final decision
thereon.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.120 EMERGENCY TREE REMOVAL.
   Where the condition or location of a tree constitutes an Emergency, the tree
may be removed immediately by permission of the Director, by any officer of the
Police or Fire Departments, the Director of Public Works, or any member of the
Committee. The Director shall give priority of inspection to those requests
based on hazard or danger. As soon as reasonably possible, the Director or
other officer who received the request shall notify the members of the
Committee by e-mail or telephone that the request has been received.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.130 TREE PLANTING NEAR POWER LINES AND PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No person shall plant any tree within or adjacent to any public right-of-
way, power line alignment or easement in the town unless and until such tree
and its location shall have been first approved by the Committee, and a permit
granted therefor, in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any tree
that will reach a height greater than 25 feet at maturity shall not be placed
within ten feet of utility poles or lines. No undesirable tree, or any of the
following trees, may be planted within 15 feet of a public road, curb,
sidewalk, utility line, or element of community infrastructure: Coast Redwood
(Sequoia sempervirens), Southern magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora), or Fruitless
Mulberry (Morus alba).
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.140 VIOLATIONS/ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   (A)   The unlawful removal or alteration of a tree is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance and may be punishable as a misdemeanor or infraction.
   (B)   In addition, it shall be a civil violation for a person to knowingly
violate this chapter. The Director, at his or her discretion, may immediately
issue a citation for this civil violation upon evidence of the violation. There
is no requirement of a first warning in order for the Director to issue this
citation.
   (C)   Administrative fine. Each violation of this chapter shall result in a
citation with a $1,000 fine.
   (D)   The Director shall give notice of a violation of this chapter by
issuing a citation to any and all responsible persons within 30 days of the
receipt of notice of the violation. The citation shall also give notice of the
right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the validity of the
citation and the time for requesting that hearing.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.150 HEARINGS ON THE IMPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Administrative hearing. Any person subject to an Administrative Fine
pursuant to §
8.36.140 shall have the right to request an administrative hearing within 45
days of the issuance of a citation for a civil violation of this chapter. To
request such a hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall notify the Town
Clerk's Office in writing within 45 days of the issuance of the citation.
   (B)   The Town Clerk's Office shall refer any request for a hearing under §
9.28.050 to a hearing officer appointed by the Town Manager. The hearing
officer shall conduct a hearing on the matter within 60 days of the request for
the hearing unless one of the parties requests a continuance for good cause.
The hearing officer shall render a decision within ten days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, permit the
fine to be satisfied by the performance of community service.
   (C)   Appeal from Decision of Hearing Officer. The person upon whom an
Administrative Fine is imposed pursuant to §
8.36.140 may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the Town Council in
accordance with
Chapter 2.44 of the Town Code.
   (D)   Appeal to Superior Court. The person upon whom an Administrative Fine
is imposed pursuant to §
8.36.140 and whose appeal to the Town Council is denied pursuant to this
section may appeal to the Superior Court pursuant to the procedures outlined in
Government Code Section 53069.4.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
§ 8.36.160 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES - DEBT TO TOWN; ENFORCEMENT.
   The amount of an administrative fine shall be deemed a debt owed to the town
by the person found in violation of §
8.36.140. Any person owing such fine shall be liable in a civil action brought
in the name of the town for recovery of such fine.
(Ord. 743, passed 7-1-2009)
CHAPTER 8.40: WATER WELL CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
8.40.010   Permit required
   
8.40.020   Application for permit
   
8.40.030   Filing and delivery of application
   
8.40.040   Limitations on use of groundwater wells
   
8.40.050   Wells along creekbeds to be set back
   
8.40.060   Granting of permits; conditions of issuance
   
8.40.070   Hold harmless agreement
   
8.40.080   Appeal
   
8.40.090   Use
§ 8.40.010 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall drill, construct or reconstruct any groundwater well or test
well without first submitting an application to and receiving a permit from the
Town Manager of the town. The application shall be on a form provided by the
town and shall provide information sufficient to determine that the well will
comply with the provisions of this chapter, all laws of the state and rules and
regulations issued thereunder. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as
set forth by resolution adopted by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.010) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.020 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Applications for water well construction shall comply with the following.
   (A)   All applications shall be signed by the owner of the property or the
owner’s agent, upon which the project is to be constructed.
   (B)   Attached to the application shall be plans and drawings for the
project which will clearly show the project anticipated, a plot plan showing
exterior boundaries of the property on which the project is planned with size
and locations of all structures thereon, date of commencement and date of
completion proposed for water well construction and the appropriate filing fee.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.020) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.030 FILING AND DELIVERY OF APPLICATION.
   Upon payment of the appropriate fee, the original and ten copies of the
application, including all attachments, shall be filed with the Town Manager.
Copies will then be forwarded to the Planning Director, the Building Inspector,
the Town Engineer and members of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.030) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.040 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF GROUNDWATER WELLS.
   (A)   Except during periods of a water moratorium declared by Marin
Municipal Water District, water from groundwater wells can be used only as a
water source for irrigation, landscaping and other non- potable uses.
   (B)   When Marin Municipal Water District declares a water moratorium on the
issuance of water permits, water from the groundwater wells may be used for
potable purposes to allow construction of a single-family house on an existing
lot of record during the period of the moratorium subject to the conditions set
forth in §
8.40.060 of this chapter.
   (C)   Storage tanks shall be prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.040) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.050 WATER WELLS ALONG CREEKBEDS TO BE SET BACK.
   Shallow water wells which draw water from the underflow of the stream could
have an effect on the surface flow of the stream. Therefore, drilling of wells
along creeks within the town shall be regulated and no well can be drilled
within 100 feet of either Fairfax or San Anselmo Creek.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.050) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.060 GRANTING OF PERMITS; CONDITIONS OF ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Prior to a well drilling permit being issued by the Town Manager, the
following findings must be made:
      (1)   The project contemplated in the application shall not be likely to
create any private or public nuisance or cause any damage to real property; and
      (2)   In the construction of the project there shall be no substantial
interference with the quiet and peaceful environment of neighboring property.
   (B)   The Town Manager may impose such other conditions as deemed necessary
for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and the property
rights of others, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   When a permit for use of potable water is granted for construction
of a single-family house, all connecting pipes and appurtenances must be
installed and connection to the Marin Municipal Water District system shall be
required once the moratorium is lifted.
      (2)   (a)   Prior to any potable test well being brought into production
it must meet all appropriate requirements of the county’s Health Services
Department, including the requirement for a backflow prevention device.
Further, reports must be furnished by a hydrologist or other recognized
professional that will allow a determination on the impact of the proposed well
on surface water or groundwater. In addition, the standards set forth in
Bulletin 74-81 issued by the state’s Department of Water Resources shall apply
to all water wells, cathodic protection wells and monitoring wells in the town.
         (b)   Should the standards contained in this chapter and the standards
contained in Bulletin 74-81 be in conflict, the more strict standards shall
apply.
      (3)   There should be no septic tanks in use on properties adjacent to
the proposed well site.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.060) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.070 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   At the time of issuance of the well permit, the applicant shall execute a
hold harmless agreement relieving the town, its officers, agents and employees
of any liability for damages resulting from the construction and use of the
well and the water supplied thereby. The agreement shall bind the applicant and
successor owners of the property and shall be recorded in the office of the
Marin County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.070) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.080 APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   Should the application for permit be denied, the applicant or
any other person directly interested may appeal the ruling to the Town Council.
      (2)   The appeal must be filed within ten days of the ruling of the Town
Manager and a hearing held by the Town Council at the next available meeting.
   (B)   If the application is granted by the Town Manager, that filing may
also be appealed to the Town Council under the same terms.
   (C)   At the hearing, the Town Council shall consider the application, all
reports and evidence provided at the hearing, and either approve or deny the
permit.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.080) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
§ 8.40.090 USE.
   All percolating groundwater recovered from water well construction shall be
used only within the boundaries of the property it will serve. In no case shall
water taken from a site in Fairfax be transported out of the town limits.
(Prior Code, § 8.30.090) (Ord. 582, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 583, passed - -
1989)
CHAPTER 8.44: CLEAN INDOOR AND OUTDOOR AIR AND HEALTH PROTECTION - SMOKING
REGULATIONS
Section
Article I: Smoking Regulations
   
8.44.010   Findings and purpose
   
8.44.020   Definitions
   
8.44.030   Smoke generally
   
8.44.040   Application of chapter to town-owned facilities
   
8.44.050   Prohibition of smoking in certain enclosed places
   
8.44.060   Smoking restrictions in new and existing units of multi-unit
residences
   
8.44.070   Prohibition of smoking in certain unenclosed public places
   
8.44.080   Smoking optional areas
   
8.44.090   Duty of person, employer, business or nonprofit entity
   
8.44.100   Posting of signs
   
8.44.110   [Reserved]
   
8.44.120   Enforcement
   
8.44.130   Violations and penalties
   
8.44.140   Non-retaliation
   
8.44.150   Public education
   
8.44.160   Governmental agency cooperation
   
8.44.170   Other applicable laws
Article II: Tobacco Retailers Licensing Ordinance
   
8.44.200   Title
   
8.44.210   Requirements and prohibitions
   
8.44.220   Application procedure
   
8.44.230   Issuance of license
   
8.44.240   License renewal and expiration
   
8.44.250   Transfer restrictions
   
8.44.260   License conveys a limited, conditional privilege
   
8.44.270   Fee for license
   
8.44.280   Compliance monitoring
   
8.44.290   Suspension or revocation of license
   
8.44.300   Tobacco retailing without a valid license
   
8.44.310   Enforcement
   
8.44.320   Additional remedies
ARTICLE I: SMOKING REGULATIONS
§ 8.44.010 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The Town Council does find that:
   (A)   Tobacco use causes death and disease and continues to be an urgent
public health challenge, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Tobacco-related illness is the leading cause of preventable death
in the United States, accounting for about 443,000 deaths each year; and
scientific studies have concluded that tobacco use can
cause chronic lung disease, coronary heart disease, and stroke, in addition to
cancer of the lungs, larynx, esophagus, and mouth; and
      (2)    Some of the most common types of cancers including stomach, liver,
uterine cervix, and kidney are related to tobacco use; and
   (B)   Secondhand smoke has been repeatedly identified as a health hazard, as
evidenced by the following:
      (1)   The U.S. Surgeon General concluded that there is no risk-free level
of exposure to secondhand smoke; and
      (2)   The California Air Resources Board placed secondhand smoke in the
same category as the most toxic automotive and industrial air pollutants by
categorizing it as a toxic air contaminant for which there is no safe level of
exposure; and
      (3)   The California Environmental Protection Agency included secondhand
smoke on the Proposition 65 list of chemicals known to the State of California
to cause cancer, birth defects, and other reproductive harm; and
      (C)   Exposure to secondhand smoke causes death and disease, as evidenced
by the following:
      (1)   Secondhand smoke is responsible for as many as 73,000 deaths among
nonsmokers each year in the United States; and
      (2)   Exposure to secondhand smoke increases the risk of coronary heart
disease by approximately 30 percent; and
      (3)   Secondhand smoke exposure causes lower respiratory tract
infections, such as pneumonia and bronchitis in as many as 300,000 children in
the United States under the age of 18 months each year; and exacerbates
childhood asthma; and
   (D)   The U.S. Food and Drug Administration conducted laboratory analysis of
electronic cigarette samples and found they contained carcinogens and toxic
chemicals to which users and bystanders could potentially be exposed; and
   (E)   Tobacco use and exposure to secondhand smoke impose great social and
economic costs, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   The total annual economic burden of smoking in the United States is
$193,000,000,000; and
      (2)   From 2001 through 2004, the average annual health care expenditures
attributable to smoking were approximately $96,000,000,000; and
      (3)   The medical and other costs to nonsmokers due to exposure to
secondhand smoke were estimated at over $10,000,000,000 per year in the United
States in 2005; and
      (4)   The total annual cost of smoking in California was estimated at
$475 per resident or $3,331 per smoker per year, for a total of nearly
$15,800,000,000 in smoking-related costs in 1999 alone; and
      (5)   California’s Tobacco Control Program saved the state and its
residents $86,000,000,000 in health care expenditures between the year of its
inception, 1989, and 2004, with savings growing yearly; and
   (F)   Exposure to secondhand smoke anywhere has negative health impacts, and
exposure to secondhand smoke does occur at significant levels outdoors, as
evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Levels of secondhand smoke exposure outdoors can reach levels
attained indoors depending on direction and amount of wind and number and
proximity of smokers; and
      (2)   Irritation from secondhand smoke begins at levels as low as four
micrograms per cubic meter, and in some outdoor situations this level can be
found as far away as 13 feet from the burning cigarette; and
      (3)   To be completely free from exposure to secondhand smoke in outdoor
places, a person may have to move nearly 25 feet away from the source of the
smoke, about the width of a two-lane road; and
   (G)   Thirdhand smoke harms indoor air quality and is a recognized public
health concern, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Thirdhand smoke is residual tobacco smoke contamination after a
cigarette has been extinguished and takes the form of particulate matter that
is deposited in a layer onto every indoor surface; in loose household dust; and
as volatile organic compounds that “off gas” into the air over days, weeks and
months; and
      (2)   Desorption of thirdhand smoke from indoor surfaces to air is
recognized as a source of tobacco exposure;
      (3)   A majority of adults in the United States agreed with the statement
that breathing in air in a room today where people smoked yesterday can harm
the health of children; and
   (H)   Thirdhand smoke exposure has negative health impacts, as evidenced by
the following:
      (1)   Tobacco smoke constituents, even at low levels, have been proved
toxic; and
      (2)   Residual nicotine from tobacco smoke absorbed to indoor surfaces
reacts with ambient nitrous acid, a common indoor air pollutant, to form
carcinogenic tobacco-specific nitrosamines; and
      (3)   High levels of nicotine on indoor surfaces represents a health
hazard through dermal exposure, dust inhalation, and ingestion; and
   (I)   Smoking is the primary cause of fire-related injuries and deaths in
the home, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Cigarettes, cigars, pipes and other smoking materials are the
leading cause of fire deaths in the United States, causing an estimated 142,900
smoking-related fires, 780 deaths, 1,600 injuries, and $606,000,000 in direct
property damage in 2006; and
      (2)   One in four fatalities from home fires caused by smoking is NOT the
smoker whose cigarette started the fire, and 25 percent of those deaths were of
neighbors or friends of the smoker; and
      (3)   Smoking in a residence where long-term oxygen therapy takes place
is very dangerous as oxygen is a fire accelerant, and 27 percent of fatalities
due to smoking during long-term oxygen therapy occurred in multifamily
dwellings; and
      (4)   The United States Fire Administration recommends that people smoke
outdoors; and
   (J)   Nonsmokers who live in multi-unit dwellings can be exposed to
neighbors' secondhand smoke, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Secondhand smoke can seep under doorways and through wall cracks;
and persons living in apartments near smokers can be exposed to elevated
pollution levels for 24 hours a day, and at times, the particulate matter
exposure can exceed the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s 24-Hour Health
Based Standard; and
      (2)   The Surgeon General has concluded that eliminating smoking in
indoor spaces is the only way to fully protect nonsmokers from secondhand smoke
exposure and that separating smokers from nonsmokers, cleaning the air, and
ventilating buildings cannot completely prevent secondhand smoke exposure; and
      (3)   The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the World
Health Organization (WHO) have found that there is no risk-free level of
secondhand smoke, and even brief exposure can cause immediate harm.
Establishing a 100 percent smoke free environment is the only effective way to
fully protect those who do not smoke from secondhand smoke.
   (K)   Most Californians do not smoke and a majority favors limitations on
smoking in multi-unit residences, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Sixty-nine percent of Californians surveyed favor limiting smoking
in outdoor common areas of apartment buildings and 78 percent support laws that
create nonsmoking units; and
      (2)   Sixty-two percent of California renters feel that there is a need
for laws to limit smoking in apartments; and
   (L)   A local ordinance that authorizes residential rental agreements to
include a prohibition on smoking of tobacco products within rental units is
expressly permitted by California law; and
   (M)   Creating smoke free areas helps protect the health of the 86.7 percent
of Californians who are nonsmokers; and
   (N)   State law prohibits smoking within 25 feet of playgrounds and tot lots
and expressly authorizes local communities to enact additional restrictions;
and state law prohibits smoking within 20 feet of entryways and operable
windows of government buildings; and
   (O)   Cigarette butts are a major and persistent source of litter, as
evidenced by the following:
      (1)   It is estimated that over 2,000,000,000 billion cigarette butts are
discarded every day worldwide, and that Americans alone discard more than
175,000,000 pounds of cigarette butts every year; and
      (2)   Cigarette butts are often cast onto sidewalks and streets, and
frequently end up in storm drains that flow into streams, rivers, bays, lagoons
and ultimately the ocean; and
      (3)   Cigarette filters, made of plastic cellulose acetate, take
approximately 15 years to decompose; and
   (P)   There is no Constitutional right to smoke.
   (Q)   Electronic smoking devices, or "e-cigarettes," have become
increasingly popular in recent years, as evidenced by the following:
      (1)   Between 2011 and 2012 the percentage of all youth in grades six to
12 who had tried electronic smoking devices doubled;
      (2)   Six point eight percent (6.8%) of all youth between sixth and
twelfth grade report trying electronic smoking devices;
      (3)   Ten percent (10%) of high school students have tried electronic
smoking devices;
      (4)   Nine point three percent (9.3%) of youth who have used electronic
smoking devices have never smoked conventional cigarettes;
      (5)   Between 2010 and 2011, rates of both awareness and use of
unregulated electronic smoking devices by adults also increased significantly;
      (6)   Findings from the 2014 National Youth Tobacco Survey show that
current e-cigarette use (use on at least one day in the past 30 days) among
high school students increased from 4.5% in 2013 to 13.4% in 2014, rising from
approximately 660,000 to 2,000,000 students; and
      (7)   Among middle school students, current e-cigarette use more than
tripled from 1.1% in 2013 to 3.9% in 2014, an increase from approximately
120,000 to 450,000 students.
   (R)   The State of California's Tobacco Education and Research Oversight
Committee (TEROC) "opposes the use of e-cigarettes in all areas where other
tobacco products are banned."
   (S)   A study published in the Journal of Environmental and Public Health
suggests that electronic smoking devices "may have the capacity to 're-
normalize' tobacco use in a demographic that has had significant
denormalization of tobacco use previously."
   (T)   Electronic smoking devices often mimic conventional tobacco products
in shape, size, and color, with the user exhaling a smoke-like vapor similar in
appearance to the exhaled smoke from cigarettes and other conventional tobacco
products.
   (U)   The use of electronic smoking devices in smoke free locations
threatens to undermine compliance with smoking regulations and reverse the
progress that has been made in establishing a social norm that smoking is not
permitted in public places and places of employment.
   (V)   Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11362.3 provides that no person may smoke
marijuana/ cannabis or marijuana/cannabis products in a location where smoking
tobacco is prohibited. Therefore the smoking regulations herein are intended to
apply equally to smoking of cannabis and cannabis products to the fullest
extent permitted by law.
   (W)   Flavored tobacco products promote youth initiation of tobacco use and
cause young occasional smokers to become daily smokers by reducing or masking
the natural harshness and taste of tobacco smoke and thereby increasing the
appeal of tobacco products.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 790, passed 6-3-2015; Am. Ord. 814, passed
12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 836, passed 9-4-2019; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARM'S LENGTH TRANSACTION. A sale in good faith and for valuable
consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between
two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to
participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or
partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of
the violations of this article is not an arm's length transaction.
   BAR. An area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only
incidental to the consumption of the beverages. Although a restaurant may
contain a BAR, the term BAR shall not include the restaurant dining area.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other
business entity formed for profit-making purposes.
   CIGAR.
      (1)   Any roll of tobacco wrapped entirely or in part in tobacco or in
any substance containing tobacco; or
      (2)   Any paper or wrapper that contains tobacco and is designed for
smoking or ingestion of tobacco products.
      (3)   For the purposes of this subsection, CIGAR includes, but is not
limited to, tobacco products known or labeled as "cigar," "cigarillo,"
"tiparillo," "little cigar," "blunt wrap," or "cigar wrap."
   CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR. A distinguishable taste or aroma or both, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted by a tobacco product or any byproduct
produced by the tobacco product. CHARACTERIZING FLAVORS include, but are not
limited to, tastes or aromas relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey,
candy, cocoa, dessert, alcoholic beverage, menthol, mint, wintergreen, herb or
spice.
   CONSTITUENT. Any ingredient, substance, chemical, or compound, other than
tobacco, water, or reconstituted tobacco sheet that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacture, or
packing of the tobacco product.
   DEPARTMENT. The Town Manager, and any agency or person designated by the
Town Manager to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter.
   DISTINGUISHABLE. Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. An electronic or battery operated device that
delivers vapors for inhalation. This term shall include every variation and
type of such devices, whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed, or
sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo,
an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or
descriptor.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE PARAPHERNALIA. Any cartridges, cartomizers, e-
liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, electronic smoking device batteries,
electronic smoking device chargers, and any other item specifically designed
for the preparation, charging, or use of electronic smoking devices.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE VENDING MACHINE. Any machine, appliance, or other
mechanical device that carries Electronic Smoking Devices or Electronic Smoking
Device Paraphernalia that is operated by currency, token, debit card, credit
card, or any other form of payment that is designed or used for vending
purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote
control locking mechanisms.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his
or her services for a non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal
corporation or non-profit entity, which employs the services of one or more
individual persons or utilizes volunteers.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on
all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passageways) which
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by
portions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, such as "office
landscaping" or similar structures.
   FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any tobacco product that contains a constituent
that imparts a characterizing flavor.
   LABELING. Written, printed, pictorial, or graphic matter upon any tobacco
product or any of its packaging.
   LANDLORD. Any person who owns real property leased as residential property,
any person who lets residential property, or any person who manages such
property, except that LANDLORD does not include sublessors.
   LEASE. A written or oral agreement between a landlord and tenant conveying
possession of a unit. LEASE includes both agreements set for a fixed period of
time as well as month-to-month or week-to-week rental agreements.
   MINOR. Any individual who is less than 21 years old, except active duty
military personnel who are 18 years of age or older. An identification card
issued by the United States Armed Forces shall be used as proof of age for this
purpose.
   MULTI-UNIT RESIDENCE. A building or portion thereof that contains two or
more units except the following specifically excluded types of housing:
      (1)   A single-family home;
      (2)   A mobile home park;
      (3)   A campground;
      (4)   A marina or port;
      (5)   A single-family home with an attached in-law or second unit when
permitted pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65852.1, 65852.150, 65852.2 or an
ordinance of the town adopted pursuant to those sections.
   MULTI-UNIT COMMON AREA. Every enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-
unit residence, multi-unit commercial facilities, senior citizen residences and
nursing homes accessible to and usable by residents of different small units
and/or members of the public, including but not limited to halls and paths,
courtyards, lobbies, laundry rooms, common areas, outdoor eating areas, play
areas and swimming pools.
   NEW UNIT. A unit that is issued a certificate of occupancy after the
effective date of this chapter and also means a unit that is let for
residential use for the first time after the effective date of this chapter.
   NON-PROFIT ENTITY. Any corporation, unincorporated association or other
entity created for charitable, religious, philanthropic, educational,
character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net
proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the
objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public agency
is not a NON-PROFIT ENTITY within the meaning of this chapter.
   NO SMOKING SIGN. A sign containing the words “No Smoking” or the
international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of
a burning cigarette in a red circle or red heart with a red bar across it).
   OPENINGS. OPENINGS shall include main entrances, exits, operable windows and
ventilation intake systems.
   PACKAGING. A pack, box, carton, or container of any kind, or, if no other
container, any wrapping (including cellophane) in which a tobacco product is
sold or offered for sale to a consumer.
   PERSON. Any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, private
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other
legal entity.
   PHARMACY. A retail establishment in which the profession of pharmacy by a
pharmacist licensed by the State of California in accordance with the Business
and Professions Code is practiced and where prescriptions are offered for sale.
A pharmacy may also offer other retail goods in addition to prescription
pharmaceuticals.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the legal or actual control of an
employer or sole proprietor that an employee, contractor or member of the
public to enter during the normal course of operations, but regardless of hours
of operation, including, but not limited to, indoor and outdoor work areas,
construction sites, vehicles used in employment or for business purposes,
taxis, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and banquet rooms,
classrooms, bingo and gaming facilities, long-term health facilities,
warehouses, and private residences used as child/elder care or health care
facilities subject to licensing requirements.
   PROPRIETOR. A person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business.
An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a 10 percent
or greater interest in the stock, assets, or income of a business other than
the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed
to exist when a person can or does have or shares ultimate control over the
day-to-day operations of a business.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place, public or private, open to members of the general
public regardless of any fee or age requirement, including but not limited to,
bars, restaurants, clubs, stores, stadiums, parks, playgrounds, taxis, buses,
bus shelters, public transportation facilities, hotels and motels, fairs,
farmers’ markets and theaters. PUBLIC PLACE does not include the area within
private vehicles that are in or on public places.
   REASONABLE DISTANCE. A distance of at least 20 feet.
   RECREATION AREA. Any area, public or private, open to the general public for
recreational purposes, regardless of any fee requirement, including, but not
limited to public gardens, children’s play areas, sporting facilities,
stadiums, and playgrounds.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. The open display of tobacco products or tobacco
paraphernalia in a manner that is accessible to the general public without the
assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. This includes point-of-
sale tobacco promotional products (such as tobacco industry tee shirts, caps,
key chains, give-aways), to which the public has access without the assistance
of an employee. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.
   SERVICE AREA. Area at which one or more persons are waiting for a
transaction, entry or service of any kind, whether or not such service involves
the exchange of money, including, but not limited to ATMs, bank teller windows,
telephones, ticket lines, bus stops and cab stands.
   SMOKE. The gases and particles released into the air by combustion,
electrical ignition, or vaporization, including from an Electronic Smoking
Device, when the apparent or usual purpose of the combustion, electrical
ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the resulting gases, particles
or vapors combustion products, such as, for example, tobacco smoke, and
marijuana (cannabis) smoke, except when the purpose of inhalation is solely
olfactory, such as, for example, smoke from incense.
   SMOKING. Engaging in an act that generates Smoke, such as, for example,
possessing a lighted cigar, a lighted cigarette of any kind, a lighted pipe, or
a lighted hookah pipe; or lighting a pipe, a hookah pipe, a cigar, or a
cigarette of any kind, or operating an electronic smoking device.
   SPORTS ARENA. Enclosed or unenclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health
spas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar
places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in
physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports
events.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA. Cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of
smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item
designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco
products.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT.
      (1)    Any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine
that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco,
snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or any other preparation of tobacco;
or
      (2)   Any device or component, part, or accessory that delivers nicotine
alone or combined with other substances to the person using the device
including but not limited to cigarettes, electronic smoking devices or
paraphernalia, cigars, or pipes, whether or not the device or component is sold
separately. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include any product that has been approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is
marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
   TOBACCO RETAILER or RETAILER. Any person who sells, offers for sale, or does
or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products,
tobacco paraphernalia, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device
paraphernalia. TOBACCO RETAILING shall mean the doing of any of these things.
This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco products, tobacco
paraphernalia, electronic smoking devices or electronic smoking device
paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.
   TOBACCO VENDING MACHINE. Any machine, appliance, or other mechanical device
that carries tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia operated by currency,
token, debit card, credit card, or any other form of payment that is designed
or used for vending purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or
devices that use remote control locking mechanisms.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
   UNENCLOSED AREA. Any area that is not an enclosed area.
   UNIT. A dwelling space consisting of essentially complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including, for example, permanent
provisions for living and sleeping, and any private outdoor spaces like
balconies and patios. UNIT includes an apartment; a room in a long-term health
care facility, senior citizen housing, assisted living facility, or hospital; a
room in a single room occupancy (“SRO”) facility; a room in a homeless shelter;
a single-family home; an in-law or second unit; and single room occupancy hotel
rooms, as defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50519(b)(1), even where
lacking private cooking facilities or private plumbing facilities. UNIT does
not include lodging in a hotel or motel that meets the requirements set forth
in Cal. Civil Code § 1940(b)(2).
   VENDOR-ASSISTED. Only a store employee has access to the tobacco product and
assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take
possession of the product until it is purchased.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 790, passed 6-3-2015; Am. Ord. 814, passed
12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 836, passed 9-4-2019; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.030 SMOKE GENERALLY.
   For all purposes within the town, the Town Council declares that
nonconsensual exposure to smoke is a nuisance, and the uninvited presence of
smoke on property is a nuisance and a trespass.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.040 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER TO TOWN-OWNED FACILITIES.
   All town-owned vehicles, including buses and other means of public transit
under the authority of the town, and all enclosed facilities owned and
controlled by the town, including jails, and any board, council, commission and
agency of the town shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.050 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CERTAIN ENCLOSED PLACES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, smoking shall be prohibited in the
enclosed areas of the following places within the Town of Fairfax and except in
such places in which smoking is already prohibited by state or federal law in
which case the state or federal law applies:
      (1)   Places of employment;
      (2)   Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the
authority of the town and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit
depots;
      (3)   Public places;
      (4)   Service areas;
      (5)   Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting motion
pictures, stage productions, lectures, musical recitals or other similar
performances, except for smoking which is part of such production; and
      (6)   Sports arenas and convention halls.
   (B)   No person shall place, cause to be placed, or permit to be placed any
ashtray, or tobacco ash collector or receptacle in any enclosed area designated
as non-smoking.
   (C)   No person shall dispose of smoking waste or tobacco product waste
within the boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited, including
inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance requirement.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.060 SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN NEW AND EXISTING UNITS OF MULTI-UNIT
RESIDENCES.
   (A)   All new units of a multi-unit residence are hereby designated
nonsmoking units including any associated exclusive-use enclosed areas or
unenclosed areas, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch, deck, or
patio.
   (B)   All units of a multi-unit residence that are not new units, are hereby
designated nonsmoking units, including any associated exclusive-use enclosed
areas or unenclosed areas, such as, for example, a private balcony, porch deck,
or patio as of January 1, 2023.
   (C)   Required and implied lease terms for all new and existing units of
multi-unit residences.
      (1)   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit
in a multi-unit residence, including, for example, new units and existing
units, entered into, renewed, or continued month-to-month after the effective
date of this chapter shall include the provisions set forth in subsection (2)
below on the earliest possible date when such an amendment is allowable by law
when providing the minimum legal notice.
      (2)   Every lease or other rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit
in a multi-unit residence, including, for example, new units and existing
units, entered into, renewed, or continued month-to-month after the effective
date of this chapter shall be amended or prepared to include the following
provisions:
         (a)   For new and existing units:
            1.   New units. A clause providing that as of January 1, 2023, it
is a material breach of the agreement to allow or engage in smoking in the
unit. Such a clause might state, "It is a material breach of this agreement for
tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by
invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in the unit."
            2.   Existing units. A clause providing that as of January 1, 2023,
it is a material breach of the agreement to allow or engage in smoking in the
unit. Such a clause might state, "It is a material breach of this agreement for
tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by
invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in the unit as of
January 1, 2023."
         (b)   A clause providing that it is a material breach of the
agreement. for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant
or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in
any common area of the property other than a designated smoking area. Such a
clause might state, "It is a material breach of this agreement for tenant or
any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present by invitation
or permission of the tenant to engage in smoking in any common area of the
property, except in an outdoor designated smoking area, if one exists."
         (c)   A clause providing that it is a material breach of the agreement
for tenant or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or present
by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate any law regulating smoking
while anywhere on the property. Such a clause might state, "It is a material
breach of this agreement for tenant or any other person subject to the control
of the tenant or present by invitation or permission of the tenant to violate
any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property."
         (d)   A clause expressly conveying third-party beneficiary status to
all occupants of the multi-unit residence as to the smoking provisions of the
agreement. Such a clause might state, "Other occupants of the property are
express third-party beneficiaries of those provisions in this agreement that
concern smoking. As such, other occupants of the property may seek to enforce
such provisions by any lawful means, including by bringing a civil action in a
court of law."
      (3)   Whether or not a landlord complies with subsections (1) and (2)
above, the clauses required by those subsections shall be implied and
incorporated by law into every agreement to which subsections (1) or (2) apply
and shall become effective as of the earliest possible date on which the
landlord could have made the insertions pursuant to subsections (1) or (2).
      (4)   A tenant who breaches the smoking regulations of a lease or
knowingly allows another person to do so shall be liable to:
         (a)   The landlord; and
         (b)   Any lawful occupant of the multi-unit residence who is exposed
to smoke or who suffers damages as a result of that breach.
      (5)   This chapter shall not create additional liability in a landlord to
any person for a tenant's breach of any smoking provision in a lease or other
rental agreement for the occupancy of a unit in a multi-unit residence if the
landlord has fully complied with this section.
      (6)   Failure to enforce any smoking regulation of a lease or agreement
on one or more occasions shall not constitute a waiver of the lease or
agreement provisions required by this chapter and shall not prevent future
enforcement of any such smoking regulation on another occasion.
   (D)   Prohibitions and duties generally.
      (1)   No person shall smoke or knowingly permit smoking in an area of the
premises under his or her legal or de facto control in which smoking is
prohibited by a lease or agreement term, by this chapter, the Town Code, or any
other state or federal law, provided, however, that this prohibition does not
apply to a person who is already compelled to act under state or federal law.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally permit the presence or
placement of ash receptacles, such as, for example, ash trays or ash cans,
within an area under the legal or de facto control of the person and in which
smoking is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a
reasonable distance required by this chapter from any area in which smoking is
prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in
violation of this subsection shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
      (3)   Smoking is prohibited in all multi-unit common areas, provided,
however, that a person with legal control over a common area may designate a
portion of the unenclosed area of the multi-unit common area as a designated
smoking area if the area meets all of the following criteria:
         (a)   The area must be located a reasonable distance from any unit or
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited by this section or other law; by
binding agreement relating to the ownership, occupancy, or use of real
property; or by designation of a person with legal control over the property.
In the case of a nonsmoking area created by agreement or designation, this
provision does not apply unless the person designating the smoking area has
actual knowledge of, or has been given notice of, the agreement or designation.
A person with legal control over a designated smoking area may be obliged to
modify, relocate, or eliminate that as laws change, as binding agreements are
created, and as nonsmoking areas on neighboring property are established;
         (b)   The area must not include, and must be a reasonable distance
from, unenclosed areas primarily used by children and unenclosed areas with
improvements that facilitate physical activity including, for example,
playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, school campuses, and sandboxes;
         (c)   The area must be no more that 10 percent of the total unenclosed
area of the premises for which it is designated;
         (d)   The area must have a clearly marked perimeter;
         (e)   The area must be identified by conspicuous signs;
         (f)   The area must be completely within an unenclosed area; and
         (g)   The area must not overlap with any enclosed or unenclosed area
in which smoking is otherwise prohibited by this chapter or other provisions of
this Code, state law, or federal law.
      (4)   "No Smoking" signs, with letters of no less than one inch in height
or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle crossed by a red
bar) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted and maintained by the landlord
in every place on the premises in which smoking is prohibited by this chapter
or by the landlord, except that signs are not required inside units. Signs must
be sufficient to make areas where smoking is prohibited obvious to a reasonable
person. The absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any
provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.070 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN CERTAIN UNENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise expressly authorized by state or federal law,
smoking shall be prohibited in any place where food and/or drink is offered for
sale, including outdoor dining areas of restaurants and farmers markets, except
unenclosed areas of a stand-alone bar.
   (B)   Smoking is prohibited within:
      (1)   A reasonable distance from any entrance, opening or exit of any
enclosed area within which smoking is prohibited, except while passing on the
way to another destination. Entrances to outdoor decks or patios at bars are
excluded from this prohibition;
      (2)   Parks, including, but not limited to Contratti Field, Bolinas Park
and Peri Park Playground;
      (3)   Public events including but not limited to, sports events,
festivals, entertainment, speaking performances, ceremonies, pageants, parades,
fairs and farmer's markets; and
      (4)   Places of employment; and
      (5)   Unenclosed (outdoor) service areas.
   (C)   No person shall place, cause to be placed, or permit to be placed any
ashtray, or tobacco ash collector or receptacle in any area designated a non-
smoking area by this chapter.
   (D)   No person shall dispose of smoking waste, cannabis waste, or tobacco
product waste within the boundaries of an area in which smoking is prohibited,
including inside the perimeter of any reasonable distance requirement.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858,
passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.080 SMOKING OPTIONAL AREAS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the smoking
restrictions of this chapter shall not apply to private single family
residences, except when used as a child care or health care facility.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any owner,
operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility
from declaring and enforcing a nonsmoking policy in the entire establishment or
facility or from posting signs as described by §
8.44.100.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 790, passed 6-3-2015; Am. Ord. 858, passed
11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.090 DUTY OF PERSON, EMPLOYER, BUSINESS OR NONPROFIT ENTITY.
   (A)   No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly
permit smoking in an area which is under the legal or de facto control of the
person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity and in which smoking is
prohibited by law.
   (B)   No person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity shall knowingly or
intentionally permit the presence or placement of ash receptacles, such as, for
example, ashtrays or ash cans, within an area which is under the legal or
actual control of the person, employer, business, or nonprofit entity and in
which smoking is prohibited by law, including, without limitation, within a
reasonable distance required by this chapter from any area in which smoking is
prohibited. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the presence of ash receptacles in
violation of this subsection shall not be a defense to a charge of smoking in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.100 POSTING OF SIGNS.
   (A)   The person, employer, business or non-profit entity with legal or
actual control of a building subject to this chapter shall clearly and
conspicuously post “No Smoking” signs at the entrances of every building, as
well as at every other place where smoking is prohibited under this chapter.
   (B)   “No Smoking” signs shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at every
entrance to any building or other place where smoking is prohibited under this
chapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858,
passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.110 [RESERVED.]
§ 8.44.120 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of these regulations shall be given to all applicants for a
business license or renewal thereof; provided, however, lack of such notice
shall be no defense to a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Enforcement of this chapter may be brought through the administrative
citation process as outlined in
Chapter 1.10 of the Fairfax Town Code. Before a civil penalty is levied, the
person charged with the violation shall be given a written warning by the town
staff of the proposed action, including the nature of the violation and the
amount of the proposed penalty.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a private citizen
may bring legal action to enforce this chapter.
   (D)   Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.130 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Each instance of smoking in violation of this chapter shall constitute
a separate and continuing violation.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter are subject to a civil action brought by
the Town of Fairfax, punishable by a civil fine not less than $100 and not
exceeding $500 per violation.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.140 NON-RETALIATION.
   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because the employee
or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this
chapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.150 PUBLIC EDUCATION.
   The Town Manager or his or her designee will engage in a continuing
educational program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of
this chapter, as well as a guide to owners, operators and managers with
compliance; provided, however, lack of such education shall be no defense to a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.160 GOVERNMENTAL AGENCY COOPERATION.
   The Town Manager or his or her designee may annually request other
governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the town to
establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this
chapter. This includes urging all federal, state, county and school district
agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent
with current health findings regarding environmental tobacco smoke.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.170 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
   It is the intent of the Town Council of the Town of Fairfax to supplement
applicable state and federal law and not to duplicate or contradict such law
and this chapter shall be construed consistently with that intention. This
chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is
otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(Ord. 754, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
ARTICLE II: TOBACCO RETAILERS LICENSING ORDINANCE
§ 8.44.200 TITLE.
   This article shall be known as Fairfax's "Tobacco Retailers Licensing
Ordinance."
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017)
§ 8.44.210 REQUIREMENTS AND PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Tobacco retailer's license required. It shall be unlawful for any
person to act as a tobacco retailer in the town without first obtaining and
maintaining a valid tobacco retailer's license pursuant to this article for
each location at which that activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a
valid tobacco retailer's license is a nuisance as a matter of law.
   (B)   Lawful business operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in
the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a
license is issued, it shall be a violation of this section for a licensee, or
any of the licensee's agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or
federal law applicable to tobacco products or paraphernalia, electronic smoking
devices or paraphernalia or tobacco retailing.
   (C)   Display of license. Each tobacco retailer license shall be prominently
displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed location.
   (D)   Positive identification required. No person engaged in tobacco
retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product, electronic smoking device
or electronic smoking device paraphernalia to another person who appears to be
under the age of 27 years without first examining the identification of the
recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state
law to purchase and possess the tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia,
electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia (i.e., 21
years old, or active duty military personnel who are 18 years of age or older
with a US Armed Forces identification card).
   (E)   Minimum age for persons selling tobacco. No person who is younger than
the age of 18 shall engage in tobacco retailing.
   (F)   Self-service displays prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a
self-service display or self-service merchandizing, or by any means other than
vendor-assisted sales, is prohibited. No tobacco retailer shall locate,
install, keep, maintain or use, or permit the location, installation, keeping,
maintenance or use on his, her or its premises any electronic smoking device
vending machine or tobacco vending machine for the purpose of selling or
distributing any electronic smoking device or any tobacco product.
   (G)   False and misleading advertising prohibited. A tobacco retailer
without a valid tobacco retailer license or a proprietor without a valid
tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a person whose license has
been suspended or revoked:
      (1)   Shall keep all tobacco products out of public view. The public
display of tobacco products in violation of this provision shall constitute
tobacco retailing without a license under §
8.44.300; and
      (2)   Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products
that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco
retailer's location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that
such products can be obtained at that location.
   (H)   Flavored tobacco products.
      (1)   The sale or distribution by a tobacco retailer of any flavored
tobacco product is prohibited.
      (2)   There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a tobacco product is a
flavored tobacco product if a manufacturer or any of the manufacturer’s agents
or employees, in the course of their agency or employment, has made a statement
or claim directed to consumers or to the public that the tobacco product has or
produces a characterizing flavor, including, but not limited to, text, color,
and/or images on the product’s labeling or packaging that are used to
explicitly or implicitly communicate that the tobacco product has a
characterizing flavor.
      (3)   The Town Manager, or his or her designee, may adopt rules,
regulations, or guidelines for the implementation and enforcement of this §
8.44.210(H).
   (I)   Minimum pack size for cigars. Notwithstanding any other provision of
this section, it shall be a violation of this subsection for any licensee or
any of the licensee's agents or employees to sell, offer for sale, or exchange
for any form of consideration:
      (1)   Any single cigar, whether or not packaged for individual sale;
      (2)   Any number of cigars fewer than the number contained in the
manufacturer's original consumer packaging designed for retail sale to a
consumer; or
      (3)   Any package of cigars containing fewer than five cigars.
This subsection (I) does not apply to the sale or offer for sale of a single
cigar for which the retail price exceeds $5.
   (J)   Pharmacies cannot sell tobacco products. No license may be issued to
authorize tobacco retailing in a pharmacy.
   (K)   Signage requirements.
      (1)   A tobacco retailer shall post plainly visible signs at the point of
purchase of tobacco products which comply with the signage requirements of Cal.
Bus. and Prof. Code § 22952, as amended from time to time.
      (2)   A tobacco retailer shall post signs at each entrance to any
premises on which any tobacco product is offered for sale, plainly visible from
outside the premises, which state "Warning: The fine for buying tobacco
products or electronic cigarettes for anyone under 21 is $200-$1,000, with the
exception of active duty military personnel aged 18 years or older with a US
Armed Forces identification card" in letters at least one-half inch tall, and
which cite Cal. Penal Code § 308(a). These signs shall be updated to conform to
any subsequent state or federal requirements and/or amendments to Cal. Penal
Code § 308(a).
   (L)   Sampling and distribution of sampling packages of tobacco products,
tobacco paraphernalia, electronic smoking devices, and electronic smoking
device paraphernalia is not permitted.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 836, passed 9-4-2019; Am. Ord. 858,
passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.220 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Application for a tobacco retailer's license shall be submitted in the
name of each proprietor proposing to conduct or conducting retail tobacco
sales, and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof.
      (1)   It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed
regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws
affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer's license. No proprietor may rely
on the issuance of a license as a determination by the Town that the proprietor
has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued
contrary to this section, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false
or misleading information supplied by a proprietor shall be revoked pursuant to
§
8.44.290. Nothing in this article shall be construed to vest in any person
obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right to
act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law.
      (2)   All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the
department and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of
the business seeking a license.
         (b)   The business name, address, and telephone number of the single
fixed location for which a license is sought.
         (c)   A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor
to receive all communications and notices (the "authorized person and address")
required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this section.
If an authorized person and address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be
understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address
specified in subparagraph (b) above.
         (d)   Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer's license
is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer's license by the
California Board of Equalization.
         (e)   Such other information as the department deems necessary for the
administration or enforcement of this article as specified on the application
form required by this section.
   (B)   A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the department in writing of
any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco
retailer's license within ten business days of any change.
   (C)   Tobacco retailers in existence on the effective date enforcement date
specified in §
8.44.310 shall apply for a license within 90 days after said enforcement date.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.230 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Grounds for denial. Upon the receipt of a complete application for a
tobacco retailer's license and the license fee required by this section, the
department shall issue a license unless substantial evidence demonstrates that
one or more of the following grounds for denial exists:
      (1)   The information presented in the application is inaccurate or
false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a
violation of this section.
      (2)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a
location which is not eligible for the issuance of a tobacco retailer license.
However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license
if the applicant provides the town with documentation demonstrating by clear
and convincing evidence that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the
location or business in an arm's length transaction.
      (3)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a
proprietor to whom this article prohibits a license to be issued.
      (4)   The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a
location that is unlawful pursuant to any other provision of this Code,
including without limitation, zoning ordinance and building code, or that is
unlawful pursuant to any other law.
   (B)   Appeal of denial. Except as provided in §
8.44.290(C), a decision of the department to deny a license is appealable to
the Town Council and any such appeal must be filed in writing with the Town
Clerk within 15 days of the department's denial of the issuance of the license
and the applicable appeal fee must be paid.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.240 LICENSE RENEWAL AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   Renewal of license. A tobacco retailer's license is invalid if the
appropriate license fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the
license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one calendar
year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco
retailer's license and submit the license fee no later than November 30 of each
year.
   (B)   Expiration of license. A tobacco retailer's license that is not timely
renewed shall expire on December 31 of each year. To renew a license not timely
renewed pursuant to subparagraph (A), above, the proprietor must:
      (1)   Submit the license fee and the renewal form; and
      (2)   Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor has not
sold and will not sell any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the
license expiration date and before the license is renewed.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.250 TRANSFER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A tobacco retailer's license may not be transferred from one location
to another.
   (B)   A new tobacco retailer's license is required whenever a tobacco
retailing location has a change in proprietor(s).
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, prior violations
at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license
ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless the new
proprietor(s) provide the department with clear and convincing evidence that
the new proprietor(s) have acquired or are acquiring the location in an arm's
length transaction.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.260 LICENSE CONVEYS A LIMITED, CONDITIONAL PRIVILEGE.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and
maintaining a tobacco retailer's license any status or right other than the
limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in
the town identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this
article shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu
of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any
provision of this Code including, without limitation, the zoning ordinance and
building codes, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place
of employment pursuant to Cal. Labor Code § 6404.5. For example, obtaining a
tobacco retailer's license does not make the retailer a "retail or wholesale
tobacco shop" for the purposes of Cal. Labor Code § 6404.5.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.270 FEE FOR LICENSE.
   The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer's license shall be
established from time to time by resolution of the Town Council. The fee shall
be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of
this article, including, for example, issuing a license, administering the
license program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks,
documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed
the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this article. Fees are
nonrefundable except as may be required by law.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.280 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Compliance with this article shall be monitored by the department. In
addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this article.
The department may designate any number of additional persons to monitor
compliance with this article.
   (B)   The department will work with Marin County Tobacco Program to inspect
each tobacco retailer at least one time per 12-month period. Nothing in this
paragraph shall create a right of action in any licensee or other person
against the Town or its agents.
   (C)   The department shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age
for tobacco purchases or possession against a minor person who otherwise might
be in violation of such law because of the person's age (hereinafter "youth
decoy") if the potential violation occurs when:
      (1)   The youth decoy is participating in an inspection supervised by a
peace officer, code enforcement official, or the person designated by the town
to monitor compliance with this article;
      (2)   The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the
town to monitor compliance with this article; or
      (3)   The youth decoy is participating in an inspection funded in part,
either directly or indirectly through subcontracting, by the County of Marin
Department of Health and Human Services or the California Department of Health
Services.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.290 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation of license for violation. In addition to any
other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer's license shall be
suspended or revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the
department finds based on a preponderance of the evidence, after the licensee
is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, or any of
the licensee's agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements,
conditions, or prohibitions of this article or has pleaded guilty, "no contest"
or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in §
8.44.210 above.
      (1)   Upon a finding by the department of a first violation of this
article at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be
suspended for 30 days.
      (2)   Upon a finding by the department of a second violation of this
article at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be
suspended for 90 days.
      (3)   Upon a finding by the department of a third violation of this
article at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be
suspended for one year.
      (4)   Upon a finding by the department of four or more violations of this
article at a location within any 60-month period, the license shall be revoked
and thereafter the licensee shall be ineligible to apply for a new license for
five years.
   (B)   Appeal of suspension or revocation. A decision of the department to
suspend or revoke a license is appealable to the Town Council and any appeal
must be filed in writing with the Town Clerk within 15 days of mailing of the
department's decision and the applicable appeal fee must be paid. If such an
appeal is timely made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed action. An
appeal to the Town Council is not available for a revocation made pursuant to
subsection (C) below.
   (C)   Revocation of license wrongly issued. A tobacco retailer's license
shall be revoked if the department finds, after the licensee is afforded notice
and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the grounds for denial of a
license under §
8.44.230 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the
license issued. The decision by the department shall be the final decision of
the town. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new
license application.
   (D)   Judicial action to challenge. Any final administrative action to
suspend or revoke a tobacco retailer's license under this article shall be
subject to judicial review pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 53069.4, which, among
other things, requires such a judicial challenge to be brought within 20 days
of service of the final decision.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.300 TOBACCO RETAILING WITHOUT A VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of
competent jurisdiction determines, or the Town Council finds based on a
preponderance of evidence, after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that
any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid
tobacco retailer's license or has engaged in any prohibited activity set forth
in §
8.44.210, either directly or through the person's agents or employees, the
person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailer's
license as follows:
      (1)   After a first violation of this article at a location within any
60-month period, no new license may issue for the location (unless ownership of
the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length
transaction), until 30 days have passed from the date of the violation.
      (2)   After a second violation of this article at a location within any
60-month period, no new license may issue for the location (unless ownership of
the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's length
transaction), until 90 days have passed from the date of the violation.
      (3)   After a third or subsequent violation of this article at a location
within any 60-month period, no new license may issue for the location (unless
ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm's
length transaction), until 60 months have passed from the date of the
violation.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.310 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   This article shall not be enforced by the town until January 1, 2019.
   (B)   Tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, electronic smoking devices or
electronic smoking device paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in
violation of this article are subject to seizure by the department or any peace
officer and shall be forfeited after the licensee and any other owner of such
items seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that
the items were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this article.
The decision by the department may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set
forth in §
8.44.290(B). Forfeited items shall be destroyed after all internal appeals have
been exhausted and the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to Cal.
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without
the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that
suit becomes final.
   (C)   For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this article, each
of the following constitutes a separate violation:
      (1)   Each day on which a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia,
electronic smoking device or electronic smoking device paraphernalia is offered
for sale in violation of this article; or
      (2)   Each individual retail tobacco product, retail item of tobacco
paraphernalia, retail electronic smoking device or retail item of electronic
smoking device paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in
violation of this article.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
§ 8.44.320 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   The remedies provided by this article are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   (B)   Whenever evidence of a violation of this article is obtained in any
part through the participation of a person under the age of 21 years old, such
a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or
administrative process brought to enforce this article and the alleged
violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of
the evidence presented.
   (C)   Violations of this article are subject to a civil action brought by
the Town Attorney, punishable by a civil fine not less than $250 and not
exceeding $1,000 per violation.
   (D)   Violations of this article, in the discretion of the Town Attorney,
may be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice
so require.
   (E)   Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of
any provision of this article shall also constitute a violation of this
article.
   (F)   Violations of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances.
   (G)   In addition to other remedies provided by this article or by other
law, any violation of this article may be remedied by a civil action brought by
the Town Attorney, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance
abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings, and
suits for injunctive relief.
(Ord. 814, passed 12-6-2017; Am. Ord. 858, passed 11-3-2021)
CHAPTER 8.48: REGULATORY FEE FOR CLEAN STORM WATER ACTIVITIES
Section
   
8.48.010   Title
   
8.48.020   Purpose and intent
   
8.48.030   Definitions
   
8.48.040   Establishment of fee for clean storm water activities
   
8.48.050   Calculation of fee
   
8.48.060   Clean Storm Water Fund established
   
8.48.070   Collection of fee; interest and penalties
   
8.48.080   Delinquent fees
   
8.48.090   Remedies
§ 8.48.010 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Town of Fairfax Storm Water Activity
Fee” and may be so cited.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.010) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.020 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the future health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the town by establishing a funding source to
provide enforcement of the town’s Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention Ordinance (
Chapter 8.32 of this code), to provide maintenance and repair of the town's
stormwater drainage facilities, to provide capital improvements to the town’s
storm drainage system and to provide other clean stormwater activities.
   (B)   The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the water quality
of the state’s and the nation’s watercourses, water bodies and wetlands in a
manner pursuant to and consistent with the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.020) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLEAN STORMWATER ACTIVITIES. All programs required by the Marin County Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Program and the BURCP Basin Plan Permit, the
operation and maintenance of the town’s storm water drainage system, any
capital improvements to repair, rehabilitate, replace, or improve components of
the storm water drainage system, the enforcement of the Urban Runoff Pollution
Prevention Ordinance (
Chapter 8.32 of this code) and related regulations, the administration of this
chapter and of
Chapter 8.32 and any other activities related to the foregoing.
   LAND USE CATEGORY. The category of land use assigned to a parcel of real
property as shown on the most current official assessment roll of the Marin
County Assessor.
   PARCEL. A unit of real property in one ownership as shown on the most
current assessment roll of the Marin County Assessor.
   PARCEL SIZE. The area of a unit of real property in one ownership as
determined from records maintained by Marin County or the Town of Fairfax.
   RUNOFF FACTOR.
      (1)   The indicator of storm water generation of a parcel.
      (2)   It is based upon the average ratio of impervious area to total
parcel area for a particular land use category.
   STANDARD RUNOFF UNIT or RU. The average estimated amount of impervious area
of parcels in the single-family residential land use category, it is the
product of the average single-family residential parcel size multiplied by the
runoff factor for single-family residential parcels.
Average Parcel Size x .4 = RU
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Those storm water drainage conveyance facilities
within the town by which storm water may be conveyed to waters of the United
States, including any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains, which are
not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), as defined at Title 40
C.F.R. pt. 122.2. STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM also includes storm drains, as defined
in §
8.32.010 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.030) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.040 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEE FOR CLEAN STORM WATER ACTIVITIES.
   Every person, corporation or entity which owns real property within the town
shall pay an annual fee to the town for clean storm water activities.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.040) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.050 CALCULATION OF FEE.
   (A)   The annual clean storm water activity fee for owners of parcels in the
single-family residential land use category shall be the rate per one standard
runoff unit (RU).
   (B)   The annual clean storm water activity fee for owners of parcels in all
other land use categories shall be calculated using the following formula:
{'{'} (parcel size x runoff factor) / (RU) {'}'} x (rate per RU)
   (C)   The runoff factors for various land use categories shall be those set
forth in the following table:
 
Land Use Category         Runoff Factor
Single-Family Residential 0.4
Multi-Residential         0.6
Commercial                0.8
Industrial                0.8
Vacant Land               0.1
 
   (D)   The rate per runoff unit shall be set by the Town Council, by
resolution; the rate may be adjusted from time to time, in accordance with
town’s procedures for adopting rates, fees and charges.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.050) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.060 CLEAN STORM WATER FUND ESTABLISHED.
   The Clean Storm Water Fund is established in the Town Treasury. All income
and revenue collected from real property owners pursuant to this chapter shall
be paid into the Clean Storm Water Fund. The income and revenue shall be
expended only for clean storm water activities, and shall not be expended for
any, other purpose.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.060) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.070 COLLECTION OF FEE; INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Town Manager is authorized to have the fees imposed by this
chapter collected by the County of Marin in conjunction with the County of
Marin’s collection of property tax revenues for the town.
   (B)   In the event that the County of Marin collects the fees imposed by
this chapter, the imposition of additional penalties, fees, charges and
interest upon property owners who fail to pay the fee imposed by this chapter,
shall be subject to and governed by the rules, regulations and procedures
utilized by the County of Marin in its collection of property taxes, charges
and fees for the town, and its collection of this additional fee for the town.
   (C)   Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the
provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the fee required by this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.070) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.080 DELINQUENT FEES.
   Delinquent fees are made a lien upon the real property served by the storm
water drainage system. The amount of any fee, penalty, charge or interest
imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed to the
town.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.080) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
§ 8.48.090 REMEDIES.
   The town may seek legal, injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce
this chapter. In any such action the town shall be entitled to reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs. The remedies established in this chapter are
cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available to the town for the
collection of any fees imposed by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8.36.090) (Ord. 646, passed - -1996)
CHAPTER 8.52: PESTICIDES
Section
   
8.52.010   Purpose
   
8.52.020   Definition
   
8.52.030   Use
   
8.52.040   Exceptions
   
8.52.050   Neighbor notification
   
8.52.060   Timing of notice
   
8.52.070   Types of notices required
   
8.52.080   Distance of notification coverage
   
8.52.090   Exceptions
   
8.52.100   Annual notification
   
8.52.110   Enforcement
   
8.52.120   Education
§ 8.52.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The use of pesticides with known carcinogens in the Town of Fairfax is
of such great concern to the Town Council that in order to protect the health,
safety and welfare of Fairfax residents this chapter is being adopted. The Town
Council is formalizing Fairfax’s official policy of not using pesticides on
town property by prohibiting the use of pesticides on Fairfax parks, open space
parcels and public rights of way including both aerial spraying and ground
applications; and, requiring public notice entitled “neighbor notification”
prior to pesticide use on private property.
   (B)   Residents of Fairfax have a right to know when pesticides are being
used in their neighborhood on private property in order to allow time to take
precautions to protect themselves, their family, pets and property from the
hazards of pesticide exposure.
   (C)   (1)   The headwaters for Corte Madera Creek are the Fairfax and San
Anselmo (Cascade) Creeks which traverse the town limits.
      (2)   Coho salmon and steelhead (native to these creeks) have been listed
as threatened under the Federal Endangered Species Act.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PESTICIDE. Any spray adjuvant, substance or mixture of substances, which is
intended to be used for defoliating plants, regulating plant growth or for
preventing, destroying, repelling or mitigating any pest which may infest or be
detrimental to vegetation, man, animals or households, or be present in any
agricultural or non-agricultural environment, including fungicides, herbicides,
insecticides, nematicides, rodenticides, dessicants, defoliants and plant
growth regulators.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.030 USE.
   (A)   The use of pesticides on Fairfax parks, open space parcels and public
rights of way and buildings owned and maintained by the Town of Fairfax, is
hereby prohibited.
   (B)   The “use” shall be defined as both aerial and ground spraying and or
dusting and all other ground applications.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.040 EXCEPTIONS.
   The only exceptions to the use of pesticides under §
8.52.030 are the same as those found in §
8.52.090; and, in addition an exception may be approved by a two-thirds super
majority vote of the full Town Council with a mandatory finding that the
health, safety and welfare of the community is so threatened that an emergency
exists, that no reasonable alternative is available and the prohibition of the
use of pesticides would create the potential for allowing a significant adverse
impact on the town.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.050 NEIGHBOR NOTIFICATION.
   Prior to the use of pesticides on private property notice shall be required.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.060 TIMING OF NOTICE.
   Neighbors of the affected properties shall receive a minimum of 48 hours
notice prior to the application of pesticides.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.070 TYPE OF NOTICES REQUIRED.
   (A)   A visible 8.5-inch by 11-inch Pesticides Alert notice on a form
approved by the Town of Fairfax shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
front of the property where the pesticide application will occur and an
approved written notice delivered 48 hours in advance either by a mail service
or a hand delivered 8.5-inch by 11-inch notice attached to an accessible front
door or front gate if locked of every separate residential unit within 150 feet
of the posted property.
   (B)   The notice shall include the address and approximate location of the
pesticide application, date and estimated time of use, the type of pesticide
being used and an appropriate 800 number for information regarding the product
content and potential impacts.
   (C)   The notice shall remain posted for 48 hours after pesticide use.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.080 DISTANCE OF NOTIFICATION COVERAGE.
   All separate residential units within 150 feet of the parcel where pesticide
application is to occur shall receive proper written notification as set forth
in §
8.52.070.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.090 EXCEPTIONS.
   Prior notification provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
   (A)   The use of an aerosol product with a directed spray, in containers of
18 fluid ounces or less, when used to protect individuals from an imminent
threat from stinging and biting insects, including venomous spiders, bees,
wasps and hornets; (This section shall not exempt from notification the use of
any fogger product or aerosol product that discharges to a wide area.)
   (B)   The use of non-volatile insect or rodent bait in a tamper resistant
container;
   (C)   The use of boric acid;
   (D)   The use of horticultural soap and oils that do not contain synthetic
pesticides or synergists;
   (E)   The application of a granular pesticide, where granular pesticide
means any ground applied solid pesticide that is not a dust or power;
   (F)   The application of a pesticide by direct injection into a plant; and
   (G)   The spot application of a pesticide, where spot application means the
application of pesticide in a manually pressurized or non-pressurized container
of 32 ounces or less to an area of ground less than nine square feet. Nine
square feet is a maximum area to be exempted once per year to prohibit a
cumulative exception.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.100 ANNUAL NOTIFICATION.
   Annual notification of Ord. 687 shall be given by the town to all businesses
in Fairfax that sell pesticides and all listed Marin County businesses that
apply pesticides as a regular service to their customers.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.110 ENFORCEMENT.
   The first violation of this chapter within a three year period shall
constitute a public nuisance. The second violation within the same three year
period shall a constitute an infraction. The third violation within the same
three year period shall constitute a misdemeanor and the penalties will be
applied according to existing law.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
§ 8.52.120 EDUCATION.
   Education will be a key component of success for this chapter. In that
light, it is suggested that residents refer to the County of Marin and its
Master Gardener Program to learn about Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
techniques and how they can utilize such a program at their residence.
Information may also be obtained from the Marin Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Program (MCSTOPP), the Marin Agricultural Commissioner’s office and the
University of California Agricultural Extension office in Novato.
(Ord. 686, passed 3-2-2001)
CHAPTER 8.56: LIVING WAGE FOR CONTRACTORS
Section
   
8.56.010   Findings and purpose
   
8.56.020   Living wage requirement
   
8.56.030   Definitions
   
8.56.040   Exemptions
   
8.56.050   Assignees/successors in interest
   
8.56.060   Contract provision
   
8.56.070   Certification by contractor
   
8.56.080   Application of chapter
   
8.56.090   Notification of employees
   
8.56.100   Monitoring and enforcement
   
8.56.110   Third tier review
   
8.56.120   Labor relation neutrality
   
8.56.130   Employee retention
   
8.56.140   Severability
§ 8.56.010 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   In enacting this chapter the Town Council makes the following findings and
articulates the following purposes for the promulgation of the living wage
regulations set forth herein:
   (A)   The health and welfare of all Fairfax residents is benefitted and
advances when Fairfax workers are paid a living wage;
   (B)   The town awards contracts to private sector and non profit employers
to provide services to the town in accordance with those contracts;
   (C)   Many workers in Fairfax and their families live at or below the
poverty line; (The payment of inadequate wages to those workers tends to
negatively affect the quality of services provided to the town and its
residents by fostering high turnover and instability in the workplace.)
   (D)   The payment of a living wage will increase the ability of low wage
workers to attain sustenance, decrease the amount of poverty and reduce the
amount of taxpayer funded services provided in the Town of Fairfax;
   (E)   Some employers who provide contract services to the Town do not
provide health insurance benefits to their employees; and (This factor
negatively affects worker performance and the quality of services delivered to
the town and its residents, results in unwarranted employee absenteeism and
negatively impacts local and state health programs. These problems can be
favorably impacted if employers provide reasonable health insurance benefits to
their employees.)
   (F)   Living wage jobs will decrease poverty, increase consumer income and
invigorate downtown businesses.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.020 LIVING WAGE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Covered employees shall be paid a living wage.
   (B)   The “living wage” to be paid to employees pursuant to the requirements
of this chapter shall be a minimum hourly wage of $13 with employer sponsored
benefits or $14.75 without employer sponsored benefits, until adjusted by
further action of the Town Council annually after consideration of the annual
cost of living increase as measured by the San Francisco Bay Area Consumer
Price Index. Any adjustments made to the minimum hourly wage shall become
effective the following July 1.
   (C)   (1)   “Benefits,” as used in this section, means all of the following
at a minimum, provided by employer: 12 days compensated sick and vacation leave
(combined) annually for full-time employees, prorated for employees working
less than full-time; payment of at least $1.75 per hour toward health insurance
for the employee.
      (2)   No covered employer will fund wage increases required by this
chapter, or otherwise respond to the provisions of this chapter, by reducing
the health insurance, pension, vacation or other non-wage benefits of any of
its employees.
   (D)   Amendments to this chapter concerning the definition of living wage
shall apply to contracts entered into or extended following the effective date
of the amendments.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACT FOR PRIVATE SECTOR SERVICES.
      (1)   Any contract for both profit and non profits between the town and a
private sector contractor for the following services:
         (a)   Automotive repair and maintenance;
         (b)   Equipment maintenance service;
         (c)   Facility and building maintenance;
         (d)   Furniture moving and installation/ maintenance services;
         (e)   Janitorial and custodial services;
         (f)   Landscaping services;
         (g)   Laundry services;
         (h)   Office and clerical services;
         (i)   Pest control services;
         (j)   Recreation services;
         (k)   Security services;
         (l)   Transportation and shuttle services;
         (m)   Towing services; and
         (n)   Tree trimming and removal.
      (2)   CONTRACT FOR PRIVATE SECTOR SERVICES. Does not refer to: contracts
for commodities, goods, or supplies; contracts for public works; contracts for
public projects subject to prevailing wage requirements; contracts for
professional services including, but not limited to the services of architects,
engineers, landscape architects, advisers, or consultants; nor leases.
      (3)   CONTRACTOR FOR PRIVATE SECTOR SERVICES. Any private sector
contractor/employer who enters into a contract or contracts for private sector
services with the town, with the cumulative compensation amount in one town
fiscal year greater than $10,000.
   COVERED EMPLOYEE.
      (1)   Any employee of a contractor for private sector services, or to any
employee of a subcontractor who lives or works in the Town of Fairfax. In the
foregoing context, COVERED EMPLOYEES are persons hired by contractors or
subcontractors to work on a full-time, part-time, temporary, seasonal or
regular basis for wages or salary.
      (2)   COVERED EMPLOYEE shall not include persons who are: in positions
that are designated for “trainees” that are part of an employer’s bona fide
time-limited training program, which training program enables the employee to
advance into a permanent position; in positions of employment that require
student status as a prerequisite to being employed in that position;
volunteers; recipients of income support such as, but not limited to
supplemental security income who would be ineligible for such benefits by
virtue of receiving a living wage as described herein, who waive in writing
their entitlement to a living wage; or workers in licensed, sheltered workshops
or supported employment; recipients of public funds who have been placed in a
work experience, on the job training position, summer employment position or
wage-based community service position as defined by either the Town Code, Town
Personnel Rules and Regulations or Fairfax Town Manager.
      (3)   COVERED EMPLOYEE shall not include those employees who are
represented by a bargaining unit or labor union pursuant to rights conferred by
state or federal law and for whom a collective bargaining labor agreement is in
effect governing their terms and conditions of employment.
   EMPLOYER.
      (1)   The Town of Fairfax and any person who is a recipient, contractor
or subcontractor and who employs employees.
      (2)   EMPLOYER does not include other governmental agencies or quasi-
governmental agencies, which have publicly elected boards or commissions.
   PUBLIC SUBSIDIES RECIPIENT. Any person who receives financial assistance
from the town, including direct grants, loans, waiver of town fees or other
valuable consideration in an amount of more than $15,000 in any 12-month
period. This amount shall be adjusted annually, effective June 30, to reflect
increases during the preceding year (January through December) in the Consumer
Price Index - Urban Wage Earners, as published by the U.S. Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics. Recipient does not include a private employer with
less than ten employees who receives a tax abatement or subsidy.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. Any subcontractor who enters into a subcontract with a
contractor for private sector services.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax, including all town departments and related town
entities governed by the Town Council.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   The Town Council in its sole discretion, or its designee, may grant an
exemption for grounds upon making a finding and determination either that
compliance with the living wage will cause economic hardship, or that the
exemption is necessary for the best interests of the town and is due to unusual
circumstances (e.g., following a declared natural disaster) or where the town
is required to award a contract for services to a sole source contractor for
services. For all exemption requests, the exemption applicant must provide a
written statement that includes complete details in support of the request for
exemption and describe alternative solutions pursued. Exemptions will apply
only to the contract for which they are granted.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.050 ASSIGNEES/SUCCESSORS IN INTEREST.
   The living wage requirement by this chapter shall be binding upon the
assignees and successors in interest of any contractor or subcontractor to
which this chapter applies.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.060 CONTRACT PROVISION.
   Town departments and officers shall place in contracts for services and
related requests for proposals or bid documents language in substantially the
following form: “This contract is subject to the provisions of Fairfax Town
Code Chapter ----, requiring payment of a living wage to covered employees.
Non-compliance during the term of the contract will be considered a material
breach and may result in termination of the contract or pursuit of other legal
or administrative remedies.”
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.070 CERTIFICATION BY CONTRACTOR.
   Prior to commencement of the contract’s term or execution by Fairfax, the
contractor will certify to the satisfaction of the town that its employees are
paid a living wage as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.080 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The living wage requirement imposed by this chapter shall apply to all
contracts for services and related subcontracts made or entered into, or
extended, on or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this
chapter.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.090 NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Contractors for services and subcontractors shall notify all employees
subject to the provisions of this chapter of the requirement to pay a living
wage, the current minimum living wage rates, the minimum vacation leave and
sick leave that must be provided and the minimum amount paid toward health
insurance to qualify for the lower minimum living wage.
   (B)   Contractors for services and subcontractors shall post a copy of this
chapter and the approved complaint procedure, in the workplace, and provide
this information to employees upon request.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.100 MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Monitoring of compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall
occur under the same monitoring program as applicable to the town’s prevailing
wage requirements. An annual report shall be provided to the Town Council or
its designee concerning the status of the program.
   (B)   The Town Manager shall be the compliance officer for the purpose of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter. Complaints concerning contractors’
compliance with this chapter shall be made to the compliance officer, who shall
follow the complaint procedure established by the Town Council.
   (C)   Any employee claiming violation of the chapter may report such acts to
the town and may bring an action in the appropriate court of the State of
California or other appropriate administrative agency, against an employer to
enforce his or her rights.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude an employee from seeking any or
all forms of relief and damages.
   (E)   Contractors or subcontractors shall not discharge, reduce the
compensation of, discriminate or otherwise retaliate against or intimidate any
person for making a complaint to the town concerning non- compliance with
obligations under this chapter. Contractors for services, and subcontractors
shall also comply with federal, stated and all other applicable law proscribing
retaliation for union organizing.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.110 THIRD TIER REVIEW.
   (A)   Prior to commencement of the contract’s term or execution by Fairfax,
contractor and/or subcontractor will certify to the satisfaction of the town
that its employees are paid a living wage as provided by this chapter.
Contractors and subcontractors must include a statement of findings of any
violations found against the contractor and/or subcontractor over the past five
years and how these violations were addressed, with the National Employees
Relations Board, the Occupational Safety and Health Agency, the California
Labor Commission, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and/or the
Department of Fair Housing.
   (B)   Prior to final approval of contracts procured pursuant to the Town
Code, pertaining to Town Council approval of services agreements, the town
would consider the history of the proposer as an employer and the working
conditions of the employer’s employees as deemed appropriate by the Town
Council. The town shall be authorized to access and review the employer’s
employee turnover, wages paid, benefits and employee grievances or complaints
and consider references from entities engaged in prior contracts with the
contractor or subcontractor. Any proprietary information, or personnel and
employee information, shall be kept confidential. This information would be
taken into account as part of consideration of the contract and may be used by
the Council as the basis for contract denial.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.120 LABOR RELATION NEUTRALITY.
   Contractors for services and subcontractors shall not hinder or further
collective bargaining organization or other collective bargaining activities by
or on behalf of an employer’s employees. However, this restriction shall not
apply to any expenditure made in the course of good faith collective bargaining
or to any expenditure made pursuant to obligations incurred under a bona fide
collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.130 EMPLOYEE RETENTION.
   (A)   In the event that any contract for services for an amount greater than
$10,000 is terminated by the town prior to its expiration, any new contract
with a subsequent contractor for those same services shall include the
following term: The contractor shall make best efforts to offer employment to
qualified employees of the prior contractor for the performance of this
contract.
   (B)   The efforts shall not be required in regard to employees who are:
      (1)   Exempt under the Fair Labor Standards Act;
      (2)   Family members of prior contractor;
      (3)   Employed by prior contractor for less than six months; or
      (4)   Convicted of a job-related or workplace crime.
   (C)   Upon request by the town, the Contractor shall demonstrate to the town
that good faith efforts have been made to comply with this provision.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
§ 8.56.140 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the chapter.
The Town Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter irrespective of
the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, division, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter.
(Ord. 691, passed 8-6-2002)
CHAPTER 8.60: RECYCLING AREAS REQUIRED FOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Section
   
8.60.010   Purpose
   
8.60.020   Definitions
   
8.60.030   General requirements
   
8.60.040   Guidelines for all development projects
   
8.60.050   Additional guidelines for single-tenant development projects
   
8.60.060   Additional guidelines for multiple- tenant development projects
   
8.60.070   Location
   
8.60.080   Declaration of severability
§ 8.60.010 PURPOSE.
   In order to promote sustainability through source reduction, recycling, and
composting activities, the Town of Fairfax proposes to adopt this recycling
space allocation chapter.
   Fairfax encourages the participation of the residential, commercial,
industrial, and public sectors in recycling of solid waste.
   The lack of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials
that are compatible with surrounding land uses is a significant impediment to
diverting solid waste and constitutes a need for Fairfax to address access to
solid waste for source reduction, recycling, and composting activities. This
chapter has been developed to meet that need.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any of the following:
      (1)   A project for which a building permit is required for a commercial,
industrial, or institutional building, or residential building having five or
more living units, where solid waste is collected and loaded and any
residential project where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location
serving five or more living units.
      (2)   Any new public facility where solid waste is collected and loaded
and any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting and
loading solid waste.
      (3)   The definition of DEVELOPMENT PROJECT only includes subdivisions or
tracts of single-family detached homes if, within such subdivisions or tract,
there is an area where solid waste is collected and loaded in a location which
serves five or more living units. In such instances, recycling areas as
specified in this chapter are only required to serve the needs of the living
units which utilize the solid waste collection and loading area.
   IMPROVEMENT.  An improvement adds to the value of a facility, prolongs its
useful life, or adapts it to new uses. Improvements should be distinguished
from repairs. Repairs keep facilities in good operating condition, do not
materially add to the value of the facility, and do not substantially extend
the life of the facility.
   PUBLIC FACILITY. The definition of public facility includes, but is not
limited to buildings, structures and outdoor recreation areas owned by a local
agency.
   RECYCLING AREA. Space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable
materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for
recyclable materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for
those who deposit as well as those who collect and load any recyclable
materials placed therein.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.030 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any new development project for which an application for a building
permit is submitted on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for
collecting and loading recyclable materials.
   (B)   Any improvements for areas of a public facility used for collecting
and loading solid waste shall include adequate, accessible, and convenient
areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.
   (C)   Any existing development project for which an application for a
building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter or a single alteration which is subsequently performed
that adds 30 percent or more to the existing floor area of the development
project shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting
and loading recyclable materials.
   (D)   Any existing development project for which an application for a
building permit is submitted on or after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter for multiple alterations which are conducted within a
12-month period which collectively add 30 percent or more to the existing floor
area of the development project shall provide adequate, accessible, and
convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials.
   (E)   Any existing development project for which multiple applications for
building permits are submitted within a 12-month period beginning on or after
the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for multiple
alterations which are subsequently performed that collectively add 30 percent
or more to the existing floor area of the development project shall provide
adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading
recyclable materials.
   (F)   Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of
which submits on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter an application for a building permit for a single alteration which is
subsequently performed that adds 30 percent or more to the existing floor area
of that portion of the development project which said tenant leases shall
provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading
recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum, be sufficient
in capacity, number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development
project which said tenant leases.
   (G)   Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of
which submits on or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter an application for a building permit for multiple alterations which are
conducted within a 12- month period which collectively add 30 percent or more
to the existing floor area of that portion of the development project which
said tenant leases shall provide adequate, accessible, and convenient areas for
collecting and loading recyclable materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a
minimum, be sufficient in capacity, number, and distribution to serve that
portion of the development project which said tenant leases.
   (H)   Any existing development project occupied by multiple tenants, one of
which submits within a 12- month period beginning on or after the effective
date of the ordinance codified in this chapter multiple applications for
building permits for multiple alterations which are subsequently performed that
collectively add 30 percent or more to the existing floor area of that portion
of the development project which said tenant leases shall provide adequate,
accessible, and convenient areas for collecting and loading recyclable
materials. Such recycling areas shall, at a minimum, be sufficient in capacity,
number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development project which
said tenant leases.
   (I)   Any costs associated with adding recycling space to existing
development projects shall be the responsibility of the party or parties who
are responsible for financing the alterations.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.040 GUIDELINES FOR ALL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   (A)   Recycling areas should be designed to be architecturally compatible
with nearby structures and with the existing topography and vegetation, in
accordance with such standards.
   (B)   The design and construction of recycling areas shall not prevent
security of any recyclable materials placed therein.
   (C)   The design, construction, and location of recycling areas shall not be
in conflict with any applicable federal, state, or local laws relating to fire,
building, access, transportation, circulation, or safety.
   (D)   Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide
protection against adverse environmental conditions, such as rain, which might
render the collected materials unmarketable.
   (E)   Driveways and/or alleys and parking lot travel aisles shall, at a
minimum, conform to local building-code requirements for garbage collection
access and clearance. In the absence of such building- code requirements,
driveways and/or travel aisles should provide unobstructed access for
collection vehicles and personnel.
   (F)   A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection
and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent
to all points of direct access to the recycling areas.
   (G)   Developments and transportation corridors adjacent to recycling areas
shall be adequately protected for any adverse impacts such as noise, odor,
vectors, or glare through measures including, but not limited to maintaining
adequate separation, fencing, and landscaping.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.050 ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES FOR SINGLE-TENANT DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   (A)   Areas for recycling shall be adequate in capacity, number, and
distribution to serve the development project.
   (B)   Dimensions of the recycling area shall accommodate receptacles
sufficient to meet the recycling needs of the development project.
   (C)   An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection
and loading of recyclable materials generated by the development project should
be located within the recycling area.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.060 ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES FOR MULTIPLE-TENANT DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   (A)   Recycling areas shall, at a minimum, be sufficient in capacity,
number, and distribution to serve that portion of the development project
leased by the tenant(s) who submitted an application or applications resulting
in the need to provide recycling area(s) pursuant to §
8.60.030.
   (B)   Dimensions of recycling areas shall accommodate receptacles sufficient
to meet the recycling needs of that portion of the development project leased
by the tenant who submitted an application or applications resulting in the
need to provide recycling area(s) pursuant to §
8.60.030.
   (C)   An adequate number of bins or containers to allow for the collection
and loading of recyclable materials generated by that portion of the
development project leased by the tenant(s) who submitted an application or
applications resulting in the need to provide recycling area pursuant to §
8.60.030 should be located within the recycling area.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.070 LOCATION.
   (A)   Recycling areas shall not be located in any area required to be
constructed or maintained as unencumbered, according to any applicable federal,
state, or local laws relating to fire, access, building, transportation,
circulation, or safety.
   (B)   Any and all recycling area(s) shall be located so they are at least as
convenient for those persons who deposit, collect, and load the recyclable
materials placed therein as the location(s) where solid waste is collected and
loaded. Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable
materials shall be adjacent to the solid waste collection areas.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 8.60.080 DECLARATION OF SEVERABILITY.
   All provisions of this chapter are severable and, if for any reason any
sentence, paragraph, or section of this chapter shall be held invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts of the chapter.
(Ord. 717, passed 9-6-2006)
CHAPTER 8.64: INSTALLATION OF WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES, REMOVAL AND OPERATION OF
NON-CERTIFIED WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES
Section
   
8.64.010   Purpose
   
8.64.020   Findings
   
8.64.030   Definitions
   
8.64.040   Exemptions
   
8.64.050   Education program
   
8.64.060   Voluntary curtailment
   
8.64.070   Replacements for non-compliant appliances
   
8.64.080   Removal of non-certified wood heaters upon remodel
   
8.64.090   New construction, additions or remodels
   
8.64.100   Operation of non-compliant wood stoves and inserts
   
8.64.110   Permit requirements for replacement of wood-burning appliances
   
8.64.120   Prohibited fuels
   
8.64.130   Violation
§ 8.64.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to improve air quality within the town by:
   (A)   Educating the public regarding the impacts of burning wood and the
various types of wood-burning appliances;
   (B)   Regulating the type of wood-burning appliances that may be installed
and maintained within the town; and
   (C)   By banning the use of non-certified burning appliances after July 1,
2010.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.020 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Town Council finds that the EPA and the California Air Resources
Board ("CARB") adopted PM-10 and PM-2.5 as the National Ambient Air Quality
Standards ("NAAQS") and the California Ambient Air Quality Standards ("CAAQS"),
respectively, for particulate matter.
   (B)   Research indicates that wood smoke is a contributor to PM-10 and PM-
2.5 levels and poses significant health risks to the public.
   (C)   The Town Council desires to lessen this risk to human health and the
environment caused by pollution from wood-burning appliances.
   (D)   Therefore, a need exists to adopt regulations that apply to wood-
burning combustion emissions.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.030 DEFINITIONS.
   BAY AREA AIR QUALITY MANAGEMENT DISTRICT. The air quality agency for the San
Francisco Bay Area pursuant to Cal. Health & Safety Code.
   EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   EPA CERTIFIED WOOD HEATERS. Any wood heater that meets the standard in Title
40, Part 60, Subpart AAA (Sections 60.530 et seq.) of the Code of Federal
Regulations in effect at the time of installation and is certified and labeled
pursuant to  those regulations. An EPA certified wood heater may be
freestanding, built-in, or an insert within a fireplace.
   FIREPLACE. Any permanently installed masonry or factory-built wood-burning
appliance designed to be used with an air-to-fuel ratio greater than or equal
to 35 to 1.
   GARBAGE. All solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes generated from residential,
commercial and industrial sources, including, but not limited to, trash,
refuse, rubbish, industrial wastes, asphalted products, manure, vegetable or
animal solids or semi-solids.
   GAS FIREPLACE. Any masonry or factory-built fireplace in which a device that
has been designed to burn natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas in a manner
that simulates the appearance of burning wood has been permanently installed so
the burner pan and associated equipment are affixed to the masonry or metal
base of the fireplace.
   INSERT. Any wood heater designed to be installed in an existing masonry or
factory-built fireplace.
   PAINTS. All exterior and interior house and trim paints, enamels, varnishes,
lacquers, stains, primers, sealers, under-coatings, roof coatings, wood
preservatives, shellacs, and other paints or paint-like products.
   PAINT SOLVENTS. All original solvents sold or used to thin paints or clean
up painting equipment.
   PELLET-FUELED HEATER. Any appliance that operates exclusively on solid fuel
pellets.
   SOLID FUEL. Wood or any other non-gases or non-liquid fuel.
   TREATED WOOD. Wood of any species that has been chemically impregnated,
painted or similarly modified to improve resistance to insects or decay.
   WASTE PETROLEUM PRODUCT. Any petroleum product (other than fuels) that has
been  refined from crude oil, and has been used or has been contaminated with
physical or chemical impurities.
   WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCE. A fireplace, wood heater, or pellet-fired heater or
similar device burning solid fuel used for aesthetic or space-heating purposes.
   WOOD HEATER. An enclosed, wood-burning appliance, that is not a fireplace
capable of and intended for space heating that meets all the following
criteria:
      (1)   An air-to-fuel ratio in the combustion chamber averaging less than
35-to-l as determined by the manufacturer's listing and approved by the
Building Official;
      (2)   A usable firebox volume less than 20 cubic feet (0.57 cubic
meters);
      (3)   A minimum burn rate less than 11 lb/hr (kg/hr); and
      (4)   A maximum weight of less than 1,760 lbs (800kg). (For the purpose
of this chapter, fixtures and devices that are normally sold separately, such
as flue pipe, chimney and masonry components that are not an integral part of
the appliance or heat distribution ducting do not count as part of the
appliance weight.)
   WOOD STOVE. A freestanding wood heater.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.040 EXEMPTIONS.
   Wood-burning appliances specifically designed for cooking, outdoor
fireplaces, existing fireplaces, gas and pellet fueled appliances, permanently
installed or dedicated gas log fireplaces, shall be exempt from all provisions
of this chapter. The Building Official may approve an alternate wood-burning
appliance, provided the Building Official finds that the proposed alternate
appliance meets or exceeds the standards established for an EPA Phase II
certified wood heater.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.050 EDUCATION PROGRAM.
   The town through the Building Official, working in conjunction with the Fire
Department, shall establish and maintain an on-going program to educate the
public on the provisions of this chapter and the health impact of wood smoke.
The education program shall identify the various types of smoke reduction
methods, including use of cleaner burning pellet stoves, manufactured fire
logs, and gas fireplaces. The town will educate the public on fireplace and
woodstove maintenance and encourage cleaner-burning alternatives such as gas-
fueled devices, pellet stoves and proper wood-burning techniques to build
hotter, more efficient fires.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.060 VOLUNTARY CURTAILMENT.
   The town shall endeavor to provide public notification requesting that
residents curtail the burning of wood during poor air quality episodes as
determined by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District. Methods to notify
the public could include the raising of a distinctive flag or pennant on town
facilities, a written notice published in local newspapers, on websites, email
notification by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District and oral notices
presented by radio, telephone or television.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.070 REPLACEMENTS FOR NON-COMPLIANT APPLIANCES.
   (A)   This section applies to both residential and commercial properties.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to install a replacement wood-burning appliance
that is not one of the following:
      (1)   A pellet-fueled appliance;
      (2)   An EPA Phase II-certified wood appliance manufactured after 1990;
or
      (3)   A dedicated gas log fireplace or gas stove.
   (C)   The conversion of a gas fireplace to burn wood shall constitute the
installation of a wood-burning appliance and shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.080 REMOVAL OF NON-CERTIFIED WOOD HEATERS UPON REMODEL.
   A non-EPA Phase II-Certified wood heater, freestanding or insert, shall be
removed, rendered inoperable or replaced with a compliant appliance, when the
combination of an addition, alteration and/or remodel exceeds 50% based on the
assessed valuation.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.090 NEW CONSTRUCTION, ADDITIONS OR REMODELS.
   Non-EPA Phase II-Certified wood-burning heaters or wood-burning fireplaces
will not be allowed to be added in new construction, additions or remodels of
any size. Pellet-fueled and gas appliances will be allowed.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.100 OPERATION OF NON-COMPLIANT WOOD STOVES AND INSERTS.
   Effective July 1, 2010, it shall be unlawful to use all non-EPA Phase II-
Certified wood heaters, freestanding or insert, on any property within the
town. After that date all noncompliant wood stoves and inserts must be removed
or rendered inoperable. The Building Official may grant an exception to this
section in the case of hardship. Examples of hardships include the following: a
residential sole source of heat; a temporary sole source of heat; an inadequate
alternative source of heat.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.110 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR REPLACEMENT OF WOOD-BURNING APPLIANCES.
   Any person who plans to replace a wood-burning appliance must submit
documentation to the Building Department, with a building permit application,
demonstrating that the appliance is in compliance with this chapter as listed
in § 8.64.070.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.120 PROHIBITED FUELS.
   (A)   Use of any of the following fuels in a wood-burning appliance is
prohibited:
      (1)   Garbage;
      (2)   Treated wood;
      (3)   Plastic products;
      (4)   Rubber products;
      (5)   Waste petroleum products;
      (6)   Paints;
      (7)   Paints solvents;
      (8)   Coal;
      (9)   Glossy or colored paper;
      (10)   Particleboard; or
      (11)   Salt-water driftwood.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to products designed specifically for use
as fuel in a wood-burning appliance.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
§ 8.64.130 VIOLATION.
   Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced pursuant to
Titles 1 and 15 of the Fairfax Town Code.
(Ord. 720, passed 5-2-2007)
CHAPTER 8.68: SMARTMETERS AND RELATED EQUIPMENT
Section
   
8.68.010   Statement of intent
   
8.68.020   Prohibition on installation of SmartMeters
§ 8.68.010 STATEMENT OF INTENT.
   (A)   On August 4, 2010, the Town Council adopted Ordinance No. 752, an
urgency ordinance temporarily prohibiting the installation of any so-called
“SmartMeter” in or on any home, apartment, condominium or business in the town,
as well as the installation of equipment related to SmartMeters in, on, under,
or above any public street or public right-of-way in the town;
   (B)   Over the past three years, the Council, town staff and members of the
public have participated in extensive meetings with PG&E representatives, as
well as in legislative and regulatory hearings on SmartMeters, but there remain
significant questions about the security, privacy, safety, accuracy and health
effects, along with proposals for mitigating them or permitting consumer
alternatives to SmartMeters;
   (C)   In particular, PG&E’s Opt Out plan will not protect the privacy,
health and economic interests that were raised by numerous town residents in
their public comments, because the plan (as set forth in CPUC Application A 11-
03-014) requires a substantial upfront deposit and ongoing monthly fees, which
fees are unreasonable and do not reflect any savings garnered by maintaining
current analog meters and avoiding the acquisition and installation costs
incurred by replacement with SmartMeters;
   (D)   In addition, PG&E’s fee proposal also effectively discriminates
against those ratepayers who elect to opt out for health or safety reasons,
which is in violation of the prohibition on prejudicial rates in Cal. Public
Utilities Code § 453(b);
   (E)   Finally, the application does not address whether PG&E will honor the
ordinances of the numerous jurisdictions who have passed SmartMeter moratoriums
to protect and preserve the health and safety of their residents under their
constitutionally delegated power to do so;
   (F)   The status of PG&E’s Opt Out plan is currently under review by the
California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) and unless the town acts to
protect and preserve the rights of its residents during the pendency of those
proceedings, the CPUC review process will effectively be rendered moot.
   (G)   As a result of these deficiencies and uncertainties, the Town Council
has determined that the prohibition on the installation of SmartMeters and
related equipment is necessary and proper to allow further regulatory and
legislative activities to proceed for three years unless sooner terminated if
the Town Council determines that the privacy, safety, accuracy and health
effects of SmartMeters have been adequately addressed.
   (H)   The Town Council has determined that the prohibition on the
installation of SmartMeters and related equipment for an additional three years
is necessary and proper to allow further legal, regulatory and legislative
activities to proceed.
   (I)   The Town Council has determined that the prohibition on the
installation of SmartMeters and related equipment is necessary and proper to
allow further regulatory and legislative activities to proceed until the Town
Council determines that the privacy, safety, accuracy and health effects of
SmartMeters have been adequately addressed at which time the Town Council will
consider action to repeal this chapter.
(Ord. 775, passed 2-5-2014; Am. Ord. 806, passed 2-1-2017; Am. Ord. 840, passed
12-4-2019)
§ 8.68.020 PROHIBITION ON INSTALLATION OF SMARTMETERS.
   (A)   The town hereby prohibits the installation of SmartMeters or related
equipment. No SmartMeter may be installed in or on any home, apartment,
condominium or business in the town, and no equipment related to SmartMeters
may be installed in, on, under, or above any public street or public right- of-
way.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter may be charged as infractions or
misdemeanors as set forth in §
1.08.010 of this code or as administrative citations as set forth in
Chapter 1.10 of this code, in the discretion of the town. In addition,
violations shall be deemed public nuisances, with enforcement by injunction or
any other remedy authorized by law.
   (C)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to direct all town departments,
including the Town Attorney, to facilitate compliance with the purpose and
intent of this chapter using the enforcement powers described in the preceding
paragraph.
(Ord. 775, passed 2-5-2014)
CHAPTER 8.72: REUSABLE FOODWARE
Section
   
8.72.010   Definitions
   
8.72.020   Dine-in foodware regulations
   
8.72.030   Takeout foodware regulations
   
8.72.040   Town purchasing, facilities, and town-sponsored events
   
8.72.050   Non-reusable cup charge
   
8.72.060   Separate waste receptacles required
   
8.72.070   Exemptions
   
8.72.080   Enforcement
   
8.72.090   Violations
§ 8.72.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BPI CERTIFIED. Those compostable fiber foodware products that have been
certified by the Biodegradable Products Institute (BPI) to safely and readily
biodegrade in an industrial composting facility in the typical processing time.
As of January 1, 2020, BPI ensures all certified products are fluorinated
chemical free.
   COMPLIANT FOODWARE ACCESSORY. An item or material is (1) accepted in Marin
County composting collection program as compostable; and is (2) made entirely
of natural fiber.
   COMPLIANT NON-REUSABLE FOODWARE. An item or product intended for disposal
after one use and is: (1) accepted by the county through its composting
collection program as compostable as identified by the Deputy Director of
Environmental Health Services or their designee; (2) is certified by either BPI
certified or other third party product certification recognized by the county
through its Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services or  their designee
to ensure the item is free of harmful chemicals including but not limited to
fluorinated chemicals, that may have been used in foodware manufacture; and is
(3) made entirely of natural fiber, as defined that term is below, and
including but not limited to paper, wood, or sugarcane fibers.
   COMPOST FACILITY. Compost facilities used by the town's current waste
haulers for composting organic material.
   COMPOSTABLE. An item or material (1) will break down, or otherwise become
part of usable compost in a safe and timely manner; and (2) is natural fiber-
based or made from other materials approved by the Deputy Director of
Environmental Health Services or designee.
   COMPOSTABLE PLASTICS OR BIODEGRADABLE PLASTICS. The disposable products
developed from polylactic acid (PLA), which require a specific set of
conditions to compost and/or biodegrade that do not exist in the county or the
region. These products are considered non-compliant.
   CUSTOMER. Any person obtaining prepared food from a food vendor.
   DIRECTOR. The Deputy Director of Environmental Health Services or their
designee.
   DISPOSABLE (OR NON-REUSABLE) CUP. A beverage cup designed for single-use to
serve beverages such as water, hot and cold drinks, and alcoholic beverages.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. Thirty days from adoption of this chapter.
   EPS. Expanded polystyrene, also known as polystyrene foam.
   FLUORINATED CHEMICAL. A class of fluorinated organic compounds containing at
least one fully fluorinated carbon atom, also known as perfluoroalkyl (PFOA)
and polyfluoroalkyl (PFOS) substances, or PFAS chemicals. California Prop 65
lists PFOA and PFOS as reproductive toxicants.
   FOOD VENDOR. A food facility as that term is defined in Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 113789, or its successor, including but not limited to a restaurant,
bar, grocery store, delicatessen, bakery, food service establishment (carry
out, quick service, full-service), food truck, itinerant restaurant, pushcart,
farmers market, caterer, microenterprise home kitchen operation, or cottage
food operation, that sells prepared food to be consumed on and/or off the
premises located or operating within the town, except that for purposes of this
chapter the term FOOD VENDOR shall not include a public or private school
cafeteria.
   FOODWARE. All containers, bowls, plates, food trays, cups, lids, boxes, and
other like items that are used for prepared foods, including without
limitation, foodware for takeout foods and/or leftovers from partially consumed
meals prepared by food vendors.
   FOODWARE ACCESSORIES. Types of items usually provided alongside prepared
food including but not limited to forks, spoons, knives, chopsticks, napkins,
cup sleeves, food wrappers, beverage trays, condiment containers, straws,
stirrers, splash sticks, cocktail sticks, toothpicks, tray-liners, and plate-
liners.
   NATURAL FIBER. A plant-based, non-synthetic fiber, including but not limited
to paper, wood, bamboo, palm leaf, wheat straw, or sugarcane. natural fiber
does not include plastic of any kind.
   ON REQUEST. That only at the request of a customer shall the compliant
product be provided.
   POLYSTYRENE FOAM. Includes blown polystyrene and expanded and extruded foams
(sometimes incorrectly called styrofoam, a Dow Chemical Co. trademarked form of
polystyrene foam insulation) which are thermoplastic petrochemical materials
utilizing a styrene monomer and processed by any number of techniques
including, but not limited to, fusion of polymer spheres (expandable bead
polystyrene), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blow molding
(extruded foam polystyrene). Polystyrene foam is generally used to make cups,
bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays, coolers, packing
peanuts, and egg cartons.
   PREPARED FOOD. Food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked,
chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared on the
premises of the food vendor and includes takeout food. For the purposes of this
chapter, prepared food does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or
poultry, which are sold from a butcher case or similar appliance.
   REUSABLE or DURABLE. Foodware and foodware accessories, including plates,
bowls, cups, jars, trays, glasses, straws, stirrers, condiment cups, utensils,
etc. that are manufactured of durable materials and specifically designed and
manufactured to be washed and sanitized and to be used repeatedly over an
extended period of time, and are safe for washing and sanitizing according to
applicable regulations.
   TAKEOUT FOOD. Food or beverages requiring no further preparation to be
consumed and which generally are purchased to be consumed off the premises of
the food vendor.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
   TOWN FACILITY. Any building or structure owned, leased, or operated by the
Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.020 DINE-IN FOODWARE REGULATIONS.
   Food vendors within the incorporated areas of town:
   (A)   Shall sell or provide food and beverages for consumption on the
premises using reusable foodware and utensils (forks, spoons, knives,
chopsticks) except as otherwise provided in §
8.72.030(B);
   (B)   May provide all other compliant foodware accessories, which are made
of natural fibers, including napkins, food wrappers, straws, stirrers, cocktail
sticks, toothpicks, tray-liners, and plate-liners;
   (C)   Shall offer condiments in reusable containers or dispensers rather
than pre-packaged single-use condiment packets; and
   (D)   Food vendors will have until November 10, 2023, before enforcement of
this regulation begins.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.030 TAKEOUT FOODWARE REGULATIONS.
   Food vendors within the incorporated areas selling takeout food for
consumption off premises:
   (A)   Shall provide takeout food in reusable foodware, or compostable
natural fiber compliant foodware, or items composed entirely of glass or
aluminum;
   (B)   Shall provide all other compliant foodware accessories, which are made
from natural fibers, including napkins, cup sleeves, beverage trays, condiment
containers, straws, stirrers, splash sticks, cocktail sticks, and toothpicks
only upon request or at self-serve stations;
   (C)   Takeout food bags shall be reusable, paper, or comply with
Chapter 8.18 (regulations for single-use carry-out bags);
   (D)   Takeout food delivery services shall provide the option for compliant
foodware accessories (forks, spoons, knives, chopsticks) and single-use
condiments only on request. a food vendor or a takeout food delivery service
may include lids, spill plugs, and sleeves without request for non-reusable
cups for delivery; and
   (E)   Food vendors shall provide plastic straws only on request, to
accommodate any person's access needs.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.040 TOWN PURCHASING, FACILITIES, AND TOWN-SPONSORED EVENTS.
   The following regulations apply to town purchases, facilities, and town-
sponsored events:
   (A)   All town facilities that involve food service shall use reusable
foodware and compliant foodware accessories.
   (B)   Town-managed concessions, town-sponsored events, and town-permitted
events shall use reusable foodware or compliant foodware and compliant foodware
accessories.
   (C)   These entities are prohibited from using non-reusable plastic
foodware, including EPS/polystyrene foam, and compostable or biodegradable
plastics. No town department shall purchase or acquire non-reusable plastic
foodware for use at any town facility. Organizations or individuals using town
facilities shall use reusable or compliant foodware and compliant foodware
accessories.
   (D)   The town shall prohibit the use of EPS/polystyrene foam and non-
reusable plastic foodware by vendors, franchisees, lessees, contractors, or
other commercial food and beverage purveyors at all town government center
facilities, and town parks. Prohibited products include, but are not limited
to, EPS/polystyrene foam and non-reusable plastic food containers, straws,
bowls, plates, trays, utensils, clamshells, and cups which are not intended for
reuse, on or in which any foods or beverages are placed or packaged.
   (E)   As of the effective date, all town departments that hold contracts,
lease agreements, permits or other agreements that involve food service shall
incorporate this prohibition into all new and renewed contracts, leases,
permits, agreements, etc.
   (F)   The use or distribution of EPS/polystyrene foam, and non-reusable
plastic foodware at special events at town facilities that are sponsored or co-
sponsored by the town shall be prohibited. This prohibition shall apply to the
event organizers, agents of the event organizers, event vendors, and any other
party (including non-profit organizations) who have an agreement with one or
more of the co-sponsors of the event to sell goods or beverages at the event or
otherwise provide an event-related service.
   (G)   Written agreements with any vendor, including non-profit
organizations, to sell food or beverages at an event that is sponsored or co-
sponsored by the town, shall specifically prohibit the usage and distribution
of EPS/polystyrene foam and non-reusable plastic foodware.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.050 NON-REUSABLE CUP CHARGE.
   (A)   All food vendors shall charge customers $0.25 at the point of sale for
every non-reusable cup provided unless they are exempt under this chapter.
   (B)   Income from the non-reusable cup charge shall be retained by the food
vendor.
   (C)   Charges for non-reusable cups shall be identified separately on any
post-sale receipt provided and, pre-sale, shall be clearly identified for the
customer on media such as menus, ordering platforms, and/or menu boards.
customers placing orders by telephone shall be informed verbally of non-
reusable cup charges.
   (D)   All customers demonstrating, at the point of sale, a payment card or
voucher issued by the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC) pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with § 123275) of
Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code and as
amended, or an electronic benefit transfer card (EBT) issued pursuant to §
10072 of the Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code, and individuals with
disabilities shall be exempt from the non-reusable cup charge.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.060 SEPARATE WASTE RECEPTACLES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All food vendors who provide solid waste containers for customer use,
must provide separate receptacles for solid waste, recyclables, and organics.
Receptacles shall be colored black or grey for garbage, blue for recycling, and
green for compost/organics.
   (B)   To the extent possible given space constraints, all receptacles for
solid waste, recyclables, and organics should be placed adjacent to one
another.
   (C)   Graphic-rich signage must be posted on or above each receptacle
following the waste hauler's guidelines.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.070 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Entities packaging prepared foods outside Marin County are exempt from
the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, such entities are urged to
follow the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Non-reusable foodware and foodware accessories composed entirely of
aluminum is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Should foodware or foodware accessories made of compliant compostable
natural fiber not be commercially available, as determined by director or their
designee, the county may approve temporary exemption of specific non-reusable
foodware or foodware accessories items until they are made commercially
available. The county shall maintain a list, updated annually, with foodware or
foodware accessories deemed not available commercially.
   (D)   For the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety
due to an emergency or natural disaster, the City Council, or designee, may
exempt food vendors, persons operating town facilities and agents, contractors,
and vendors doing business with the town, from the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.080 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with this chapter is required as of the effective date.
   (B)   Enforcement of this chapter shall be pursuant to §§
8.72.020 through
8.72.070, inclusive.
   (C)   Enforcement shall include written notice of non-compliance and a
reasonable opportunity to correct, prior to issuance of any penalty.
   (D)   It is found and determined to by the Town Council that the public
interest, health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city require that
the Marin County Environmental Health Services Division be designated as the
enforcement agency of and within town and as such enforcement agency it is
authorized with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the Marin
County Environmental Health Services division is vested, for the purposes of
enforcing this chapter within town, with all of the jurisdiction and powers
vested in or available to said division by this chapter and said health and
safety code.
   (E)   Enforcement of this chapter will begin on November 10, 2023.
Enforcement will be delegated to the County's Environmental Health Services.
Enforcement will progress on the regular inspection schedule of all covered
food vendors in the county as described in this chapter.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
§ 8.72.090 VIOLATIONS.
   On behalf of the town, the county may choose to undertake the following
legal actions to correct and/or abate nuisances and violations of this chapter.
The Director of Environmental Health Services or their designee is authorized
to promulgate regulations and take any and all other actions reasonable and
necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited
to, entering the premises of any food provider during regular business hours to
verify compliance, and by the issuance of administrative citations. The
remedies and penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition
to any other remedies available at law or in equity.
   (A)   Administrative citations. Administrative citations may be issued for
violations of this chapter at the discretion of the Director. The issuance of
an administrative citation under this chapter shall not supersede or limit the
remedies provided elsewhere in this Code or California law, including other
administrative citation remedies. Issuance of an administrative citation may be
exercised in place of, but shall not be considered a waiver of, the use of any
other available enforcement remedy.
   (B)   Process and service of citation.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of citation penalty, the county shall issue a
violation warning letter to the facility operator and provide the facility
operator 30 days to correct the violation(s).
      (2)   The violation warning letter and/or citation shall be mailed to the
food facility operator named in the facility's permit.
      (3)   The failure of any interested person to receive the violation
warning letter and/or citation shall not affect the validity of the
proceedings.
   (C)   Administrative citation penalty schedule. Following the violation
warning letter described in division (B)(1) above and 30-day cure period, if
the violations remains, the county may issue the following administrative
penalties:
      (1)   A fine not exceeding $100 for the first violation;
      (2)   A fine not exceeding $200 for a second violation of the same Code
provision within one year; and
      (3)   A fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation in excess
of two, of the same Code provision within one year.
   (D)   Response to citation penalty. Following receipt of citation penalty,
food facility operator shall have 30 days to pay the fine as indicated on the
citation, or to request a waiver of payment of the penalty due to unique undue
hardship. This waiver may be granted by the Director upon demonstration by a
food facility operator to the satisfaction of the Director that strict
application of the requirements would cause undue hardship. An "undue hardship"
includes but is not limited to the following: (1) a situation unique to the
food facility where a suitable alternative that conforms with the requirements
of this chapter does not exist for a specific application; and (2) imposing the
provisions of this chapter would cause significant economic hardship.
"Significant economic hardship" may be based on, but not limited to,
demonstrating that suitable foodware or foodware accessories made of compliant
compostable natural fiber is not available at a commercially reasonable price
and the additional cost associated with providing the compliant foodware or
foodware is particularly burdensome to the food facility based on the type of
operation(s) affected, the overall size of the business/operation, the number,
type and location of its facilities, the impact on the overall financial
resources of the food facility, and other factors. Reasonable added cost for a
suitable item as compared to a similar item that the food facility can no
longer use shall not by itself constitute adequate grounds to support an
exemption for such item. In determining whether a significant economic hardship
has been established, the Director or designee shall consider the following
information: ability of the food facility to recover the additional expense by
increasing its prices; the availability of tax credits and deductions; outside
funding; and other options.
   (E)   Nonpayment of citation for more than one year deemed nuisance.
Nonpayment of any assessed violation for longer than one year shall constitute
a nuisance and be subject to the nuisance abatement procedures in Marin County
Code Chapter 1.05, including payment of civil penalties of up to $2,500 per
violation per day and enforcement and other abatement costs incurred by the
County.
(Ord. 878, passed 4-5-2023)
CHAPTER 8.74: GASOLINE POWERED LANDSCAPE EQUIPMENT
Section
   
8.74.010   Purpose and intent
   
8.74.020   Definitions
   
8.74.030   Prohibition against use
   
8.74.040   Use of landscape equipment generally
   
8.74.050   Scope and limitations of chapter
   
8.74.060   Enforcement; penalty
§ 8.74.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards to protect the natural
environment, increase sustainability efforts, reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
and improve the overall quality of life within the town.
(Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 8.74.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GASOLINE-POWERED. Any item or equipment that is powered by an internal
combustion engine that runs on gasoline, diesel, or other volatile fuel.
   LANDSCAPE EQUIPMENT. Equipment such as, but not limited to, a lawn mower,
leaf blower and/or edger-trimmer used to maintain lawns, gardens, sidewalks and
driveways.
   LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE BUSINESS. A business, as that term is defined by §
5.04.010 of this Code, that performs lawn and yard maintenance such as, but not
limited to, cutting grass and removing leaves.
(Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 8.74.030 PROHIBITION AGAINST USE.
   (A)   Effective January 1, 2023, the use or operation of any gasoline-
powered landscape equipment for personal, non-commercial purposes by any
resident of the town, or the use of gasoline-powered landscape equipment by
town staff or contractors on town property, is expressly prohibited, except as
provided in §
8.74.040.
   (B)   Effective January 1, 2024, the use or operation of any gasoline-
powered landscape equipment for commercial purposes by any landscape
maintenance business is expressly prohibited, except as provided in §
8.74.040.
(Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 8.74.040 USE OF LANDSCAPE EQUIPMENT GENERALLY.
   Subject to the restrictions of §
8.74.030, the use of landscape equipment is otherwise permitted within town
limits as follows:
   (A)   No landscape equipment shall be operated except between the hours of
8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, and between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:
00 p.m. on weekends and holidays.
   (B)   Except for emergency use by the town or its employees, agents, or
contractors, the use of landscape equipment within town limits shall not extend
into the public right-of-way, including streets, sidewalks, and planting
strips, in order to maintain safe and healthy thoroughfares for pedestrians and
cyclists and to promote active transportation in the town.
   (C)   Persons operating landscape equipment shall not deposit dirt, dust,
leaves, grass clippings, trimmings, solid waste, or debris onto a neighboring
property or into streets, gutters, or storm drains.
(Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 8.74.050 SCOPE AND LIMITATIONS OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent
with all federal and state laws applicable to the town and shall not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A department, agency or contractor of the federal government;
      (2)   A department, agency or contractor of the State of California;
      (3)   A local public entity or its contractor; and/or
      (4)   The town or its employees, agents, or contractors in emergency
situations.
   (B)   This chapter does not apply to the use of chainsaws with blades or
blade attachments longer than 18 inches.
   (C)   In the event that there is a lack of commercially available or cost-
comparable electric landscape equipment, the Town Manager or designee may
approve a temporary exemption until such electric landscape equipment can be
obtained. To claim this exemption, a person seeking to continue to use
gasoline-powered landscape equipment that would otherwise be in violation of
this chapter must, before using gasoline-powered landscape equipment, submit
documentation to the Town Manager or designee that includes a list of equipment
suppliers contacted, a price comparison, and a statement of financial hardship
rendering that person unable to comply with this chapter, in addition to such
other information as the Town Manager or designee may request at their
discretion. In no event shall a temporary exemption be granted for a period
exceeding two years.
   (D)   The Town Manager is authorized to grant a one-time, six month
extension to any resident who requests such extension based upon a self-
reported financial hardship.
(Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
§ 8.74.060 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY.
   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee has primary responsibility for
enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
an infraction for the first, second, and third instances of such violation,
which infractions are punishable pursuant to §§
1.08.020,
1.08.040, and
1.08.050 of this Code.
   (C)   Any person having been cited for three violations of any provision of
this chapter who, within one year thereafter, commits a fourth or any
subsequent violation of the same provisions of this chapter may, in the
discretion of the Town Attorney, be charged as a misdemeanor punishable
pursuant to §
1.08.030 of this Code.
   (D)   In addition to those remedies set forth above, the Town Manager or his
or her designee may punish any violation of this chapter as a public nuisance,
subject to abatement as set forth in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.
   (E)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are cumulative and
not exclusive. The Town Attorney may seek legal, injunctive, or any other
relief to enforce the provisions of this chapter and any regulations or
administrative procedures developed pursuant hereto.
(Ord. 867, passed 7-6-2022)
TITLE 9: PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
   Chapter
      
9.04.   CURFEW
      
9.08.   WEAPONS
      
9.12.   MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS
      
9.16.   MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES REGARDING MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA
       
9.20.   SPECIAL POLICE RESPONSE
      
9.28.   SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
      
9.30.   CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
CHAPTER 9.04: CURFEW
Section
   
9.04.010   Minors; presence in public places
   
9.04.020   Minors; use of motor vehicles
   
9.04.030   Bar or restaurant proprietor to report violations
   
9.04.040   Violation by minor; penalty
   
9.04.050   Violation by person other than minor; penalty
§ 9.04.010 MINORS; PRESENCE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle,
stroll or play in any public street, public square, park or any public place in
the town between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and daylight of the following day;
provided that, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor
accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or
legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult
person having the care and custody of the minor.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.010)
§ 9.04.020 MINORS; USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to operate a
motor vehicle or ride in or on a motor vehicle about the public streets,
alleys, avenues, parks, public squares or any other public places in the town
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and the time of sunrise of the following day
when not accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian or other adult
person having legal custody and control of the minor; provided that, the
provisions of this section do not apply to any such minor who is operating or
riding in a motor vehicle while engaged in gainful employment or upon an
emergency errand or on legitimate business directed by his or her parent,
guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is empowered and authorized to impound any motor
vehicle which is being operated or used in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.020)
§ 9.04.030 BAR OR RESTAURANT PROPRIETOR TO REPORT VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for any proprietor, keeper, clerk or any other person having
charge or control of any café, tavern, restaurant, bar, eating place or public
dance hall to permit any minor under the age of 18 years to remain in the place
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and daylight immediately following; provided
that, the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his
or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of
the minor.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.040)
§ 9.04.040 VIOLATION BY MINOR; PENALTY.
   Any minor who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of Cal. Welfare and Institutions Code
Chapter 2, Division 2.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.050)
§ 9.04.050 VIOLATION BY PERSON OTHER THAN MINOR; PENALTY.
   Any person, other than a minor, who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 9.04.060)
CHAPTER 9.08: WEAPONS
Section
   
9.08.010   Discharge of firearms prohibited; exception
   
9.08.020   Toy weapons; discharge prohibited
   
9.08.030   Toy weapons; possession by minors prohibited
   
9.08.040   Toy weapons; improper possession deemed nuisance; abatement
§ 9.08.010 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It is unlawful for any person to shoot, fire or discharge any firearm, gun,
pistol rifle, bow, crossbow or any similar device designed to propel
projectiles or other calibrated instrument or apparatus fired by means of any
shell, cartridge, powder or other explosive within the town, except in case of
reasonable and necessary discharge thereof for the preservation and defense of
life, limb or property.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.010) (Ord. 606, passed - -1991)
§ 9.08.020 TOY WEAPONS; DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to discharge, in the town, any air gun, musket
gun, BB gun, air rifle, pellet gun, slingshot, blowgun or blowshooter.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.020)
§ 9.08.030 TOY WEAPONS; POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any minor under the age of 21 years to have in his or her
possession in the town any air gun, musket gun, BB gun, air rifle, pellet gun,
slingshot, blowgun or blowshooter.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.030)
§ 9.08.040 TOY WEAPONS; IMPROPER POSSESSION DEEMED NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.
   Any of the devices mentioned in §§
9.08.020 and
9.08.030 which are used or possessed contrary to the provisions thereof
constitute a nuisance and the Chief of Police may seize and take any such guns
or devices and destroy them.
(Prior Code, § 9.08.040)
CHAPTER 9.12: MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS
Section
   
9.12.010   Glass containers in parks and ballfields
   
9.12.020   Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places
   
9.12.030   Violation; penalty
§ 9.12.010 GLASS CONTAINERS IN PARKS AND BALLFIELDS.
   It is unlawful for any person to possess, take into or discard any bottle or
other glass container in the parks or ballfields of the town; provided that, no
prohibition herein shall preclude any authorized person from possessing or
taking into the canteen in the town park glass containers holding beverages to
be offered for sale in small individual amounts and the removal thereof when
empty.
(Prior Code, § 9.12.010)
§ 9.12.020 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   It is unlawful for any person to drink any beer, wine or other alcoholic
beverages or have in his or her possession or on his or her person any bottle,
can or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage, which bottle, can or
other receptacle has been opened or on which a seal has been broken, or the
contents of which have been partially removed, on any public street, sidewalk,
passageway, park, playground or parking lot, or in any private parking lot or
passageway open to use by the public; provided that, the Chief of Police may
give written authorization which will allow the drinking of alcoholic beverages
at special events in any of the above described areas when adequate provision
has been made for the policing of the events.
(Prior Code, § 9.12.020)
§ 9.12.030 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a
public offense. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding $500, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   If any person is arrested or cited for a second or subsequent offense
under this section within one year of a prior conviction, then the person
violating the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both the fine
and imprisonment.
(Prior Code, § 9.12.030)
CHAPTER 9.16: MISCELLANEOUS POLICIES REGARDING MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA
Section
   
9.16.010   Purpose
   
9.16.020   Definitions
   
9.16.030   Findings
§ 9.16.010 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter are:
   (A)   To express the compassion of the people of the Town of Fairfax for
those who are ill in our community and whose sufferings would be alleviated by
the use of medical marijuana;
   (B)   To express the strong support of the people of the Town of Fairfax for
the restoration of Cannabis/marijuana medical preparations to the list of
available medicines which can be prescribed by licensed physicians; and
   (C)   To direct Town of Fairfax officials to take whatever actions may be
within their power to support the availability of Cannabis/marijuana for
medical use.
(Prior Code, § 9.14.010) (Ord. 627, passed - -1993)
§ 9.16.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANNABIS/MARIJUANA MEDICAL PREPARATIONS. All products made from cannabis or
marijuana, in any form intended or used for human consumption, for the
treatment of any disease; the relief of pain; or as an adjunct to any medical
procedure for the treatment of cancer, glaucoma, or HIV/AIDS; or for any other
medical or healing purpose defined within the bounds of the patient/doctor
relationship.
(Prior Code, § 9.14.020) (Ord. 627, passed - -1993)
§ 9.16.030 FINDINGS.
   The Fairfax Town Council makes the following observations:
   (A)   Safe and effective medicine. Scientific and medical studies by the
National Academy of Science have shown Cannabis/marijuana to be a safe and
effective medicine with very low toxicity compared to most prescription drugs.
It has been shown to be effective in the treatment of glaucoma; clinically
diagnosed depression; epilepsy; muscle spasticity; arthritis; and the nausea,
vomiting and appetite loss associated with chemotherapies.
   (B)   Doctors and patients need the Cannabis/marijuana option. Studies show
that one- third of all cancer patients discontinue potentially life-saving
chemotherapy due to the severe and debilitating side effects. The same is true
for many HIV/AIDS patients receiving AZT or other similar therapies.
   (C)   United Nations approves prescription marijuana. In May of 1991, the
United Nations Narcotic Control Board voted overwhelmingly to reclassify
Cannabis/marijuana, placing it back on Schedule 2, and making it available by
prescription. The United States Representative to this Board voted in favor of
rescheduling.
   (D)   Federal court orders prescription marijuana. Despite a federal court
order recognizing the “clearly established medical value” of Cannabis/
marijuana, and mandating that it be reclassified to Schedule 2 and available by
prescription, the federal government continues to deny access to this safe and
effective medicine.
(Prior Code, § 9.14.030) (Ord. 627, passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 9.20: SPECIAL POLICE RESPONSE
Section
   
9.20.010   Liability for subsequent police responses
§ 9.20.010 LIABILITY FOR SUBSEQUENT POLICE RESPONSES.
   (A)   When there exists at any location in the town any activity that a
police officer at the scene determines creates a threat to the peace, health,
safety or general welfare of any member of the public or constitutes an
obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property of any other person, the police shall
give notice to the person(s) described in division (C) below that the
activities must immediately cease. The persons will be informed that if the
continued activity results in a subsequent response by police within the next
48 hours that the person(s) will be responsible for all costs for any such
subsequent response or responses.
   (B)   This chapter shall only apply to activities for which a citation may
be issued or an arrest made for a violation of a town ordinance or state
statute.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, any notice given shall be to any person
engaged in or who is in control of the prohibited activity or who owns or
otherwise is responsible for the property where the activity is occurring.
   (D)   Any such person described in division (C) below and the parent or
guardian of any such person who is a minor, shall be held jointly and severally
liable for payment of the costs resulting from the subsequent response or
responses, except that the maximum liability shall not exceed $1,000.
   (E)   The costs for subsequent responses shall be calculated as the total of
all costs incurred by the town in connection with each response including, but
not limited to the costs of personnel time, applicable administrative overhead
costs, costs for repair of any damage caused to town property and costs related
to any injuries to town personnel. The remedies herein set forth are non-
exclusive and are in addition to any and all other remedies available to the
town as provided by law.
   (F)   The Police Department shall submit documentation of all expenses for
responses covered by this chapter to the Finance Officer who shall establish
appropriate accounting and billing procedures to collect the fees.
(Prior Code, § 9.16.010) (Ord. 639, passed - -1994)
CHAPTER 9.28: SOCIAL HOST ACCOUNTABILITY
Section:
   
9.28.010   Legislative purpose
   
9.28.020   Legislative findings
   
9.28.030   Title
   
9.28.040   Definitions
   
9.28.050   Prohibition of loud or unruly gatherings where alcohol, cannabis
and/or any controlled substance is served to, consumed by, or in the possession
of underage persons
   
9.28.060   Violations/administrative fines
   
9.28.070   Hearings on the imposition of administrative fines; appeals
   
9.28.080   Administrative fines; debt to town; enforcement
   
9.28.090   Severability and preemption
§ 9.28.010 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this chapter are:
   (A)   To protect the public health, safety and general welfare;
   (B)   To promote the reduction of underage drinking and use of controlled
substances by imposing administrative fines on persons responsible for loud or
unruly gatherings where alcohol and/or controlled substances are consumed by,
served to or in the possession of underage persons; and
   (C)   To facilitate the enforcement of laws prohibiting the service to,
consumption of, or possession of alcoholic beverages, marijuana/cannabis and/or
controlled substances by underage persons.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 802, passed 8-3-2016; Am. Ord. 815,
passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.020 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The Town Council finds as follows:
   (A)   The town, pursuant to the powers delegated to it by the California
Constitution, has the authority to enact laws that promote the public health,
safety and general welfare of its residents;
   (B)   The occurrence of loud or unruly gatherings on private property where
alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances are served to, consumed by, or
in the possession of underage persons is harmful to the underage persons
themselves and is a threat to the public health, safety, or quiet enjoyment of
residential property and the general welfare;
   (C)   The town, through the Police Department, has made numerous and
substantial efforts to enforce underage drinking and controlled substance laws;
yet, despite these efforts, alcohol and controlled substance use by youth
remains a serious problem in the town, contributing significantly to the
incidence of adolescent crime, addiction, sexual assault, truancy, driving
under the influence, and motor vehicle crashes involving alcohol and/or
controlled substances and causing injury and/or death;
   (D)   Underage persons often obtain alcoholic beverages and/or controlled
substances at gatherings held at private residences or at rented residential
and commercial premises that are under the control of a person who knows or
should know of the service to, possession by, and/or consumption of alcohol
and/or controlled substances by underage persons. The town wishes to prevent
occurrences wherein persons responsible for loud or unruly gatherings on
private property over which they have possession or control have failed to
ensure that alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances are not served to,
consumed by or possessed by underage persons at these gatherings;
   (E)   The town further wishes to encourage residents to prevent the
occurrence or recurrence of loud or unruly gatherings, including those where
alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances are served to, consumed by or
possessed by underage persons, on private property, which seriously disrupt
neighboring residents’ quiet enjoyment of their property;
   (F)   Control of loud or unruly gatherings on private property where
alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances are served to, consumed by, or
in the possession of underage persons is necessary when such activity is
determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety, or general welfare of
the public;
   (G)   The occurrence of loud or unruly gatherings on party buses or
limousines where alcoholic beverages, controlled substances and/or marijuana
are served to, ingested by or in the possession of underage persons is harmful
to the underage persons themselves and is a threat to the public health,
safety, or quiet enjoyment of the streets and highways as well as other areas
where a party bus or limousines drives, parks or temporarily stops;
   (H)   Persons held responsible for abetting or allowing loud or unruly
gatherings where alcohol and/or controlled substances are served to, consumed
by, or in the possession of underage persons will be more likely to properly
supervise or to stop such conduct at gatherings held on property in their
possession or under their control;
   (I)   Problems associated with loud or unruly gatherings at which alcoholic
beverages and/or controlled substances are served to, consumed by, or in the
possession of underage persons are difficult to prevent or deter unless the
town has the legal authority to issue an administrative citation for an
administrative fine;
   (J)   The intent of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety,
quiet enjoyment of residential property, and general welfare, rather than to
punish;
   (K)   California Business and Professions Code § 25658 makes it unlawful for
a person under the age of 21 years to purchase or attempt to purchase, or
consume alcoholic beverages and makes it unlawful for any person to sell any
alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years;
   (L)   According to local, state and federal surveys, alcohol is
overwhelmingly and consistently the most widely used drug at all adolescent age
levels. A child who begins alcohol use prior to age 15 is four times as likely
to experience alcohol dependence than one who refrains from alcohol use until
age 20 or older;
   (M)   California Health and Safety Code §§ 11350 and 11377 make it unlawful
for any person to possess enumerated controlled substance without a written
prescription, with limited exceptions;
   (N)   Subject to certain exceptions authorized by law, California Health and
Safety Code § 11357 makes it unlawful for persons under the age of 21 to
possess marijuana/cannabis and marijuana/cannabis products;
   (O)   According to the National Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse,
nine out of 10 people with addiction began smoking, drinking or using other
drugs before they turned 18; and
   (P)   Subsections (A) through (J) are equally valid to the service of,
ingestion of or possession of marijuana/cannabis by underage persons. It is the
finding of the Town Council that the addition of marijuana/cannabis to the
prohibition outlined in §
9.28.050 is a reasonable and necessary means to protect and promote the health,
safety, and general welfare of the youth and other residents of the town.
   (Q)   This Town Council therefore determines that this chapter is a
reasonable and necessary means to protect and promote the health, safety, and
general welfare of the youth and other residents of the town.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 802, passed 8-3-2016; Am. Ord. 815,
passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.030 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Social Host Accountability Ordinance.”
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 815, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from
whatever source or by whatever process produced.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every
liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine or beer, and which
contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit
for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with
other substances.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug or substance whose possession and use are
regulated under the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health and
Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.). Such term does not include any drug or substance
for which the individual found to have consumed or possessed such substance has
a valid prescription issued by a licensed medical practitioner authorized to
issue such a prescription, or in the case of medical cannabis, a recommendation
for medical marijuana from an approved provider, or a State of California
medical marijuana ID card.
   JUVENILE DIVERSION PROGRAM. A juvenile diversion program approved by the
Chief of Police of the Town of Fairfax or his/her designee that includes
components such as peer to peer review, requires accountability for a
participant, requires parent participation for the affected underage person and
involves interactive participation by underage participants. A JUVENILE
DIVERSION PROGRAM can also include participation in a restorative justice type
program (e.g., Youth Court).
   LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERING. A party or gathering of two or more persons at a
residence or on other private property or rented public property or on a party
bus or limousine upon which loud or unruly conduct occurs. Such loud or unruly
conduct constitutes a public nuisance and includes but is not limited to:
      (1)   Excessive noise;
      (2)   Excessive traffic;
      (3)   Obstruction of public streets and/or the presence of unruly crowds
that have spilled into public streets;
      (4)   Public intoxication or unlawful public consumption of alcohol or
alcoholic beverages, marijuana or any controlled substance;
      (5)   Assaults, batteries, fights, domestic violence or other
disturbances of the peace;
      (6)   Vandalism;
      (7)   Litter; or
      (8)   Any other conduct that constitutes a threat to the public health,
safety, or quiet enjoyment of residential property or the general welfare.
   MARIJUANA. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. The prohibition herein includes marijuana/cannabis in any
form including but not limited to cigarettes, vapor, hashish, food products/
edibles containing marijuana or concentrated marijuana and any other product of
marijuana. For purposes of this chapter, the term MARIJUANA may be used
interchangeably with the term cannabis. Such term does not include medicinal
marijuana possessed with a recommendation for medical marijuana from an
approved provider, or a State of California medical marijuana ID card.
   MINOR. Any person less than 21 years of age.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE EVENT. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   The person who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the
premises where the gathering occurs;
      (2)   The person in charge of the premises; and/or
      (3)   The person who organized the event.
   If the person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the juvenile and
the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable
for the administrative fine.
   UNDERAGE PERSON. Any person less than 21 years of age and shall have the
same meaning as MINOR, defined in this section.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 802, passed 8-3-2016; Am. Ord. 815,
passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.050 PROHIBITION OF LOUD OR UNRULY GATHERINGS WHERE ALCOHOL, MARIJUANA
AND/OR ANY CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE IS SERVED TO, CONSUMED BY, OR IN THE POSSESSION
OF UNDERAGE PERSONS.
   Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4, of the California Constitution,
no person shall knowingly suffer, permit or host a gathering at his or her
place of residence or other private property, place or premises or host a
gathering at a public place under his or her control or arrange for a party bus
or limousine or renting the same where two or more persons under the age of 21
are present, where the gathering is loud or unruly and alcoholic beverages,
marijuana and/or any controlled substance is in the possession of, being
consumed by, or served to any underage person.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 802, passed 8-3-2016; Am. Ord. 815,
passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.060 VIOLATIONS/ADMINISTRATIVE FINES.
   (A)   It shall be a civil violation for a person to knowingly conduct or
allow a loud or unruly gathering where alcohol, marijuana and/or any controlled
substance is served to, consumed by, or in the possession of an underage person
or persons on premises owned by the person responsible for the event, on
premises rented by or to the person responsible for the event, on premises
where the person responsible for the event resides or on premises where the
person responsible for the event is in control of such premises or on a party
bus or limousine where the person responsible for the event either rents or
arranges the party bus or limousine during the loud or unruly gathering. The
enforcement officer, at his or her discretion, may immediately issue a citation
for this civil violation upon evidence of the violation. There is no
requirement of a first warning in order for the enforcement officer to issue
this citation.
   (B)   Administrative fine; juvenile diversion programs. A first violation of
this chapter shall result in a citation with a $750 fine. A second violation
shall result in a citation with an $875 fine. A third violation shall result in
a citation with a $1,000 fine. For underage offenders, the administrative fines
set forth above may be waived, in the discretion of the Chief of Police, upon
proof of successful completion of a juvenile diversion program.
   (C)   The enforcement officer shall give notice of a violation of this
chapter by issuing a citation to any and all responsible persons identified by
the chapter within ten days of the violation. The citation shall also give
notice of the right to request an administrative hearing to challenge the
validity of the citation and the time for requesting that hearing.
   (D)   In the event that the responsible person who is in violation of this
chapter is a juvenile, then the juvenile and the parents or guardians of that
juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the civil violation.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
1.08.010 of the Town Code, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil
violation only, and shall not constitute an infraction or misdemeanor.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 802, passed 8-3-2016; Am. Ord. 815,
passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.070 HEARINGS ON THE IMPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; APPEALS.
   (A)   Administrative hearing.
      (1)   Any person subject to an administrative fine pursuant to §
9.28.050 shall have the right to request an administrative hearing within 45
days of the issuance of a citation for a civil violation of this chapter. To
request such a hearing, the person requesting the hearing shall notify the Town
Clerk's Office in writing within 45 days of the issuance of the citation.
      (2)   The Town Clerk's Office shall refer any request for a hearing under
§
9.28.050 to a hearing officer appointed by the Town Manager. The hearing
officer shall conduct a hearing on the matter within 60 days of the request for
the hearing unless one of the parties requests a continuance for good cause.
The hearing officer shall render a decision within ten days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The hearing officer may, in his or her discretion, permit the
fine to be satisfied by the performance of community service.
   (B)   Appeal from decision of hearing officer. The person upon whom an
administrative fine is imposed pursuant to §
9.28.050 may appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the Town Council in
accordance with
Chapter 2.44 of the Town Code.
   (C)   Appeal to Superior Court. The person upon whom an administrative fine
is imposed pursuant to §
9.28.050 and whose appeal to the Town Council is denied pursuant to division
(B) of this section may appeal to the Superior Court pursuant to the procedures
outlined in Cal. Gov't Code § 53069.4.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 815, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.080 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES; DEBT TO TOWN; ENFORCEMENT.
   The amount of an administrative fine shall be deemed a debt owed to the town
by the person found in violation of §
9.28.050 and, if that person is a juvenile, then also his/her parents or
guardians. Any person owing such fine shall be liable in an action brought in
the name of the town for recovery of such fine.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 815, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 9.28.090 SEVERABILITY AND PREEMPTION.
   (A)   If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any
other provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter
are severable. Nothing in this chapter is intended to regulate the operators or
owners of charter party carriers or other matters which are exclusively
regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.
   (B)   The administrative fines imposed by this chapter do not preclude other
potential civil actions or criminal prosecution under any other provision of
law.
(Ord. 725, passed 11-7-2007; Am. Ord. 815, passed 1-16-2018)
CHAPTER 9.30: CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Section
   
9.30.010   Findings and purpose
   
9.30.020   Definitions
   
9.30.030   Town Council authorized to adopt rules and regulations
   
9.30.040   Protection of waterways
   
9.30.050   Unauthorized encampments or sleeping on public property
   
9.30.060   Abatement of encampments
   
9.30.070   Abandoned personal property
   
9.30.080   Enforcement
§ 9.30.010 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The Town Council finds that the Town of Fairfax is committed to protecting
the life, health, safety, and welfare of all people in the town and finds that
certain public lands within the geographical boundaries of the town pose
significant health, safety and welfare hazards to the people who make shelter
or stay overnight in these areas. Additionally, the Town Council finds that
some of these public lands are environmentally sensitive and may be
significantly damaged by unregulated human activity. The Town Council is
committed to protecting the rights of individuals related to their personal
property and to treating such property with respect and consideration. It is
the purpose of this chapter to set standards for the preservation and
protection of human life, health, safety and welfare, to further the
preservation and protection of sensitive public lands to prevent destruction of
these assets, and to establish a process for the collection, storage, and
disposal, recycling, or reuse of personal property found in unpermitted
encampments on public property.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATEMENT. The process of documenting and collecting eligible items for
storage, and removing and disposing, recycling, or reusing of waste at an
unpermitted encampment according to the process in this chapter.
   CAMP or CAMPING. To pitch, erect, or occupy an encampment, or to use camp
paraphernalia or both, for the purpose of, or in a way that facilitates outdoor
sheltering for living accommodation purposes or for remaining outdoors
overnight.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Personal property used to facilitate occupancy of an
area and includes personal property typically associated with camping such as
tarps, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, bedding, camp stoves, cooking
equipment, buckets, and similar equipment, mattresses, couches, dressers, or
other furniture.
   ENCAMPMENT. One or more temporary, makeshift, or hand-built structures not
intended for long-term continuous occupancy, including tents, that are used to
shelter one or more persons or their belongings and that are not authorized by
the property owner. ENCAMPMENT includes any camp paraphernalia and personal
property associated with or located in or around the structures or tents.
   OPEN SPACE. Any undeveloped public property either primarily in its natural
state, including canyons, bluffs, and unimproved waterways, or that is held out
by the town or other public agency or used by the public for passive
recreational purposes, conservation, habitat preservation, or that maintains or
enhances the conservation of natural or scenic resources.
   PARK. Any public property, whether developed or undeveloped, held out by the
town or other public agency or used by the public for active or passive park
and recreation uses, including adjacent buffer lands and natural areas and any
adjacent parking lots and perimeter sidewalks.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any public parks, open space, public grounds, public
facilities, and public buildings, including immediately adjacent public areas,
or any property managed, maintained, operated, and controlled by the town or
other public agency.
   TOWN MANAGER. The Town Manager of the Town of Fairfax, California or
designee.
   WASTE. Any rubbish, solid waste, liquid waste, infectious waste, or medical
waste. Waste also includes abandoned or unidentified personal property that is
left unattended on public sidewalks and rights-of-way or other public property.
Waste does not include compost piles, composting or recyclable material
properly contained and disposed of in a timely fashion.
   WATERWAY. All the portions of any creek or flood control channel located
within the boundaries of the town and controlled by the town or other public
agency.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.030 TOWN COUNCIL AUTHORIZED TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Council, by resolution, may adopt such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary to regulate the use and occupancy of public property and to
facilitate the enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.040 PROTECTION OF WATERWAYS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:
      (1)   Build or erect a structure of any type along the banks of any
waterway, or drive a nail or other object into any tree or other natural area
vegetation for the purpose of building an encampment or any other structure, or
to affix an object to any tree or other natural vegetation;
      (2)   Move boulders or large rocks, destroy vegetation, paved roads or
paths created by the town or other public agency, or otherwise reconfigure the
natural landscape in the waters of or along the banks of a waterway;
      (3)   Drive, park, or bring any vehicle along the banks of a waterway,
except in places specifically provided and designated for vehicular use;
      (4)   Dig into the soil on the banks of a waterway; or
      (5)   Discharge or store waste, including garbage, refuse, or human or
animal waste, along the banks or into the waters of a waterway.
   (B)   Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit the activities of an
owner of public or private property or other lawful user of private property
that are normally associated with and incidental to the lawful and authorized
use of property; and nothing is intended to prohibit the activities of a lawful
user if such activities are expressly authorized by the Town Manager or by any
law, regulation, permit, order or other directive from a regulatory authority.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.050 UNAUTHORIZED ENCAMPMENTS OR SLEEPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to camp or to maintain an encampment in
or upon any public property, including in any bus shelter, street, sidewalk,
park, open space, waterway, and banks of a waterway, unless in an area(s)
specifically designated for camping.
   (B)   No person may sleep on any public sidewalk, bus shelter, street,
alleyway, median, parkway or right of way, or in any pedestrian or vehicular
entrance to public or private property abutting a public sidewalk, at any time
as to do so compromises individual and public safety.
   (C)   At all times it is unlawful for any person to camp, maintain an
encampment, or sleep, where such activity poses:
      (1)   An immediate threat or an unreasonable risk of harm to any person;
      (2)   An immediate threat or an unreasonable risk of harm to public
health, safety or welfare; or
      (3)   Disruption to any business, store, religious institution,
educational facility, or government services.
   (D)   At all times it is unlawful for any person to camp, maintain an
encampment, or sleep, in the following locations:
      (1)   Within two blocks of a school that offers instruction on those
courses of study required by the California Education Code or that is
maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education provided
that signs are posted prohibiting camping that are clearly visible to
pedestrians. School for purposes of this section does not include a vocational
or professional institution of higher education, including a community or
junior college, college, or university;
      (2)   In any open space, waterway, or banks of a waterway;
      (3)   Within any transit hub or bus shelter, or along any rail tracks
provided that signs are posted prohibiting camping that are clearly visible to
pedestrians; and
      (4)   In any park where it is determined there is a substantial public
health, safety and welfare risk and provided that signs are posted prohibiting
camping that are clearly visible to pedestrians.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.060 ABATEMENT OF ENCAMPMENTS.
   The Town Manager may direct the removal of personal property, camping
paraphernalia, and all other property, contraband, litter, and waste found at
an encampment or at a location where a person is engaged in unlawful camping,
provided such removal is in compliance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Written notice required prior to abatement.
      (1)   A written notice of clean-up, in English and Spanish, will be
posted on each tent or structure and in any other distinct areas of the
encampment providing notice of the date of clean-up and giving a minimum of 72
hours for persons to remove their personal property. The written notice shall
also include the following statement, which may be updated by the Town Manager
to provide accurate and current information:
         “You must remove your belongings from this site within 72 hours. You
should not leave behind any belongings you want to keep. All belongings left
behind will be removed by the town. The town will post an impound notice, in
English and Spanish, if belongings are stored during the cleanup process.
         If you wish to minimize the risk of losing valued belongings, you
should try to keep those belongings on your person at all times, in a storage
facility, or in visible, sanitary, and safely accessible bags or bins.
         If you think your belongings were stored, you can claim them by
following the directions on the impound notice after the clean-up is complete.
You may retrieve any stored belongings without being asked about your
immigration status.”
      (2)   After 72 hours, the Town Manager shall be authorized to conduct
abatement or clean-up of the site on the date posted on the notice of clean-up.
If abatement is delayed or rescheduled, the Town Manager may conduct abatement
within 72 hours of the posted notice of clean-up without reposting a new notice
of clean-up. If abatement is delayed for a longer period of time, the Town
Manager shall repost a notice of clean-up with a new date.
   (B)   The Town Manager shall follow these additional procedures when persons
are present at an encampment during abatement:
      (1)   The Town Manager shall evaluate reasonable requests for additional
time or assistance to remove items and may accommodate those requests to the
extent practicable.
      (2)   Any person who returns to an encampment during abatement shall be
allowed to remove their personal property from the site. Personal property left
behind will be deemed abandoned.
      (3)   Any person arrested for a criminal offense or an outstanding
warrant shall not be required to abandon personal property they identify as
their own. Unless the person requests the personal property be discarded or
entrusted to another, all personal property of apparent value will be impounded
by the town in accordance with existing policy and procedure. Where the owner
of the items cannot be readily identified or discovered, the Town Manager shall
follow the abatement process in this chapter.
   (C)   The Town Manager shall document the abatement process as follows:
      (1)   Photograph or video record the site before any abatement begins;
      (2)   When feasible, open backpacks, purses, suitcases, and other small
storage containers to determine whether they contain items eligible for
storage; and
      (3)   Photograph or video record the site after abatement has concluded.
   (D)   (1)   Unclaimed items found in abatement shall be eligible for storage
if:
         (a)   Circumstances indicate that the item belongs to a person;
         (b)   The item has apparent utility in its current condition and
circumstances; and
         (c)   The item can be safely retrieved from the site.
      (2)   Examples of items potentially eligible for storage include
identification and associated paperwork, medication stored in medication
bottles with identifying information, art, art supplies, musical instruments,
and items that reasonably appear to have sentimental value in their current
condition. An item need not be in a new or perfect condition to have apparent
utility.
   (E)   An eligible item found during an abatement shall be put into storage,
unless it meets one the following disqualifying conditions:
      (1)   Hazardous, including items contaminated with human waste or bodily
fluid, soiled items likely to expose others to disease, animal waste, insects,
explosives, weapons, liquids, drug paraphernalia, or mold;
      (2)   Likely to become hazardous in storage, including perishables, wet
materials that might become moldy, and items covered in mud;
      (3)   Practically un-storable, due to large size, weight, or other
similar characteristic;
      (4)   Contraband or stolen property; or
      (5)   Is on the Town Manager's current list of common types of items
that, in the experience of town staff, individuals regularly abandon during
abatement, and there is no contrary indication as to the specific item.
   (F)   The Town Manager shall record each eligible item to be stored,
including the location it was found and the date of storage. Any stored items
shall be kept in storage at least 30 calendar days and then may be disposed of,
recycled, or reused following the process in §
9.30.070.
   (G)   After abatement has concluded and when eligible items are collected
and will be placed in storage, the Town Manager shall post notices, in English
and Spanish, at the location of the abatement that includes information on how
a person may claim stored items. A person may retrieve stored items based on a
description with sufficient specificity to demonstrate ownership. A person may
retrieve stored items without inquiry into the person's immigration status.
   (H)   Expedited abatement.
      (1)   In an expedited abatement, the Town Manager shall follow the same
abatement and storage procedures in this section, but shall post a notice of
clean-up, in English and Spanish, giving a minimum of three hours for all
persons to remove their personal property.
      (2)   The Town Manager shall prioritize and expedite the removal of an
encampment if:
         (a)   The town receives direction from Marin County or other
governmental authority that abatement of the encampment is necessary to
preserve public health or safety, including to address known or suspected
outbreaks of diseases; or
         (b)   The Town Manager observes or reasonably suspects the encampment
creates a condition that presents a significant risk of property damage, bodily
injury or death.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.070 ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any personal property or possessions located on public property that
are unattended and whose owner cannot be readily identified are presumed to be
abandoned and, pursuant to Cal. Civil Code § 2080.7, any contrary provisions
regarding procedures for unclaimed property in this code do not apply. The Town
Manager shall make a reasonable effort to ascertain whether the unattended
personal property or possessions have been abandoned and, if so, to thereafter
cause their removal. Any personal property or possessions found during the
abatement process shall first be stored as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Unattended personal property or possessions that are unsanitary,
soiled contain evidence of vermin may be summarily abated and destroyed.
Unattended personal property or possessions that are not summarily abated or
destroyed under this section may be disposed of or recycled by the Town Manager
or donated for reuse.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 9.30.080 ENFORCEMENT.
   It is unlawful for a person to violate or to fail to comply with any
provision of this chapter. If an encampment is found on public property by any
member of the public, a report of such encampment must be made to the Fairfax
Police Department. No member of the public is permitted to attempt any
enforcement or harassment of any person potentially in violation of any
provision of this chapter. The town may enforce any provision of this chapter
by any one or more of the following methods:
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision in this chapter is guilty of an
infraction, punishable by a $100 fine.
   (B)   This chapter also may be enforced as an administrative violation under
Chapter 1.10 with fines set at $100 for the first violation, $200 for a
subsequent and second violation within one year and $500 for the third and all
subsequent violations within one year.
   (C)   Any violation of this chapter may be enforced by any other civil
remedy authorized by law.
(Ord. 895, passed 1-9-2025)
TITLE 10: VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Chapter
      
10.04.   UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE ADOPTED
      
10.08.   PARKING LOTS
      
10.12.   TOW-AWAY ZONES
      
10.16.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
10.24.   PREFERENTIAL PARKING PRIVILEGES FOR NEWLY CREATED PARKING SPACES
      
10.28.   SKATEBOARDS
      10.30.   OPERATION OF ELECTRIC MOBILITY (MICROMOBILITY) DEVICES
      
10.32.   TRIP REDUCTION
CHAPTER 10.04: UNIFORM TRAFFIC ORDINANCE ADOPTED
Section
   
10.04.010   Adopted; exceptions
   
10.04.020   Additions and amendments; generally
   
10.04.030   U.T.O. § 3.10 adopted; storage and abandonment of vehicles or parts
   
10.04.040   U.T.O. § 3.11 adopted; disposition of wrecked or abandoned vehicles
or parts
   
10.04.050   U.T.O. § 10.3(k) adopted; blocking driveway
   
10.04.060   U.T.O. § 10.9(c) adopted; parking on narrow streets
   
10.04.070   U.T.O. § 10.9(d) adopted; parking commercial vehicles
   
10.04.080   U.T.O. § 10.14 adopted; parking in line of traffic; hitchhiking
   
10.04.090   U.T.O. § 11 adopted; parking zones
   
10.04.100   U.T.O. § 11.1 amended; authorized signs, parking meters or curb
markings
   
10.04.110   U.T.O. §§ 11.2 through 11.3.1 deleted
   
10.04.120   U.T.O. § 11.8, all-night parking in Town Center Area
   
10.04.130   U.T.O. § 11.9.1 adopted; shifting of parked vehicles
   
10.04.140   U.T.O. § 12.7 adopted; special passenger-loading zones
   
10.04.150   U.T.O. Article XVII adopted; tow-away zones
   
10.04.160   U.T.O. Article XVIII adopted; abandoned vehicles
§ 10.04.010 ADOPTED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   All of the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, 1964 Edition,
adopted by the League of California Cities, except §§ 11.8, 15 and 15.1, are
adopted and made a part of this title as though fully set forth herein.
   (B)   Three copies of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance are on file for use and
examination by the public in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.010)
§ 10.04.020 ADDITIONS AND AMENDMENTS; GENERALLY.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended and added to as set out in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.020)
§ 10.04.030 U.T.O. § 3.10 ADOPTED; STORAGE AND ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES OR
PARTS.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 3.10, to read as follows:
Section 3.10. STORAGE AND ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES OR VEHICLE PARTS.
No person shall store, leave or abandon any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or
vehicle parts, which are wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative, upon any
public or private real property within the Town of Fairfax for a period of time
in excess of seventy-two (72) hours, unless:
(1)   The same is completely enclosed within a building; or,
(2)   Is in connection with a business enterprise lawfully situated, licensed
and operated upon the same premises.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.030)
§ 10.04.040 U.T.O. § 3.11 ADOPTED; DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES
OR PARTS.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 3.11, to read as follows:
Section 3.11. DISPOSITION OF WRECKED OR DISCARDED VEHICLES OR VEHICLE PARTS.
No person in charge or control of any real property within the Town of Fairfax,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall cause or allow
any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded, licensed
or unlicensed vehicle or vehicle parts to remain on such property longer than
seventy-two (72) hours, except that this section shall not apply to the
following circumstances:
(1)   With regard to vehicles or vehicle parts in an enclosed building;
(2)    With regard to vehicles or vehicle parts on the same premises as a
business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the
operation of such business enterprise.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.040)
§ 10.04.050 U.T.O. § 10.3(k) ADOPTED; BLOCKING DRIVEWAY.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 10.3(k), to read as follows:
Section 10.3(k). PARKING PROHIBITED WHICH BLOCKS A PUBLIC OR PRIVATE DRIVEWAY,
ETC.
No person shall park within three feet of the entrance or exit of any private
residence, or which blocks a public or private walkway, gate, stairway, path or
lane; provided, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit an owner or tenant
of the premises from parking his vehicle in such a location.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.050)
§ 10.04.060 U.T.O. § 10.9(c) ADOPTED; PARKING ON NARROW STREETS.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by § 10.04.010 is amended by
adoption of § 10.9(c), to read as follows:
(1) Except as provided herein, no person shall park a vehicle on any roadway in
the town without leaving at least twelve feet remaining on such roadway for
purposes of vehicular traffic without obstruction.
(2) When a section of roadway requires less than 12 feet of clearance, parking
will be permitted only under the following conditions: approval of both the
Fire Chief and the Police Chief, the available space for parking is clearly
delineated and enclosed by pavement markings installed by the Street
Department; and any parked vehicle shall be parked entirely within the
delineated area.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.060) (Ord. 444, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 445, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 559, passed - -1987; Am. Ord. 635, passed - -1994)
§ 10.04.070 U.T.O. § 10.9(d) ADOPTED; PARKING COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 10.9(d), to read as follows:
No person shall leave unattended any commercial vehicle on any street on any
day unless the vehicle is actually engaged in loading and/or unloading or
performing a service at a specific location. Three-quarter (3/4) ton pickups,
vans and station wagons are exempt from this section providing no more than one
such vehicle is registered or owned by any one person or company.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.070) (Ord. 562, passed - -1987)
§ 10.04.080 U.T.O. § 10.14 ADOPTED; PARKING IN LINE OF TRAFFIC; HITCHHIKING.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 10.14, to read as follows:
Section 10.14. PROHIBITING PARKING IN LINE OF TRAFFIC, AND HITCHHIKING.
(a) A driver of a vehicle shall not stop his vehicle for the purpose of picking
up a person soliciting a ride, or for the purpose of discharging a passenger,
if such stopping will impede the normal movement of traffic.
(b) No person shall solicit a ride from a driver of any vehicle in any location
where a vehicle stopping to pick up such person will impede the normal movement
of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.080)
§ 10.04.090 U.T.O. § 11 ADOPTED; PARKING ZONES.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 11, to read as follows:
Section 11.
(a)   Fifteen Minute Parking.
Green curb markings designated as 15 minute zones shall mean no standing or
parking for a period of time longer than 15 minutes, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., of
any day except Sundays and holidays.
(b)   Thirty Minute Parking.
Green curb markings designated as 30 minute zones shall mean no standing or
parking for a period of time longer than 30 minutes, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., of
any day except Sundays and holidays.
(c)   1 Hour Parking.
Green curb markings designated as 1 hour zones shall mean no standing or
parking for a period of time longer than I hour, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., of any
day except Sundays and holidays.
(d)   2 Hour Parking.
Green curb markings designated as 2 hour zones shall mean no standing or
parking for a period of time longer than 2 hours, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., of
any day except Sundays and holidays.
(e)   3 Hour Parking.
Green curb markings designated as 3 hour zones shall mean no standing or
parking for a period of time longer than 3 hours, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., of
any day except Sundays and holidays.
(f)   4 Hour Parking.
Green curb markings designated as 4 hour zones shall mean no standing or
parking for a period of time longer than 4 hours, 9:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., of
any day except: Sundays and holidays.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.090) (Ord. 653, passed - -1996)
§ 10.04.100 U.T.O. § 11.1 AMENDED; AUTHORIZED SIGNS, PARKING METERS OR CURB
MARKINGS.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance § 11.1, adopted by §
10.04.010, is amended to read as follows:
Section 11.1
When authorized signs, parking meters or curb markings have been determined by
the Town Traffic Engineer to be necessary and are in place giving notice
thereof, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle
adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign or parking meter in violation
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.095) (Ord. 653, passed - -1996)
§ 10.04.110 U.T.O. §§ 11.2 THROUGH 11.3.1 DELETED.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by deleting §§ 11.2 through 11.3.1.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.100) (Ord. 653, passed - -1996)
§ 10.04.120 U.T.O. § 11.8, ALL-NIGHT PARKING IN TOWN CENTER AREA.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   Section 11.8. ALL NIGHT PARKING IN TOWN CENTER AREA PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any street in the Town
Center Area, as such area is depicted in the map accompanying the ordinance
codified herein, for a period of time longer than 30 minutes between the hours
of 2:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M. on any day, except as may be permitted by adoption of
a resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.110) (Ord. 559, passed - -1987; Am. Ord.. 792, passed 6-3-
2015)
§ 10.04.130 U.T.O. § 11.9.1 ADOPTED; SHIFTING OF PARKED VEHICLES.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 11.9.1, to read as follows:
Section 11.9.1. SHIFTING OF PARKED VEHICLES.
For the purpose of the regulations contained in this Code relating to
limitations on stopping, standing and parking, any vehicle moved a distance of
not more than three hundred feet during the limited parking period shall be
deemed to have remained stationary.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.120)
§ 10.04.140 U.T.O. § 12.7 ADOPTED; SPECIAL PASSENGER-LOADING ZONES.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of § 12.7, to read as follows:
Section 12.7. SPECIAL PASSENGER LOADING ZONES.
(a) No operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand, or park said vehicle in any
special passenger-loading zone when approved permanent or portable signs are in
place, as hereinafter provided, for any period of time longer than is necessary
for the loading or unloading of passengers and not to exceed three minutes.
Special passenger-loading zones, as used herein, shall be those areas adjacent
to the curb, not more than sixty (60) feet in length, located between two
approved permanent or portable signs in front of or adjacent to, and within the
projected real property boundaries of any church, theater, club or place of
business or public gathering.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.130)
§ 10.04.150 U.T.O. ARTICLE XVII ADOPTED; TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted in §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of Article XVII, Tow-Away Zones, codified in
Chapter 10.12 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.140)
§ 10.04.160 U.T.O. ARTICLE XVIII ADOPTED; ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted by §
10.04.010 is amended by adoption of Article XVIII, Abandoned Vehicles, codified
in
Chapter 10.16 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 10.04.150)
CHAPTER 10.08: PARKING LOTS
Section
   
10.08.010   Parking lot defined
   
10.08.020   Permit required
   
10.08.030   Prohibited in residential district
   
10.08.040   Operation by town
   
10.08.050   Public lots; compliance with regulations and signs required
   
10.08.060   Permission required to park on property of another
   
10.08.070   Additional rules and regulations
§ 10.08.010 PARKING LOT DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKING LOT.
      (1)   Any parcel or lot of land in the town used or improved for use as a
parking space for four or more vehicles, at any one time, during any period of
the day.
      (2)   Two or more adjoining or contiguous lots so used shall constitute
one parking lot.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.010)
§ 10.08.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any land in the town to use, operate
or permit the use or operation of his or her land by any lessee or other person
as a parking lot without first obtaining a permit to do so from the Chief of
Police.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall issue any such permit upon application
therefor without charge when it has been established that the use is permitted
under Title 17 of this code and that the applicant is the owner of the premises
or is lawfully entitled to possession of them.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.020)  (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 10.08.030 PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   It is unlawful for the owner or lessee of any land in the town which is
located in a residential district under Title 17 of this code to use, operate
or permit the use or operation of the land as a parking lot within the meaning
of this chapter.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.030)  (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 10.08.040 OPERATION BY TOWN.
   The town may own or lease and operate public parking lots in the town as may
be necessary for the convenience of the traveling public.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.040)
§ 10.08.050 PUBLIC LOTS; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS AND SIGNS REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any publicly-owned or
operated parking lot in the town contrary to the directions of any parking lot
sign or pavement marking in the lot. When any time limit for continuous parking
has been established for any public parking lot by resolution of the Town
Council and notice thereof has been given by a sign posted on the public
parking lot, it is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the parking lot
continuously for a period longer than the time established by resolution.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.050)
§ 10.08.060 PERMISSION REQUIRED TO PARK ON PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.
   It is unlawful for any person to stop or park any automobile or other
vehicle upon the real property of another person in the town without the
permission, express or implied, of the owner or lessee of the real property.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.060)
§ 10.08.070 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Council may, by resolution, adopt such regulations as may be
necessary for the use and operation of any public parking lot in the town, to
include, among other things, the following:
   (A)   The marking of the public parking lots into spaces with directions for
parking of vehicles;
   (B)   The price, if any, to be charged for parking;
   (C)   The limit of time allowed, if any, for continuous parking; and
   (D)   The erection of entrance, exit and other directional signs.
(Prior Code, §  10.08.070)
CHAPTER 10.12: TOW-AWAY ZONES
Section
   
10.12.010   Established
   
10.12.020   Signs
   
10.12.030   Removal of vehicles
   
10.12.040   Notice to owner
   
10.12.050   Lien
Editor’s Note:
The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted in §
10.04.010 of this title was amended by adoption of Article XVII (§§ 17.00
through 17.4), which is codified in this chapter. The legislative history note
following each section of this chapter identifies, in brackets, the number of
the U.T.O. section from which it is derived.
§ 10.12.010 ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   By resolution, the Town Council, upon recommendation of the town’s
Traffic Engineer, may establish tow-away zones in the town wherein it shall be
unlawful to park, or permit to be parked, any motor vehicle during hours
specified in the resolution.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      TOW-AWAY ZONE. Any area of town street in Fairfax designated by
appropriate signs wherein parking of vehicles is prohibited by resolution of
the Town Council at specified times and permitted at other times.
(Prior Code, §  10.12.010)
§ 10.12.020 SIGNS.
   The town’s Traffic Engineer shall cause to be erected at the beginning of
each tow-away zone, and at intervals of 100 feet therein, appropriate signs on
each of which shall be specified the times during which parking of vehicles is
prohibited and which give notice of removal during prohibited periods.
(Prior Code, §  10.12.020)
§ 10.12.030 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES.
   Any police officer of the town may remove or cause to be removed any vehicle
parking in a tow-away zone during prohibited hours.
(Prior Code, §  10.12.030)
§ 10.12.040 NOTICE TO OWNER.
   Within six hours after removing any vehicle from a tow-away zone, the police
officer causing the removal shall, unless the vehicle is sooner claimed, give
written notice to the registered owner, at the address shown on the certificate
of registration, of the location of the vehicle, wherefrom the owner may take
possession of the vehicle on payment of all costs and charges for removal and
storage.
(Prior Code, §  10.12.040)
§ 10.12.050 LIEN.
   The person who removes the automobile and stores the same for the owner
shall have a lien on the vehicle for the charges for the removal and storage
and shall not be required to deliver up the vehicle without payment thereof.
(Prior Code, §  10.12.050)
CHAPTER 10.16: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
10.16.010   Definitions
   
10.16.020   Applicability; construction
   
10.16.030   Provisions not exclusive
   
10.16.040   Findings; nuisance declared
   
10.16.050   Administration and enforcement authority
   
10.16.060   Vehicle removal franchise
   
10.16.070   Abatement; procedure generally
   
10.16.080   Notice of intention to abate
   
10.16.090   Request for hearing
   
10.16.100   Hearing procedure
   
10.16.110   Appeal
   
10.16.120   Vehicle removal and disposal
   
10.16.130   Notice given to the Department of Motor Vehicles and to the
Department of Justice identifying the vehicle
   
10.16.140   Administrative costs
   
10.16.150   Assessment of costs against land
   
10.16.160   Abandonment prohibited
   
10.16.170   Abandonment; presumption
   
10.16.180   Violation; misdemeanor
Editor’s Note:
The Uniform Traffic Ordinance as adopted in §
10.04.010 of this title was amended by adoption of Article XVIII (§§ 18.1
through 18.15), which is codified in this chapter. The legislative history note
following each section of this chapter identifies, in brackets, the number of
the U.T.O. section from which it is derived.
§ 10.16.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HIGHWAY.
      (1)   A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
      (2)   HIGHWAY includes STREET.
   INOPERATIVE VEHICLE. A vehicle that cannot be moved under its own power or
vehicles not currently registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles
excluding those vehicles that have been filed as a non-operational status.
   OWNER OF THE LAND. The owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts
thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.
   OWNER OF THE VEHICLE. The last registered owner and legal owner of record.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Includes “highway.”
   VEHICLE. A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or
drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.010)  (Ord. 621, passed - -1993)
§ 10.16.020 APPLICABILITY; CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
      (2)   A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful
manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed
dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when the storage or
parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance, as defined under provisions of law other than Cal. Vehicle
Code Division 11, Chapter 10, commencing with § 22650, and this chapter.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.020)
§ 10.16.030 PROVISIONS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the town. It shall supplement and be
in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore
or hereafter enacted by the town, the state or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.030)
§ 10.16.040 FINDINGS; NUISANCE DECLARED.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the State of California under Cal. Vehicle Code § 22660 to
remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof
as public nuisances, the Town Council makes the following findings and
declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not
including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value
of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering,
to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard
to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and
insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare.
Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property, except as expressly
hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be
abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.040)  (Ord. 621, passed - -1993)
§ 10.16.050 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter
shall be administered and enforced by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   In the enforcement of this chapter, the officer and his or her
deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or
parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle (and to
remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof) declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.050)
§ 10.16.060 VEHICLE REMOVAL FRANCHISE.
   When the Town Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any
person or persons, the person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon
private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle
or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.060)
§ 10.16.070 ABATEMENT; PROCEDURE GENERALLY.
   Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property
within the town, the Chief of Police has the authority to cause the abatement
and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.070)
§ 10.16.080 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE.
   A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts
thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner
of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such
condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.
The notices of intention shall be in substantially the forms set out below.
(Prior Code, §  10.16.080)
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE OR REMOVE; OWNER OF LAND
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of owner of the land)
As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at
(address), you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Article
XVIII of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance, has determined that there exists upon
said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle registered                                                , to license
number                                                , which constitutes a
public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said Article XVIII.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle
(or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this
notice, and upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by
the town and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to
you as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located.
As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is
located, you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the City Council within such ten-day period, the
Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or
said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid
without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such
ten-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said
parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such
statement shall be construed as a request for hearing at which your presence is
not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the
owner of the vehicle or, in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement
as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing.
Notice Mailed                                                          
         (date)
s/                                                                            
   (Chief of Police)
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE OR REMOVE; OWNER OF VEHICLE
NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED,
DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE
(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle-
notice should be given to both if different)
As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle -
make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned
pursuant to Article XVIII of the Uniform Traffic Ordinance has determined that
said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle at (describe location on public or private
property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of said
Article XVIII.
You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle
(or said parts of a vehicle) within ten days from the date of mailing of this
notice.
As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of
a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within ten days after the
mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and if such a
request is not received by the City Council within such ten-day period, the
Chief of Police shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or
said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing.
Notice Mailed                                                         
         (date)
s/                                                                           
   (Chief of Police)
§ 10.16.090 REQUEST FOR HEARING.
   (A)   Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received
by the Chief of Police within ten days after the mailing of the notices of
intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the Town
Council on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the
assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle
or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement
denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land
within the ten-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a
hearing which does not require his or her presence.
      (2)   Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least
ten days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the
vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers
are not available to determine ownership.
      (3)   If such a request for hearing is not received within ten days after
mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the town shall have the
authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance
without holding a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.090)
§ 10.16.100 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   (1)   All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the Town
Council, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts
and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts
thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property
or public property.
      (2)   The Town Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of
evidence.
      (3)   The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or
present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and
deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or
her reasons for the denial.
   (B)   (1)   The Town Council may impose such conditions and take such other
action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose
of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts
thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it.
      (2)   At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Town Council may find
that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked or dismantled or is
inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the
property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and
determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged
against the owner of the land.
      (3)   The order requiring removal shall include a description of the
vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license
number of the vehicle, if available at the site.
   (C)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he or she has not
subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the Town Council shall not assess the
costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon
which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect the costs from the
owner of the land.
   (D)   If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying
responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land, but does not
appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the Town
Council, but does not appear, he or she shall be notified, in writing, of the
decision.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.100)
§ 10.16.110 APPEAL.
   (A)   Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Town Council by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Town Council within five days after
its decision.
   (B)   The appeal shall be heard by the Town Council, which may affirm, amend
or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.
   (C)   The Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the
hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in §
10.16.080.
   (D)   In conducting the hearing, the Town Council shall not be limited by
the technical rules of evidence.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.110)
§ 10.16.120 VEHICLE REMOVAL AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts
thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice
of the decision if the notice is required by §
10.16.100 or 15 days after the action of the governing body authorizing removal
following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to
a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard.
   (B)   After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be
reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for
either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates
pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code § 5004, in which case the vehicle may be
reconstructed or made operable.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.120) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 10.16.130 NOTICE GIVEN TO THE DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES AND TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE IDENTIFYING THE VEHICLE.
   Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted
to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.
If the vehicle is removed from public property and is registered in California,
and the owner is unknown immediate notification shall be given to the
Department of Justice stolen vehicle system. If the vehicle is removed from
public property and is not registered in California, and the owner is unknown
immediate notification shall be given to the Department of Justice stolen
vehicle system and written notification to the Department of Justice if the
vehicle is not returned to the owner after 120 hours. If the vehicle is removed
from private property and the owner is unknown written notification shall be
given to the Department of Justice if the vehicle is not returned to the owner
after 120 hours.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.130) (Ord. 621, passed - -1993)
§ 10.16.140 ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
   The Town Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any
vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.140)
§ 10.16.150 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS AGAINST LAND.
   If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged
against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to §
10.16.100 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final
disposition of an appeal therefrom, the costs shall be assessed against the
parcel of land pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 38773.5 and shall be transmitted
to the Tax Collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same
priority as other town taxes.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.150)
§ 10.16.160 ABANDONMENT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon any highway.
   (B)   No person shall abandon a vehicle upon public or private property
without the express or implied consent of the owner or person in lawful
possession or control of the property.
   (C)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 and shall provide proof that the costs of
removal and disposition of the vehicle have been paid. No part of any fine
imposed shall be suspended. The fine may be paid in installments if the court
determines that the defendant is unable to pay the entire amount in one
payment.
   (D)   Proof that the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle have
been paid shall not be required if proof is provided to the court that the
vehicle was stolen prior to the abandonment. That proof may consist of a police
report or other evidence acceptable to the court.
   (E)   The costs required to be paid for the removal and disposition of any
vehicle determined to be abandoned pursuant to Cal. Vehicle Code § 22669 shall
not exceed those for towing and seven days storage. This division does not
apply if the registered owner or legal owner has completed and returned to the
lien holder a declaration of opposition form within the time specified under
Cal. Vehicle Code § 22851.8.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.160) (Ord. 621, passed - -1993)
§ 10.16.170 ABANDONMENT; PRESUMPTION.
   (A)   The abandonment of any vehicle in a manner as provided in §
10.16.160 shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the last registered
owner of record is responsible for the abandonment and is thereby liable for
the cost of removal and disposition of the vehicle.
   (B)   An owner who has made a bona fide sale or transfer of a vehicle and
has delivered possession of the vehicle to a purchaser may overcome the
presumption prescribed in division (A) of this section by demonstrating that he
or she has complied with Cal. Vehicle Code § 5900 or by providing other proof
satisfactory to the court.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.170) (Ord. 621, passed - -1993)
§ 10.16.180 VIOLATION; MISDEMEANOR.
   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove
an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or
refuse to abate the nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the
abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where the state law is
applicable.
(Prior Code, § 10.16.180) (Ord. 621, passed - -1993)
CHAPTER 10.24: PREFERENTIAL PARKING
PRIVILEGES FOR NEWLY CREATED PARKING SPACES
Section
   
10.24.010   Findings
   
10.24.020   Application for permit
   
10.24.030   Construction
   
10.24.040   Preferential parking privileges
   
10.24.050   Revocation and expiration
   
10.24.060   Other entitlements
§ 10.24.010 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Parking spaces along the streets of the Town of Fairfax are at a
premium due to the topography of the town and its many narrow, winding streets.
   (B)   By the adoption of this Chapter 10.24, it is the intent of the town to
contribute to the alleviation of crowded parking conditions by encouraging the
owners and occupants of developed residential properties to create new and
additional parking spaces where none now exist.
   (C)   In furtherance of that purpose, the public interest requires that
persons investing private funds in the creation of such parking spaces be given
preferential parking privileges wherever such spaces require the use of the
right-of-way of a town street or other town property.
(Prior Code, § 10.24.010) (Ord. 636, passed - -1994)
§ 10.24.020 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who desires to create a new and additional parking
space utilizing town property for the purpose of serving a developed property
and who wishes to acquire preferential parking privileges with respect thereto,
shall make application to the Planning Services Director.
      (2)   The application shall be accompanied by such information and
documents as the Planning Services Director may require in order to determine
the precise location of the proposed parking space and its impact upon public
safety, vehicular and pedestrian conditions and the use and enjoyment of
neighboring properties. The application shall demonstrate that the creation of
the parking space will require the investment of private funds in an amount to
be determined from time to time by the Town Council. The application shall also
be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount determined by the Town Council.
   (B)   (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
accompanied by the recommendation of the Planning Services Director.
      (2)   If the Planning Commission determines that the creation of the
proposed parking space is in the public interest, it may grant a permit
therefor, together with preferential parking privileges for the use of the
space.
      (3)   In granting the permit, the Planning Commission may impose such
conditions as it determines may be required by vehicular and pedestrian traffic
conditions, the interests of public safety, the use and enjoyment of
neighboring properties and the general public welfare.
      (4)   Any decision of the Planning Commission to grant or revoke a permit
issued under this
Chapter 10.24 shall be subject to appeal to the Town Council in the manner set
forth in
Chapter 2.40 of this code.
   (C)   No parking space created pursuant to a permit issued under this
Chapter 10.24 shall be used for meeting the on-site parking requirements for a
residential second unit under
Chapter 17.048 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10.24.020) (Ord. 636, passed - -1994)
§ 10.24.030 CONSTRUCTION.
   The approved parking space shall be constructed in strict accordance with
approved plans and such engineering and construction requirements as may be
determined by the town.
(Prior Code, § 10.24.030) (Ord. 636, passed - -1994)
§ 10.24.040 PREFERENTIAL PARKING PRIVILEGES.
   Parking of any vehicle within any portion of any parking space constructed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be restricted to the occupants
of the property for the benefit of which the parking space was constructed and
to the guests of the occupants. Notice of the parking restrictions shall be
given by the placement of appropriate signs or markings. Any person who parks
or lets stand any vehicle within any portion of the parking space without the
authorization of the occupants of the property shall be guilty of an
infraction.
(Prior Code, § 10.24.040) (Ord. 636, passed - -1994)
§ 10.24.050 REVOCATION AND EXPIRATION.
   (A)   A permit issued pursuant to this
Chapter 10.24 shall have an initial term of five years during which time the
town may revoke the permit only if the parking space is not maintained in a
safe and sanitary condition or becomes, or results in, a public safety hazard.
   (B)   Following the expiration of the initial five-year term, the town may
revoke the permit if the parking space is not maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition or becomes, or results in, a public safety hazard, or if the town
determines that the public property occupied thereby is required for public
use.
(Prior Code, § 10.24.050) (Ord. 636, passed - -1994)
§ 10.24.060 OTHER ENTITLEMENTS.
   No variance under
Title 17 of this code, or permits under
Chapter 12.32 of this code, shall be required for construction of any parking
space approved pursuant to this chapter. Building permits and excavation
permits shall be obtained as required by this code.
(Prior Code, § 10.24.060) (Ord. 636, passed - -1994)
CHAPTER 10.28: SKATEBOARDS
Section
   
10.28.010   Use of skateboards and similar devices
   
10.28.020   Designated skate park area
   
10.28.030   Safety equipment required
§ 10.28.010 USE OF SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   It is prohibited for any person upon a skateboard or similar device to go
upon the public parking area known as the “Parkade,” including the Parkade
Steps and the handicapped accessible walkway, or upon any sidewalk in the
downtown area including Bolinas Road bounded by Park Road and Broadway, and
including Broadway bounded by School Street and Pacheco, Center Boulevard from
Pacheco westbound to Claus, and Center Boulevard from Pacheco to Pastori, and
including Sir Francis Drake Boulevard from Pacheco westbound to Claus. It shall
further be unlawful for any person upon a skateboard or similar device to go
upon any roadway, sidewalk or public parking area, in such a manner as to
create a hazard to persons or automobiles or to cause damage to property.
(Prior Code, § 10.30.010) (Ord. 593, passed - -1990; Am. Ord. 625, passed - -
1993)
§ 10.28.020 SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Town Council may adopt a resolution designating a portion of the
Pavilion/Bank Street public parking lot as a skate park area for the use of
non-motorized skateboards, scooters, inline skates, and roller skates.
   (B)   The Town Council may, from time to time, adopt resolutions
establishing the rules and regulations for the skate park area.
(Ord. 852, passed 3-3-2021)
§ 10.28.030 SAFETY EQUIPMENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   In any skateboard park or facility owned or operated by the town, any
person riding a non-motorized skateboard, scooter, inline skates, or roller
skates shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads, pursuant to Cal. Health
and Safety Code § 115800.
   (B)   The town shall cause a sign or signs to be posted at any such park or
facility providing reasonable notice of division (A) of this section, stating
that any person failing to comply with division (A) of this section will be
guilty of an infraction and subject to citation, and making all parties who may
use such park or facility aware of the language of Cal. Government Code § 831.7
concerning hazardous recreational activities.
   (C)   Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this
section and who is injured while using the skateboard park or facility shall be
deemed negligent.
(Ord. 852, passed 3-3-2021)
CHAPTER 10.30: OPERATION OF ELECTRIC MOBILITY (MICROMOBILITY) DEVICES
Section
   
10.30.010   Purpose and intent
   
10.30.020   Definitions
   
10.30.030   Operation of electric mobility (micromobility) devices
   
10.30.040   Sales/rental addendum
   
10.30.050   Enforcement
   
10.30.060   Exemptions
   
10.30.070   Marin Electric Bicycle Safety Program
§ 10.30.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate electric mobility
(micromobility) devices within the town limits of Fairfax.
   (B)   The town supports the usage of electric bicycles, motorized scooters,
and other electric mobility (micromobility) devices as an alternative mode of
transportation and recognizes the increased usage has created safety concerns
among operator interactions with other motorists and pedestrians, warranting a
higher level of regulation.
   (C)   The town desires to participate in the Marin Electric Bicycle Safety
Pilot Program, as authorized by California Vehicle Code § 21214.5.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
§ 10.30.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BICYCLE. The same meaning as in California Vehicle Code § 231.
   ELECTRIC MOBILITY (MICROMOBILITY) DEVICE. Includes the following:
      (1)   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. The same meaning as in California Vehicle Code §
312.5.
         (a)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE or LOW-SPEED PEDAL-ASSISTED ELECTRIC
BICYCLE. A bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the
rider is pedaling, and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle
reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour, and that is not capable of providing
assistance to reach speeds greater than 20 miles per hour, or as otherwise
defined in California Vehicle Code § 312.5.
      (b)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE or LOW-SPEED THROTTLE-ASSISTED ELECTRIC
BICYCLE. A bicycle equipped with a motor that may be used exclusively to propel
the bicycle, and that is not capable of providing assistance when the bicycle
reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour, or as otherwise defined in California
Vehicle Code § 312.5.
      (c)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE or SPEED PEDAL-ASSISTED ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
A bicycle equipped with a motor that provides assistance only when the rider is
pedaling, and that ceases to provide assistance when the bicycle reaches the
speed of 28 miles per hour and is equipped with a speedometer, or as otherwise
defined in California Vehicle Code § 312.5.
      (2)   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. The same meaning as in
California Vehicle Code § 313.
      (3)   ELECTRICALLY MOTORIZED BOARDS. The same meaning as in California
Vehicle Code § 313.5.
      (4)   LOW SPEED VEHICLE. The same meaning as in California Vehicle Code §
385.5.5.
      (5)   Motorized scooter has the same meaning as in California Vehicle
Code § 407.5.
   OPERATOR. A person who owns, operates, and/or controls an “electric mobility
(micromobility) device.”
   PUBLIC AREA. Any outdoor area that is open to the members of the public for
public use.
   VEHICLE. The same meaning as in California Vehicle Code § 670, as it may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
§ 10.30.030 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC MOBILITY (MICROMOBILITY) DEVICES.
   (A)   Prohibition of electric mobility (micromobility) devices where posted.
No person shall operate or ride on an electric mobility (micromobility) device
in public areas where bicycles are prohibited.
   (B)   Electric bicycle class and age restrictions. Riders must be 16 years
or older to ride a Class 2 electric bicycle or Class 3 electric bicycle.
   (C)   Helmet requirements.
      (1)   All riders under the age of 18 must wear a properly fitted and
fastened bicycle helmet that complies with California Vehicle Code § 21212(a).
      (2)   All riders of any Class 2 or Class 3 electric bicycle must wear a
properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet that complies with California
Vehicle Code § 21212(a).
   (D)   Electric mobility (micromobility) devices on sidewalks and public
facilities. No person shall operate or ride an electric mobility
(micromobility) device upon any sidewalk, in any public drainage facility,
culvert, ditch, channel, or any other public athletic field, athletic/sports
court, or gymnasium in the town, except for persons with mobility disabilities
utilizing a wheelchair or other power-driven mobility device in accordance with
the Americans with Disabilities Act (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.) and § 36.311 of
Title 28 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   (E)   Duty to operate electric mobility (micromobility) devices with due
care and reduced speed.
      (1)   An operator of an electric mobility (micromobility) device shall
exercise all due care and
shall reduce the speed of the device, obey all traffic control devices, and
take all other actions relating to the operation of the device as necessary to
safeguard the safety of the operator, passengers, and any persons or other
vehicles or devices in the immediate area.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to transport a passenger on an electric
mobility (micromobility) device designed for a single person, or cling to or
attach oneself to an electric mobility (micromobility) device with an operator
or rider on board, to any moving vehicle or motorized or non-motorized wheeled
device.
      (3)   It is recommended that those under the age of 16 and in primary
control of any electric mobility (micromobility) device do not ride “double” or
“tandem,” regardless of the device's capacity or ability to do so.
      (4)   Operators must obey all applicable California Vehicle Code
requirements.
      (5)   Operators shall allow the inspection of electric mobility
(micromobility) devices upon lawful contact with police officers to determine
if the rider is legally allowed to operate said electric mobility
(micromobility) device.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
§ 10.30.040 SALES/RENTAL ADDENDUM.
   Businesses within the town that sell, rent, or service electric mobility
(micromobility) devices shall provide safety information and information
educating users on the legal use of such devices within the State of California
and the town. This information shall be provided at the time of sale, time of
rental, or upon request of an individual.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
§ 10.030.050 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   In lieu of a fine or administrative citation as authorized by this
code, and in lieu of filing charges in any court having jurisdiction over a
violation, the Police Chief or designee may allow a violator of this chapter
and parents of the violator, if violator is a minor, to complete a police
department diversion safety program, at their expense, as assigned by the
police department designee.
   (B)   This chapter does not prohibit any officer from issuing a citation to
the courts for any offense based on the officer's discretion. In the event an
observed violation is not already codified in the California Vehicle Code and
falls under the scope of this chapter, an administrative citation may be issued
pursuant to § 8.02.010 of this code. The amount of any fines levied for
violations of this chapter shall comply with § 8.03.030 of this code.
   (C)   In the event the operator of the electric mobility (micromobility)
device is a juvenile, officers will make every effort to contact the parent(s)
or responsible guardian(s) of the said operator and advise them of the nature
of the violation. This shall occur at the time of the stop or as soon as
practical.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
§ 10.30.060 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Public agency personnel. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter or any other section of this code, town, and public agency personnel
may operate electric mobility (micromobility) devices or other vehicles at any
place in the town to perform their duties.
   (B)   Disability. This chapter does not apply to or otherwise restrict
persons with mobility disabilities utilizing a wheelchair or other power-driven
mobility device in accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (42
U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.) and § 36.311 of Title 28 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
§ 10.30.070 MARIN ELECTRIC BICYCLE SAFETY PROGRAM.
   (A)   California Vehicle Code § 21214.5 authorizes local governments in
Marin County to adopt ordinances prohibiting persons under 16 years of age from
operating Class 2 electric bicycles and requiring all persons operating Class 2
electric bicycles to wear a bicycle helmet that complies, provided the local
government administers a public information campaign regarding the ordinance at
least 30 days before enactment. The town wishes to participate in the Marin
Electric Bicycle Safety Program in order to promote the safe and efficient use
of sidewalks, bicycle paths, pathways, trails, bicycle lanes, and other
pedestrian and bicycle facilities in the town.
   (B)   Enforcement. A violation of the age and helmet requirements related to
Class 2 electric bicycles described in this chapter and adopted pursuant to the
Marin Electric Bicycle Safety Program shall be deemed an infraction and may be
punished as follows:
      (1)   For the first 60 days after adoption of this chapter, a violation
shall be punishable by a warning notice.
      (2)   After the first 60 days following adoption of this chapter, a
violation shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $25. A fee shall not be
imposed upon a citation of this infraction if the parent or legal guardian of
the minor person who violated the prohibition delivers proof to the issuing
agency within 120 days after the citation was issued that the person has
completed an electric bicycle safety and training course pursuant to California
Streets and Highways Code § 894, or an electrical bicycle safety course offered
by any local jurisdiction, if one is available.
      (3)   After the first 60 days following adoption of this chapter, a
violation shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $25. A fee shall not be
imposed upon a citation of this infraction if the person who violated the
requirement, or, if that person is an un- emancipated minor, their parent or
guardian, delivers proof to the issuing agency within 120 days after the
citation was issued that the person has a helmet meeting the requirements
specified in California Vehicle Code § 21212(a) and the person has completed a
safety course established pursuant to California Streets and Highways Code §
894, or an electrical bicycle safety course offered by any local jurisdiction,
if one is available.
      (4)   No record of any violation of the regulations specified in this
chapter shall be transmitted to any Superior Court of the State of California.
   (C)   Expiration. This section shall remain in effect until January 1, 2029,
and as of that date is repealed.
(Ord. 898, passed 6-4-2025)
CHAPTER 10.32: TRIP REDUCTION
Section
   
10.32.010   Short title
   
10.32.020   Authority
   
10.32.030   Marin County Congestion Management Agency (CMA)
   
10.32.040   Definitions
   
10.32.050   Trip reduction requirements
   
10.32.060   Non-duplication
§ 10.32.010 SHORT TITLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Town
of Fairfax Trip Reduction Ordinance (TRO).”
(Prior Code, § 10.40.010) (Ord. 619, passed - -1993)
§ 10.32.020 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is authorized under Proposition 111 Legislation, Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65089.3(2) and Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 2105.
(Prior Code, § 10.40.020) (Ord. 619, passed - -1993)
§ 10.32.030 MARIN COUNTY CONGESTION MANAGEMENT AGENCY (CMA).
   This chapter incorporates the Marin County CMA minimum trip reduction and
travel demand requirements.
(Prior Code, § 10.40.030) (Ord. 619, passed - -1993)
§ 10.32.040 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AVERAGE VEHICLE RIDERSHIP or AVR. The number of employees who start work
at a work site during the peak period divided by the number of vehicles those
employees use to arrive at the work site, averaged over the survey week.
      CARPOOL. A vehicle occupied by two to six people traveling together
between their residence and their work site or destination for the majority of
the total trip distance. Employees who work for different employers, as well as
non-employed people, are included within this definition as long as they are in
the vehicle for the majority of the total trip distance.
      COMMUTE TRIP. The trip made by an employee from home to the work site.
The COMMUTE TRIP may include stops between home and the work site.
      COMPRESSED WORK WEEK. A regular full-time work schedule which eliminates
at least one round-trip commute trip (both home-to-work and work-to-home) at
least once every two weeks. Examples include, but are not limited to working
three 12-hour days or four ten-hour days within a one-week period; or eight
nine-hour days and one eight-hour day within a two-week period.
      DISABLED EMPLOYEE. An employee with a physical impairment which prevents
the employee from traveling to the work site by means other than a vehicle and
the employee has been issued a disabled person placard or plate from the
Department of Motor Vehicles.
      EMPLOYEE. Any person conducting a work activity for an employer 20 or
more hours per week on a regular full-time, temporary or part-time basis. The
term includes independent contractors. The term excludes field construction
workers, field personnel, seasonal/temporary employees and volunteers.
      EMPLOYEE TRANSPORTATION COORDINATOR or ETC. An employee, other individual
or entity appointed by an employer to market, administer and monitor the
employer trip reduction program or employer trip reduction plan on a full- or
part-time basis.
      EMPLOYEE TRANSPORTATION SURVEY. A questionnaire distributed by employers
to employees designed to provide sufficient information to calculate AVR or VER
for the work site.
      EMPLOYER. Any person(s), trust, firm, business, joint stock company,
corporation, partnership, association, non-profit agency or corporation,
educational institution, school district, hospital or other health care
facility, or federal, state, city or county government department, agency or
district or any other special purpose public agency or district. A city, county
or city and county is a single employer for purposes of this rule, not
individual departments or agencies of the city, county or city and county.
Individual departments or agencies of the State of California and the federal
government are separate employers for the purpose of this rule. The term
includes for-profit, not-for-profit and non-profit enterprises. Several
subsidiaries or units that occupy the same work site and report to one common
governing board or governing entity or that function as one corporate unit are
considered to be one employer. The term shall not include employers with no
permanent work site within the town.
      EMPLOYER PROGRAM MANAGER. An employee with policy and budget authority
who is responsible for the implementation of the employer trip reduction
program or employer trip reduction plan and for fulfilling the requirements of
this rule.
      EMPLOYER TRIP REDUCTION PROGRAM. A group of measures developed and
implemented by an employer that are designed to provide transportation
information, assistance and incentives to employees. The purpose of such
measures is to reduce the number of motor vehicles driven to the work site by
increasing AVR or decreasing VER. An EMPLOYER TRIP REDUCTION PROGRAM may
include, but is not limited to any or all of the following services, incentives
and measures.
         (a)   Ridesharing.
            1.   Carpool/vanpool matching;
            2.   Preferential parking for carpools and vanpools;
            3.   Carpool/vanpool financial subsidies or rewards;
            4.   Employer-provided vehicles for carpools and/or vanpools;
            5.   Employer-sponsored vanpools;
            6.   Rideshare marketing campaigns; and
            7.   Subsidy of vanpool liability insurance.
         (b)   Transit.
            1.   Work site transit ticket sales;
            2.   Transit ticket subsidies, e.g., Commuter check (TM);
            3.   Transit route maps and schedules on-site; and
            4.   Shuttle to transit line (employer-sponsored or subsidized).
         (c)   Trip elimination.
            1.   Compressed work weeks;
            2.   Work-at-home programs; and
            3.   Telecommuting.
         (d)   Parking management.
            1.   Charge for employee parking;
            2.   Elimination of any employer parking financial subsidy;
            3.   Transition from employer parking financial subsidy to general
transportation monetary allowance for all employees; and
            4.   Free or reduced parking rates for carpools and vanpools only.
         (e)   Bicycle and pedestrian.
            1.   Bicycling financial subsidies or rewards;
            2.   Financial subsidy to employees for the purchase of bicycles
for commute trip use;
            3.   Bicycle lockers or other secure, weather-protected bicycle
parking facilities;
            4.   Bicycle access to building interior;
            5.   Bicycle and/or walking route information; and
            6.   On-site bicycle registration.
         (f)   On-site facilities/services.
            1.   Employee shower facilities and clothes lockers;
            2.   Site modifications that would encourage walking, transit,
carpool, vanpool and bicycle use;
            3.   On-site services to reduce mid-day vehicle trips, e.g.,
cafeteria, ATMs, apparel cleaning and the like; and
            4.   On-site transportation fair to promote commute alternations.
         (g)   Other.
            1.   Membership in a transportation management association that
provides services and incentives;
            2.   Establishment of employee committee to help design, develop
and monitor the trip reduction program;
            3.   Guaranteed ride home program;
            4.   Financial subsidies or rewards for walking and other non-
motorized transportation modes;
            5.   Shuttles between multiple work sites;
            6.   Providing child day care on/near work site; and
            7.   Enhanced trip reduction efforts on forecast criteria pollutant
exceedance days, e.g., the district's spare the air program.
      FIELD CONSTRUCTION WORKER. An employee who reports for work to a
temporary field construction site.
      FIELD PERSONNEL. Employees who spend 20 percent or less of their worktime
at the work site and who do not report to the work site during the peak period
for pick-up and dispatch of an employer-provided vehicle.
      INDEPENDENT CONTRACTOR. An individual who enters into a direct written
contract or agreement with an employer to perform certain services. The period
of the contract or agreement is at least 90 days or is open-ended.
      LOCAL JURISDICTION. A city, county or public agency, including a public
agency formed through a joint powers agreement, with authority to adopt,
implement and enforce an employer trip reduction ordinance.
      PEAK PERIOD. The time from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m., Monday through Friday
inclusive.
      SEASONAL/TEMPORARY EMPLOYEE. An employee who works for the employer for
less than 90 consecutive days (three months) within a calendar year.
      SINGLE-OCCUPANT VEHICLE. A vehicle occupied by one employee.
      SURVEY WEEK. A regular five-day Monday through Friday (inclusive) work
week. The survey week for work sites with Saturday and Sunday work schedules
will include only those work days Monday through Friday. The SURVEY WEEK cannot
contain a federal, state or local holiday, regardless of whether the holiday is
observed by the employer. A SURVEY WEEK that meets the above criteria is to be
selected by the employer during January through May, or September through
November. The SURVEY WEEK cannot be rideshare week or contain any other
rideshare or transit promotional event, e.g., “Beat the Back-Up.”
      TELECOMMUTING. A system of working at home or at an off-site, non-home
telecommute facility for the full work day on a regular basis of at least one
day per week.
      TRANSPORTATION MANAGEMENT ASSOCIATION.  An organization through which
developers, property managers, employers and/or local jurisdictions cooperate
in designing, implementing and assessing employer trip reduction programs or
other transportation demand or system management programs and measures.
      VANPOOL. A vehicle occupied by seven or more employees who commute
together to work for the majority of their individual commute trip distance.
Employees who work for different employers are included within this definition
as long as they are in the vehicle for the majority of their individual trip
distance.
      VEHICLE.
         (a)   A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved
or drawn upon a highway, except the following:
            1.   A device moved exclusively by human power;
            2.   A device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; or
            3.   Buses used for public or private transit.
         (b)   Examples of vehicles include, but are not limited to, passenger
cars, motorcycles, vans and pickup trucks.
      VEHICLE EMPLOYEE RATIO or VER.  The number of vehicles used by employees
who start work at a work site during the peak period divided by the number of
those employees averaged over the survey week. VER is the reciprocal of AVR.
      VOLUNTEER. An individual who does not receive any wages, salary or other
form of financial reimbursement from the employer for services provided.
      WORK ACTIVITY. Any activity for which an employee receives remuneration
from an employer. Telecommuting or work at home is a WORK ACTIVITY.
      WORK SITE. Any property, real or personal, which is being operated,
utilized, maintained or owned by an employer as part of an identifiable
enterprise. All property on contiguous, adjacent or proximate sites separated
only by a private or public roadway or other private or public right-of-way,
served by a common circulation or access system, and not separated by an
impassable barrier to bicycle or pedestrian travel such as a freeway or flood
control channel is included as part of the WORK SITE. If two or more employers
each have 100 or more employees at a single work site, then that work site is
considered a separate work site for each employer.
   (B)   These definitions are similar to those in Regulation 13 Transportation
Control Measures, Rule 1 Trip Reduction Requirements for Large Employers
approved on December 16, 1992 by the Bay Area Air Quality Management District
(BAAQMD). Any subsequent changes in definitions within Regulation 13 that occur
in later revisions to the regulation will supersede the definitions contained
in this section.
(Prior Code, § 10.40.040) (Ord. 619, passed - -1993)
§ 10.32.050 TRIP REDUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   The following trip reduction requirements are established and are imposed
upon employers within the town.
   (A)   (1)   This chapter shall apply to all employers within the town with
100 or more employees at an individual work site.
      (2)   Where such an employer has multiple work sites, only those sites
which have 100 or more employees are subject to this chapter.
   (B)   Each employer subject to this chapter shall disseminate trip reduction
information regarding transportation alternatives including carpools, vanpools,
transit and bicycling and other methods of reducing trips such as
telecommuting, compressed work week and flexible work hours annually to each
employee and to all new employees as they are hired.
   (C)   (1)   Each employer subject to this chapter shall annually conduct an
employee trip survey using a uniform survey form prepared by the Marin County
CMA.
      (2)   A summary of the trip results shall be submitted annually to the
town.
      (3)   Any survey procedures prepared for submission to and accepted by
the BAAQMD shall serve as a valid survey for this chapter upon submission to
the town.
   (D)   Each employer subject to this chapter shall designate an employee
transportation coordinator to be responsible for administering the employer
requirements of the Trip Reduction Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10.40.050) (Ord. 619, passed - -1993)
§ 10.32.060 NON-DUPLICATION.
   If any other agency which has jurisdiction over trip reduction requirements
for employers within the town adopts trip reduction requirements that meet or
exceed the requirements of this chapter, then any employer within the town that
meets those requirements will be deemed to be meeting the requirements of this
chapter by annually forwarding to the town a copy of all trip reduction
information and documentation required by the other agency.
(Prior Code, § 10.40.060) (Ord. 619, passed - -1993)
TITLE 11: RESERVED
 
TITLE 12: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
   Chapter
      
12.04.   OFFICIAL STREET MAP
      
12.08.   CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS
      
12.12.   DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES
      
12.16.   PRIVATE ROADS
      
12.20.   EXCAVATIONS GENERALLY
      
12.24.   EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS AND PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
      
12.28.   OBSTRUCTIONS ON ROADS AND TRAILS
      
12.32.   TEMPORARY CARPORTS AND OTHER STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
12.36.   REGULATIONS FOR PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, PUBLIC TENNIS COURTS, AND CENTRAL
BALLFIELD
      
12.44.   STREET TREES AND SHRUBS
      
12.48.   HANDBILLS AND CIRCULARS
CHAPTER 12.04: OFFICIAL STREET MAP
Section
   
12.04.010   Adoption of map
   
12.04.020   Adoption of street names
§ 12.04.010 ADOPTION OF MAP.
   The certain map or plat entitled “Official Street Map of Fairfax, Marin
County, California, Showing the Official Names of the Streets as Recommended by
the City Planning Commission of the Town of Fairfax,” prepared by George W.
Manley and approved by the Town Council on December 22, 1932, and recorded in
the office of the County Recorder on January 5, 1933 in Volume 2, Official
Surveys, at page 75, to which map and record thereof reference is hereby made,
and a copy of which is on file in the office of the Town Clerk, is adopted as
the official street map of the town.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.010)
§ 12.04.020 ADOPTION OF STREET NAMES.
   The respective street names appearing on the public streets, lanes, alleys
and ways shown upon the street map adopted by §
12.04.010 are each adopted and fixed as the official names of the streets
respectively.
(Prior Code, § 12.04.020)
CHAPTER 12.08: CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS
Section
   
12.08.010   Definition
   
12.08.020   Permit required
   
12.08.030   Specifications; generally
   
12.08.040   Concrete required
   
12.08.050   Business district; full sidewalk width to be paved
   
12.08.060   Minimum width; conformance to existing sidewalks
   
12.08.070   Owner may pave curbline
   
12.08.080   Corners and intersections
§ 12.08.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any block in any street in the town where a majority of
the front footage of the property facing upon the side of the street upon which
a sidewalk or portion thereof is to be constructed is used for business
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.010)
§ 12.08.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No sidewalk shall be constructed, nor the construction thereof be commenced,
unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the Superintendent of Streets.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.020)
§ 12.08.030 SPECIFICATIONS; GENERALLY.
   All sidewalks shall be constructed under the supervision of the
Superintendent of Streets and in accordance with specifications prescribed
therefor by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.030)
§ 12.08.040 CONCRETE REQUIRED.
   All sidewalks constructed in the town after the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter shall be constructed of concrete in the
manner and in accordance with the requirements set out in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.040)
§ 12.08.050 BUSINESS DISTRICT; FULL SIDEWALK WIDTH TO BE PAVED.
   All sidewalks constructed in any business district shall be paved to the
full width of the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.050)
§ 12.08.060 MINIMUM WIDTH; CONFORMANCE TO EXISTING SIDEWALKS.
   All sidewalks constructed in the town shall have a minimum width of three
feet and shall conform in width and location to contiguous sidewalks previously
constructed.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.060)
§ 12.08.070 OWNER MAY PAVE CURBLINE.
   The owner of any property, constructing sidewalks thereon, may, at his or
her option, make the sidewalks of a width which will reach from the property
line of the owner to the curbline, but not less than a minimum of three feet in
width.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.070)
§ 12.08.080 CORNERS AND INTERSECTIONS.
   At all corners and intersections of streets, the width of the paving shall
conform to the width of the paving upon the sidewalks so intersecting.
(Prior Code, § 12.08.080)
CHAPTER 12.12: DRIVEWAY ENTRANCES
Section
   
12.12.010   Findings
   
12.12.020   Construction permit required
   
12.12.030   Requirements; residential premises
   
12.12.040   Requirements; industrial or commercial premises
   
12.12.050   Additional entrances or approaches; residential premises
   
12.12.060   Additional entrances or approaches; industrial or commercial
premises
   
12.12.070   Interference with sidewalk
   
12.12.080   Conformance with chapter required; stop work order
   
12.12.090   Variances
§ 12.12.010 FINDINGS.
   It is ordained, found and determined that public interest, health, safety,
convenience and necessity and the normal and ordinary use of the streets and
sidewalks in the town require that the location and width of driveway entrances
or approaches in the town be regulated and limited.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.010)
§ 12.12.020 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to cut or remove the curb on any public
street, to erect, construct or maintain any driveway entrance or approach
leading from the street into any premises, structure or building frontage
thereon or for any other purpose or to erect, construct or maintain any such
driveway entrance or approach where no established curb exists without first
having secured a written permit so to do from the Superintendent of Streets of
the town, and then only upon the following terms, conditions and regulations as
to permitted widths and locations of the driveway entrances or approaches,
according to the use to be made of the premises, structure or building.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.020)
§ 12.12.030 REQUIREMENTS; RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
   Any driveway entrance or approach leading from the street into any premises,
structure or building to be used exclusively for residential purposes shall not
be of greater width than 20 feet, measured over the sidewalk area, nor shall
any such driveway entrance or approach be permitted within 30 feet of the
corner of any intersecting street.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.030)
§ 12.12.040 REQUIREMENTS; INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL PREMISES.
   Any driveway entrance or approach leading from the street into any premises,
structure or building to be used for manufacturing, industrial or commercial
purposes shall not be of greater width than 40 feet, nor shall any such
driveway entrance or approach be permitted within 30 feet of the corner of any
intersecting street.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.040)
§ 12.12.050 ADDITIONAL ENTRANCES OR APPROACHES; RESIDENTIAL PREMISES.
    No additional driveway entrances or approaches shall be erected,
constructed or maintained into or from the same premises, structure or building
used for residential purposes in the town; except that if any such premises,
structure or building is situated on a corner of intersecting streets, then one
additional driveway or approach may be erected, constructed or maintained into
or from the premises, structure or building provided each of the driveways or
approaches shall be from separate street frontages; and further excepting that
if any such premises, structure or building shall be maintained for multiple
housing, then one additional driveway or approach may be erected, constructed
or maintained into or from the premises, structure or building; provided that,
the two driveways or approaches on one street frontage shall be separated by a
sidewalk area or island not less than 40 feet in width from any other driveway
entrance or approach, measured at the narrowest point.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.050)
§ 12.12.060 ADDITIONAL ENTRANCES OR APPROACHES; INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL
PREMISES.
   No additional driveway entrances or approaches shall be erected, constructed
or maintained into the same premises, structure or building used for
manufacturing, industrial or commercial purposes at a distance closer than 22
feet to any existing driveway entrance or approach; and in all cases where two
or more driveway entrances or approaches are erected, constructed or
maintained, they shall be separated by a sidewalk area or island not less than
22 feet in width at the narrowest point to any existing driveway entrance or
approach.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.060)
§ 12.12.070 INTERFERENCE WITH SIDEWALK.
   Any driveway entrance or approach constructed in the town shall be so
erected, constructed or maintained as to not impair the sidewalk area for
pedestrian travel, and all such driveway entrances or approaches across the
sidewalk area of any public street shall be erected or constructed pursuant to
any and all ordinances of the town regulating the location, size, grade and the
type of materials to be used in the paving of the sidewalk area and the grade
and slope of any such driveway entrances or approaches.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.070)
§ 12.12.080 CONFORMANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED; STOP WORK ORDER.
   The Building Inspector of the town shall refuse to grant a building permit
to any person insofar as this chapter is concerned unless and until any and all
driveways and sidewalks conform to this chapter. The Building Inspector is
authorized, empowered and directed to stop work on any construction within the
commercial or industrial districts of the town if the driveways and sidewalks
in and about the driveways do not conform to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.080)
§ 12.12.090 VARIANCES.
   The Planning Commission is authorized and empowered to grant adjustments and
variances from the provisions of this chapter, provided it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission, and the Planning Commission finds that
all of the following are shown to exist in the particular case:
   (A)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions
applying to the land, building or use referred to in the application, which
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to land, buildings or uses
in the same district;
   (B)   The granting of the application is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of substantial property rights of the petitioner; and
   (C)   The granting of the application will not, under the circumstances of
the particular case, materially affect adversely the health or safety of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the
applicant, and will not under the circumstances of the particular case be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood.
(Prior Code, § 12.12.090) (Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 12.16: PRIVATE ROADS
Section
   
12.16.010   Purpose; applicability
   
12.16.020   Definitions
   
12.16.030   Establishment procedure
   
12.16.040   Standards
   
12.16.050   Signposting
   
12.16.060   Plat approval by Planning Commission
   
12.16.070   Appeals
   
12.16.080   Maintenance
   
12.16.090   Fees
§ 12.16.010 PURPOSE; APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe rules and regulations
governing the filing and approval of private road maps, and to provide for
approval of private road and street easements as private roads to and within
certain lots.
   (B)   When private streets have been laid out and designated as such in a
recorded subdivision map, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.010)
§ 12.16.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE ROAD or PRIVATE STREET EASEMENT. A parcel of land not dedicated as a
public street, over which a private easement for road purposes is proposed to
be, or has been, granted to the owners of the property contiguous, adjacent or
terminal thereto, which intersects or connects with a public street or an
approved private road. The instrument creating such easement shall be, or shall
have been, duly recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.020)
§ 12.16.030 ESTABLISHMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No person shall establish a private street easement or construct a
private road to any landlocked lot or other inaccessible parcel of land or
portion thereof as described in this chapter unless a private street or road
map has been filed and approved by the Planning Commission, and duly recorded.
   (B)   Every person who applies for approval of a private road or private
street easement shall file with the Planning Commission at least ten copies of
a plat of survey or map of the proposed private street. The plat of survey or
map shall be prepared, with respect to all engineering data required herein, by
or under the direction of a licensed land surveyor or a registered civil
engineer, with the following information:
      (1)   Survey and legal description of proposed private road or easement;
      (2)   Names and addresses of record owners and of person or persons
proposing the private road or easement;
      (3)   The location, names, existing widths and existing grades of all
adjoining and contiguous streets and easements, public and private;
      (4)   Radii of all curves; and the width and grades of the proposed
private road or street easement;
      (5)   The location, width and direction of flow of all watercourses; and
the location and dimensions of all drainage easements and utilities;
      (6)   The location of all trees that will affect the proposed private
road or street easement, or be affected by same;
      (7)   Date, north point and scale;
      (8)   Drawings showing grading, erosion control and landscaping plans, if
any; and
      (9)   Name and address of engineer or surveyor.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall not act on any private road or street
map until it receives a report from the Director of Public Works. His or her
report shall be submitted to the Planning Commission within ten days of the
receipt of the road application.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.030)
§ 12.16.040 STANDARDS.
   (A)   All private roads or street easements shall be designed to provide a
minimum usable width of 20 feet.
   (B)   The grade of any road or street of more than local traffic needs shall
not exceed 10%. No local street grade shall exceed 20%.
   (C)   Private roads or streets shall not impose undue hardship upon property
adjoining or upon the general welfare of the town.
   (D)   Private road or street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as practicable.
   (E)   Adequate provisions for turning shall be made at the end of each
private road or street.
   (F)   All private roads and streets shall have adequate drainage facilities
installed in conformity with the pertinent provisions of the Subdivision
Ordinance, and may require a performance bond. The Planning Commission may
require that street improvements include surface improvements, street lights,
fire hydrants and water mains, catch basins, pipe culverts, sanitary sewers and
storm drains. Drainage easements may be required.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.040)
§ 12.16.050 SIGNPOSTING.
   At or near the entrance of each intersection of a private road or street
with another public street or with another private street, there shall be
erected and maintained by the applicant a signpost to which is attached a sign
having an area of at least 15 inches by 21 inches, upon which is printed and
clearly legible in at least two-inch letters the name of the private road or
street, and the words “PRIVATE STREET.”
(Prior Code, § 12.16.050)
§ 12.16.060 PLAT APPROVAL BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   (1)   Within 40 days after the plat of survey is submitted, the
Planning Commission shall review the plat and shall approve, conditionally
approve or disapprove the plat and shall notify the applicant concerning its
action.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may grant conditional exceptions to the
standards set forth in this chapter where special circumstances or conditions
warrant other than strict adherence to the standards set forth heretobefore.
   (B)   The time limits prescribed herein may be extended by the Planning
Commission, with the consent of the applicant.
   (C)   Approval shall become void unless all conditions of approval are
completed or fulfilled within one year from date of approval, except that
grading and improvement conditions shall be considered as fulfilled if the
required work is begun during the time limit and diligently carried on to
completion.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.060)
§ 12.16.070 APPEALS.
   Appeals may be made to the Town Council from any decisions, determination or
requirement of the Planning Commission or Director of Public Works by filing a
notice thereof with the Town Clerk within ten days after the decision,
determination or requirement is made. The notice shall set forth in detail the
action and the ground by and upon which the applicant deems himself or herself
aggrieved. In the event that an appeal has not been filed with the Town Council
within ten days, the action of the Planning Commission or Director of Public
Works will be deemed final and binding, and no further application with
reference to the same proposal may be filed within one year from the expiration
of the ten-day period.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.070)
§ 12.16.080 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   (1)   All private roads or streets shall be maintained by the owners
thereof in such manner that adequate, safe and convenient access by vehicular
traffic is provided at all times for all vehicles, including fire, police,
health and sanitation and public utilities vehicles, and so that the public
vehicles can service all properties to which access over the private road is to
be gained.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         OWNERS. The owner or owners of the fee simple title to the easement
and also all those who have easement to pass over the private road by virtue of
ownership of property adjacent or contiguous to the easement.
   (B)   If the private roads or streets are not maintained as required by
division (A) above, then the Director of Public Works may, after ten days
written notice to those required to maintain the private roads or streets,
proceed to cause the work and improvement to be done upon the private roads or
streets as needed to meet the requirements and the cost thereof shall be a lien
upon the property of the owners of the easement or private road; and the costs
may be levied and assessed against the real property as a part of the real
property tax for the next ensuing taxable year.
   (C)   All owners of the proposed private road or street, and all property
owners adjacent or contiguous thereto, shall be notified that the provisions of
this section shall apply as a condition of approval of a private road or street
easement map.
   (D)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of approval that
the owners and any others having use of or benefit from the private road,
including adjacent and contiguous property owners, enter into a private road
maintenance agreement with the town.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.080)
§ 12.16.090 FEES.
   (A)   Before accepting for filing any private road or street map, the Town
Clerk shall charge and collect appropriate fees.
   (B)   For each and every private road map submitted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, a fee shall be paid to the Town Clerk in accordance
with the schedule of fees fixed and adopted by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 12.16.090) (Ord. 443, passed - -1978)
CHAPTER 12.20: EXCAVATIONS GENERALLY
Section
   
12.20.010   Definitions
   
12.20.020   Permit required to excavate or fill; exceptions
   
12.20.030   Permit application; contents; filing
   
12.20.040   Permit application; filing fee
   
12.20.050   Application; investigation; permit issuance or denial
   
12.20.060   Investigation; criteria
   
12.20.070   Investigation; use of services of Town Engineer; additional fees
   
12.20.080   Permit to move over 100 cubic yards; required findings for approval
   
12.20.090   Permit; notice of issuance or denial; appeal
   
12.20.100   Appeal; hearing
   
12.20.110   Bond and certificate of insurance
   
12.20.120   Conditions and requirements; generally
   
12.20.130   Slope of sides of excavation or fill
   
12.20.140   Permit suspension or revocation
   
12.20.150   Permit expiration; issuance of supplemental permits
   
12.20.160   Compliance with other code provisions
   
12.20.170   Enforcement; appointment of deputies
§ 12.20.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCAVATION. The cutting, grading, digging or removal of earth or natural
materials in a manner as to change natural or existing terrain.
   FILL. The placing, carrying or depositing of earth or natural materials in a
manner as to change the natural or existing terrain.
   OWNER. Any person who owns the fee simple title, equitable interest or
easement rights to real property.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.010)
§ 12.20.020 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCAVATE OR FILL; EXCEPTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person to make or cause or permit to be made any
excavation or fill in the town, except in accordance with a permit issued as
specified in this chapter; provided that, no permit shall be required to fill
or excavate:
   (A)   By any public utility;
   (B)   Where less than two cubic yards of earth or material are moved; and
   (C)   Where grading for a building site is being made for the purpose of
immediate construction of a building or improvements thereon, for which a
building permit has been issued, if, in the opinion of the Building Inspector,
evidenced by a statement on the aforementioned building permit, no hazard to
property rights of the town or of adjoining land owners will be encountered or
created by the work of excavation.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.020)
§ 12.20.030 PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS; FILING.
   (A)   An application for a permit to excavate or fill must be signed by the
owner of the land upon which the fill or excavation is to be made or by his or
her authorized agent, and filed in duplicate with the Town Clerk, who shall
forthwith deliver one copy to the Superintendent of Streets for action by him
or her or his or her deputy.
   (B)   The application, in addition to any information required by the
Superintendent of Streets, shall set forth the following:
      (1)   The name, identity and address of the owner;
      (2)   The name, identity and address of the contractor or other person
who is to perform the work of excavation or fill;
      (3)   A description and the location of the property involved;
      (4)   A statement of the exact nature of the proposed excavation or fill,
indicating the slope of the sides and the level of the finished surface, the
type of earth or material to be moved, the method, manner and equipment to be
used in the accomplishment of the work and the disposition of material of the
site;
      (5)   A proposed time of commencement of work after issuance of the
permit, and estimated date of completion;
      (6)   An agreement on the part of the applicant, to be effective for a
period of two years from and after the date of completion of the excavation or
fill, to indemnify the town and hold the town harmless against all damages
which may arise out of or by virtue of any such excavation or fill, including
any damage to public streets or equipment, and containing a covenant that the
applicant will forthwith remove from and clean any public streets of any dirt,
rock, debris or other material from any excavation or fill that may be carried
down by rainwater or other means to and upon public streets. In the event of
the sale of the property involved, during the period of the aforementioned
contract, the applicant shall require the new owner to subscribe to all
obligations under the contract;
      (7)   A description of all easement rights in the land to be excavated or
filled, with names and addresses of each owner of any rights in and to the
land, and proof of service upon each of the owners of notice of pendency of
application for excavation or fill;
      (8)   An agreement to indemnify and hold harmless every owner of any
interest in land to be excavated or filled against any loss or damage by reason
of the excavation or fill, by completion bond or other security or agreement
satisfactory to the owners of other interests or to the Superintendent of
Streets; and (Upon demand of the owner of any interest in property affected or
upon the demand of the Superintendent of Streets, a completion bond, in an
amount to be fixed by the Superintendent of Streets, shall be made a part of
the application.)
      (9)   An agreement that if the excavation or fill is not completed in
accordance with plans and specifications therefor and the permit issued, then
the work may be completed by the Superintendent of Streets and the cost thereof
to be paid by owner applicant and until paid the costs shall constitute a lien
upon the real property of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.030)
§ 12.20.040 PERMIT APPLICATION; FILING FEE.
   At the time of filing the application for a permit to excavate or fill, the
applicant shall pay a filing fee in accordance with the schedule of fees fixed
and adopted from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.040) (Ord. 443, passed - -1978)
§ 12.20.050 APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION; PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   Within ten days after the filing of the application for a permit to excavate
or fill, the Superintendent of Streets shall cause an investigation to be made,
and shall either issue the permit upon the conditions expressed in the permit
as he or she deems necessary to comply with all the provisions of this chapter,
or deny the application.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.050)
§ 12.20.060 INVESTIGATION; CRITERIA.
   (A)   Before final action is taken by the Superintendent of Streets on any
application for a permit to excavate or fill, he or she shall consider all
pertinent matters concerning the proposed excavation or fill and its possible
effect upon the public health, safety and general welfare, and shall exercise a
reasonable and sound discretion in the premises.
   (B)   The application shall be denied if it appears to the Superintendent of
Streets from his or her investigation that the excavation or fill would:
      (1)   Unlawfully remove the lateral or subjacent support of the adjacent
land;
      (2)   Result in a dangerous topographic condition;
      (3)   Cause seepage or slides;
      (4)   Improperly divert the flow of drainage waters;
      (5)   Create a nuisance; or
      (6)   Otherwise in any manner endanger the health, safety or property of
any other person, despite all precautions which the applicant might be ready,
willing and able to take.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.060)
§ 12.20.070 INVESTIGATION; USE OF SERVICES OF TOWN ENGINEER; ADDITIONAL FEES.
   (A)   Whenever an application for a permit to excavate or fill appears to
the Superintendent of Streets to require the services of the Town Engineer for
technical help and advice, the Superintendent of Streets may consult with the
Town Engineer and require the Town Engineer to make inspections of the work in
progress.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of the permit, the Superintendent of Streets
shall notify the applicant of the necessity for engineering inspection, and the
applicant shall pay, prior to starting work, reasonable engineering fees in
accordance with the schedule therefor fixed and adopted from time to time by
resolution of the Town Council, and to be determined in advance of the issuance
of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.070) (Ord. 443, passed - -1978)
§ 12.20.080 PERMIT TO MOVE OVER 100 CUBIC YARDS; REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR
APPROVAL.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter, no permit to
excavate or fill shall be granted, where the application shows the excavation
or fill to involve the movement of over 100 cubic yards of material, unless and
until approval of the application is given by action of the Planning Commission
of the town.
   (B)   The application, upon receipt, shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for investigation and action, and before action of approval may be
given, the Planning Commission must find:
      (1)   The health, welfare and safety of the public will not be adversely
affected;
      (2)   Adjacent properties are adequately protected by project
investigation and design from geologic hazards as a result of the work;
      (3)   Adjacent properties are adequately protected by project design from
drainage and erosion problems as a result of the work;
      (4)   The amount of excavation or fill proposed is not more than is
required to allow the property owner substantial use of his or her property;
      (5)   The visual and scenic enjoyment of the area by others will not be
adversely affected by the project more than is necessary;
      (6)   Natural landscaping will not be removed by the project more than is
necessary;
      (7)   The time of year during which construction will take place is such
that work will not result in excessive siltation from storm runoff nor
prolonged exposure of unstable excavated slopes.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.080)
§ 12.20.090 PERMIT; NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; APPEAL.
   The Superintendent of Streets shall forthwith notify the applicant of his or
her action on the application and, if the applicant is dissatisfied therewith,
he or she may appeal to the Town Council by filing a written notice of appeal
with the Clerk within 30 days after notice from the Superintendent of Streets,
and shall, at the same time, deliver to the Town Clerk a list of the names and
addresses of all owners of property within a 300-foot radius from the exterior
boundaries of the proposed excavation or fill.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.090)
§ 12.20.100 APPEAL; HEARING.
   The appeal from the ruling on the application by the Superintendent of
Streets shall be heard at the first succeeding regular meeting of the Town
Council held more than 20 days after filing of the appeal. The Town Clerk shall
mail notice of the hearing, at least ten days prior thereto, to all property
owners within the radius of 300 feet of proposed boundaries of the excavation
or fill. The hearing on the appeal may be continued from time to time. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the Town Council may deny the application or issue a
permit therefor under the terms and conditions as it deems necessary to conform
to the provisions of this chapter. The action of the Town Council shall be
final and conclusive and no similar application may be filed by the applicant
for the same property for a period of 12 months.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.100)
§ 12.20.110 BOND AND CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Streets may require, as a condition of the
granting of any permit under this chapter, that the applicant deposit with the
Town Clerk a completion and maintenance bond, in an amount to be fixed by the
Superintendent of Streets, not exceeding the sum of $50,000, inuring to the
benefit of the town and of the general public, guaranteeing that the applicant
will faithfully perform all of the conditions and requirements specified in the
permit, and will maintain the completed work in good condition for a period of
two years from date of completion.
   (B)   The bond shall be executed by sureties approved by the Town Clerk as
being sufficient in number and in financial responsibility. The Superintendent
of Streets may also require, as a condition to the granting of any such permit,
that the applicant deposit with the Town Clerk a certificate of a responsible
insurance company, showing that the applicant is insured in an amount not less
than a sum certain, to be fixed by the Superintendent of Streets, not to exceed
$100,000, against any loss or damage to persons or property arising directly or
indirectly from the operations of the applicant or any person acting in his or
her behalf in carrying on any operation connected directly or indirectly with
the making of the excavation or fill for which the permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.110)
§ 12.20.120 CONDITIONS AND REQUIREMENTS; GENERALLY.
   Any person to whom a permit to excavate is issued shall also comply with the
following requirements.
   (A)   The bottom of an excavation shall not be made lower than the level
specified in the permit to excavate.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Streets, any excavation
will create or aggravate a dangerous condition if left open, the excavation
shall be enclosed by a fence sufficiently high, tight and strong to eliminate
the dangerous condition.
   (C)   Any rock, earth or other material which may be dropped or deposited on
any public street or place from any vehicle transporting such materials from
any such excavation shall be immediately removed in a manner and to an extent
satisfactory to the Superintendent of Streets, at the expense of the person to
whom the permit to excavate was issued.
   (D)   The applicant shall agree to save, indemnify and hold harmless the
town and its agents against all liabilities, judgments, costs and expenses
which may in any wise accrue against the town in consequence of the granting of
the permit.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.120)
§ 12.20.130 SLOPE OF SIDES OF EXCAVATION OR FILL.
   (A)   In order to minimize the danger of slides onto or from adjacent lands,
the Superintendent of Streets may specify in the permit the permissible angle
of slope of the sides of the excavation or fill. No side of the excavation or
fill may be made steeper at any point than the angle so specified in the
permit, unless supported by a substantial, permanent retaining wall of
sufficient strength to permanently support the sides of the excavation or fill
and constructed in accordance with a permit to do so, as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)   The retaining wall shall be of concrete, brick, stone or other
material, not subject to rapid deterioration, and shall extend the full height
and length of each side of the excavation or fill which is at any point made
steeper in slope than the angle specified in the permit to excavate or fill.
   (C)   (1)   If the applicant desires to make any side of the excavation or
fill steeper than the angle specified in the permit, he or she shall so state
in a supplemental application, and shall file therewith, in duplicate, detailed
plans and specifications for the retaining wall.
      (2)   One copy of the plans and specifications shall be forthwith
delivered to the Building Inspector, who shall examine the same and shall
promptly report to the Superintendent of Streets whether the retaining wall, if
built according to the plans and specifications, will satisfy the requirements
of the Building Code of the town and the requirements of this section.
   (D)   Upon the approval of the plans and specifications by the Building
Inspector and the issuance of a building permit therefor, the Superintendent of
Streets shall include in the permit to excavate or fill, or in a supplemental
permit to excavate or fill, a provision allowing the sides of the excavation or
fill to be made steeper than the angle of slope specified therein, if supported
by a retaining wall constructed according to the plans and specifications.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.130)
§ 12.20.140 PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any permit granted under this chapter may be revoked or
suspended by the Superintendent of Streets, for any reason for which the
issuance of the permit might lawfully be denied, or for any failure to comply
with any of the terms of this chapter or of the permit.
      (2)   Revocation of the permit shall be made only upon a hearing granted
to the person to whom the permit was issued, held before the Superintendent of
Streets.
      (3)   Written notice, deposited in the United States mail at least five
days before the date set for hearing, addressed to the person at his or her
business or residence address as stated in his or her application for the
permit, shall be sufficient notice.
   (B)   In the event of the revocation or suspension, the applicant may appeal
to the Town Council in the manner prescribed in §
12.20.050.
   (C)   If, in the opinion of the Superintendent of Streets, the public
health, safety or welfare requires it, the Superintendent of Streets may
suspend any permit granted under this chapter, pending the hearing for the
revocation of the permit.
   (D)   The revocation or suspension shall be in addition to any other
penalties provided in this code.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.140)
§ 12.20.150 PERMIT EXPIRATION; ISSUANCE OF SUPPLEMENTAL PERMITS.
   (A)    In the event that any excavation or fill for which a permit has been
granted under this chapter is not commenced within six months from the date of
issuance of the permit, or in the event that work on the excavation or fill is,
at any time, abandoned for a period of six consecutive months, the permit shall
automatically terminate, without notice, and no further excavation or fill
shall be made; however, the conditions expressed in the permit shall remain
binding upon the person to whom the permit was issued, and all legal and
equitable remedies shall be available against him or her for any breach
thereof.
   (B)   (1)   When the amount of material excavated or filled equals the
number of cubic yards authorized by the permit, no further excavation or fill
may be made until a new or supplemental permit has been issued.
      (2)   An application for a supplemental permit to continue or enlarge the
excavation or fill may be filed, setting forth all the information required in
the original application.
      (3)   If the supplemental permit is issued, the applicant shall pay an
additional fee in accordance with the schedule of rates referred to in §
12.20.040.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.150)
§ 12.20.160 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter, or in any permit granted under this chapter or
Chapter 12.24, shall be deemed to authorize the doing or the commission of any
act contrary to any term or provision of any other provision of this code.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.160)
§ 12.20.170 ENFORCEMENT; APPOINTMENT OF DEPUTIES.
   The Superintendent of Streets may appoint the Building Inspector or other
competent persons to serve as his or her deputies or assistants to assist in
carrying out the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.20.170)
CHAPTER 12.24: EXCAVATIONS IN STREETS AND PUBLIC THOROUGHFARES
Section
   
12.24.010   Definition
   
12.24.020   Permit required
   
12.24.030   Permit application; contents; hold harmless agreement
   
12.24.040   Permit application; resurfacing deposit required
   
12.24.050   Permit issuance
   
12.24.060   Excavation, refilling and tamping
   
12.24.070   Resurfacing
   
12.24.080   Work by utilities
   
12.24.090   Required safety precautions
   
12.24.100   Permit for moratorium streets required
   
12.24.110   Permit requirements for moratorium streets
   
12.24.120   Variance to requirements
   
12.24.130   Penalties
   
12.24.140   Appeals
§ 12.24.010 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person by whom application is made for, or to whom shall be
issued, a permit under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.010)
§ 12.24.020 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to cut, open, excavate or tear up any portion
of any street or other
public thoroughfare within the town for the purpose of laying, replacing or
repairing any pipe, conduit or sewer therein, or for any other purpose
whatsoever, without first obtaining a written permit therefor from the
Superintendent of Streets.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.020)
§ 12.24.030 PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS; HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT.
   Any person desiring to cut, open, excavate or tear up any portion of any
street or other public thoroughfare within the town for the purpose of laying,
replacing or repairing any pipe, conduit or sewer therein or for any other
purpose whatsoever shall, before proceeding with the work, file with the
Superintendent of Streets a written application for a permit to proceed with
the work contemplated. The application shall set forth the work contemplated
with reasonable certainty, and shall contain a covenant and agreement on the
part of the applicant to hold the town harmless for any damages claimed for
injuries suffered by any person from the work or improvement.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.030)
§ 12.24.040 PERMIT APPLICATION; RESURFACING DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Streets, before issuing any such permit, shall
estimate the length of the proposed excavation or opening and shall require a
deposit from the applicant in the sum of at least $1 for each square foot of
the cut, opening or excavation.
   (B)   The deposit shall be held and applied by the Superintendent of Streets
to defray the costs of resurfacing the opening or excavation as provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.040)
§ 12.24.050 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   (A)   If it appears to the Town Administrator or his or her designee that
travel over the street described in the application will not be hindered or
delayed by the work therein described, beyond a reasonable time, he or she
shall, upon receipt of the deposit mentioned in §
12.24.040, issue a written permit to the applicant to do the work necessary to
perform in accordance with the application.
   (B)   Should the Town Administrator or his or her designee determine that
the proposed excavation could cause future ongoing maintenance costs and paving
surface problems which may exceed the amounts normally budgeted by the town for
street maintenance and resurfacing, then approval of both the Town
Administrator and Town Engineer shall be required for issuance of the permit.
   (C)   The permit may be made subject to reasonable conditions, including
repaving curb to curb where warranted.
   (D)   Prior to any street opening serving more than two residents or
businesses a ten-day notice of the proposed work shall be given by the
permittee to all affected by the work as prescribed by the Town Administrator
or his or her designee.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.050) (Ord. 656, passed - -1996)
§ 12.24.060 EXCAVATION, REFILLING AND TAMPING.
   (A)   The cutting, opening or excavation specified in the permit and the
laying, replacing and repairing of any pipe, conduit or sewer therein shall be
done by the applicant in accordance with the requirements set down by the
Superintendent of Streets, and the opening, cut or excavation shall be filled
in as soon as reasonably practicable by the applicant, up to the street surface
of any concrete, macadam or other surface of any such street.
   (B)    The backfilling shall be done by the applicant and shall be
accomplished by application of a pneumatic jack tamper or other method
acceptable to the Superintendent of Streets to thoroughly and completely tamp
the refilled dirt, gravel or other material.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.060)
§ 12.24.070 RESURFACING.
   (A)   When all of the backfilling has been accomplished and the fill tamped
and prepared for any concrete, macadam, gravel or other surface dressing, the
applicant shall thereupon immediately notify the Superintendent of Streets, in
writing, with the date and hour of notification written thereon.
   (B)   (1)   It is expressly made the duty of the Superintendent of Streets
to repave or resurface the street. The Superintendent of Streets shall pay the
cost of the paving and resurfacing out of the amount of the deposit received by
him or her for granting of the permit, making reasonable charge for all labor,
including that of the Superintendent of Streets, and for all materials used in
repaving or resurfacing.
      (2)   Should there be any amount on hand in possession of the
Superintendent after making all reasonable charges necessary for the work, then
the same shall be returned to the applicant.
      (3)   In the event that the cost of the repaving or resurfacing is in
excess of the amount of the deposit, the Superintendent of Streets shall notify
the applicant and the applicant shall pay the amount of the excess to the
Superintendent of Streets upon demand.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.070)
§ 12.24.080 WORK BY UTILITIES.
   No water district, sanitary district or other public utility corporation
shall be required to make deposit, as provided in this chapter, but shall
nevertheless be obliged to secure a permit from the Superintendent of Streets,
as required in this chapter. Any such water district, sanitary district or
public utility corporation shall also be obliged to resurface any opening or
excavation made by it in any street in the town, and to maintain the patched
surfaces or resurfacing over any excavation made by it for a period of one year
from the date of completion of the resurfacing operation.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.080)
§ 12.24.090 REQUIRED SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   Every applicant shall erect and maintain around any cut, opening,
excavation or torn-up portion of any street, for the entire period during the
course of work, a good and substantial barrier warning persons on foot or in
vehicles of the danger of travel thereover. Each end of any such cut, opening
or excavation shall be marked by a red flag during the daytime and shall be
marked by a red light at night from sundown to sunrise.
   (B)   Any person having occasion to deposit or maintain on any portion of
any street or sidewalk any building material, lumber, debris or other material
of any kind shall cause the same to be barricaded and marked.
(Prior Code, § 12.24.090)
§ 12.24.100 PERMIT FOR MORATORIUM STREETS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permission to excavate a moratorium street will not normally be
granted for five years after completion of the street renovation.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MORATORIUM STREET. A street that has been repaved with a minimum of one
inch of asphalt concrete or is listed as a “moratorium street” on the annually
updated “Town Road List.”
   (C)   Utilities shall determine alternate methods of making necessary
repairs to avoid excavating in newly renovated streets.
   (D)   Permits may be issued for exceptions to the above as follows:
      (1)   Emergency which endangers life or property;
       (2)   Interruption of utility service;
       (3)   Work that is mandated by city, county, municipality, state or
federal legislation;
       (4)   Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing
service exists; and
       (5)   Other situations deemed by the town’s Director of Public Works to
be in the best interest of the general public.
(Ord. 683, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 12.24.110 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS FOR MORATORIUM STREETS.
   (A)   Except in extreme emergency, encroachment permits for opening
excavation must be taken out in advance of excavation work. An extreme
emergency is considered to exist only when life or property is endangered or
when a utility service is interrupted during weekends, holidays or between 5:00
p.m. and 8:30 a.m. of normal working days. If an emergency cut is made,
application for a permit shall be made the next working day.
   (B)   An encroachment permit shall be secured by both the utility and by the
contractor if work is to be performed by an independent contractor.
   (C)   A plan showing approximate location of excavation will be acceptable
provided that an “as built” plan shall be submitted after the excavation is
made.
   (D)   Encroachment permits for street opening shall be valid for the time
specified on the permit or a maximum of six months. The estimated date of
commencement and completion of work shall be indicated on all permits.
Conflicts in the schedules of work under two or more permits shall be resolved
by the permittees involved. If unresolved, work under these permits will be
executed in order of permit application received by the Public Works
Department.
   (E)   No permit to excavate shall be valid unless the applicant has been
provided an inquiry identification number by a regional notification center
(USA).
   (F)   The appropriate permit fee, as determined by the Director of Public
Works or his or her designee, shall be sufficient to cover the actual cost
impacts.
   (G)   All work connected with any such permit, including restoration of town
property to its original condition, shall conform to the town’s encroachment
standards and conditions referenced in the encroachment permit.
(Ord. 683, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 12.24.120 VARIANCE TO REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Director of Public Works may grant a variance from the provisions
of this chapter when, because of special circumstances, he or she determines
that the application of any such provisions are unnecessary and inappropriate
or impose an undue hardship on the applicant. A variance shall be granted only
upon written application to the Public Works Department, setting forth the
circumstances justifying the same.
   (B)   The Director of Public Works shall not grant a variance authorizing
the encroachment upon a town street of any building other than a carport or
garage.
(Ord. 683, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 12.24.130 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation, or agent or employee thereof, who
does any act not in conformance with the requirements of §§
12.24.100 through
12.24.120 shall be guilty of an infraction.
   (B)   The person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of
this section is committed, continued or permitted by the person, firm or
corporation.
   (C)   For each offense, a fine not exceeding $100 will be imposed for the
first violation, by a fee not exceeding $200 for the second violation and by a
fine not exceeding $500 for each additional violation within one year.
(Ord. 683, passed 5-1-2001)
§ 12.24.140 APPEALS.
   Any decision made by the Director of Public Works under this chapter may be
appealed to the Town Council. Appeals shall be addressed to the Town Council,
in writing, and shall state the basis of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk not later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day
following the date of the action from which an appeal is taken. Appeals shall
be accompanied by the applicable filing fee as specified by resolution adopted
by the Town Council.
(Ord. 683, passed 5-1-2001)
CHAPTER 12.28: OBSTRUCTIONS ON ROADS AND TRAILS
Section
   
12.28.010   Definitions
   
12.28.020   Findings
   
12.28.030   General prohibition
   
12.28.040   Permit for operation of private motor vehicles
   
12.28.050   Permit denial; appeal
   
12.28.060   Violation; penalty
§ 12.28.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FIRE TRAIL. Any road, path, clearing, graded area or right-of-way
established or maintained on public or private property primarily for
firefighting or fire-protection purposes.
   HIKING TRAIL. Any road, path, clearing, graded area, track or right-of-way
established or maintained on public or private property primarily for hiking,
camping and public recreation purposes.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any wheeled conveyance of any type whatsoever which is motor-
powered, including, but not limited to motorcycles, motor bikes, automobiles
and trucks.
(Prior Code, § 12.28.010)
§ 12.28.020 FINDINGS.
   The Town Council does find and declare:
   (A)   Large sections of the town are heavily wooded with trees and
underbrush, which constitute fire hazards; and
   (B)   It is necessary for the protection of people and property of the town
that all streets, roads and easements be available and unobstructed for
vehicular traffic in case of necessity to travel to avoid or quench a fire.
(Prior Code, § 12.28.020)
§ 12.28.030 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any road by parking thereon
any motor vehicle, or other obstruction, so as to interfere with the free flow
of traffic. Any parking of a motor vehicle or other obstruction on the road
which leaves a traveled portion of less than 12 feet shall be deemed to be an
obstruction of the road.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ROAD. Any road defined in this chapter, any public street in the town, or
any easement, right-of-way, thoroughfare or road used, or dedicated for use,
for vehicular traffic, whether public or private.
(Prior Code, § 12.28.030)
§ 12.28.040 PERMIT FOR OPERATION OF PRIVATE MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle other than a
publicly owned motor vehicle on, over or across any fire trail or hiking trail,
or any lands immediately adjacent thereto, without first securing a permit from
the Fire Chief of the town. The permit shall be issued, without fee, in cases
where an application is made, unless the Fire Chief finds and determines that
the issuance of the permit shall constitute a hazard to persons or property by
reason of the nature of the vehicle or the proposed method of operation
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12.28.040)
§ 12.28.050 PERMIT DENIAL; APPEAL.
   Any person whose application for a permit has been denied by the Chief of
the Fire Department may appeal the decision in writing to the Town Council of
the town within ten days after the denial. The Town Council thereupon shall
conduct a hearing on the appeal at its next regular meeting. The Council’s
decision shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 12.28.050)
§ 12.28.060 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in
Chapter 1.08 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 12.28.060)
CHAPTER 12.32: TEMPORARY CARPORTS AND
OTHER STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
12.32.010   Permitted when; permit required
   
12.32.020   Permit application; requirements; processing procedure for
residential structures
   
12.32.025   Permit application; requirements; processing procedure for
commercial structures
   
12.32.030   Fee
§ 12.32.010 PERMITTED WHEN; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Upon certain portions of public streets and public rights-of-way in
the town, not being used for vehicular or pedestrian travel, temporary carports
and other structures may be erected and maintained by the owners or tenants of
adjoining property, upon terms and conditions and for the time prescribed in a
permit issued to the property owner by the Planning Commission or the Public
Works Department.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any carport or
other structure upon any portion of a public street or public right-of-way
without a permit having been issued therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12.32.010) (Ord. 459, passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 869, passed 9-7-
2022)
§ 12.32.020 PERMIT APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS; PROCESSING PROCEDURE FOR
RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   Any property owner contiguous to a public street or right-of-way, portions
of which are not being used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic, where the
owner has no suitable place on his or her own property or entirely on his or
her own property for the erection or construction of a carport or other
structure, may make application to the Planning Commission for permission to
erect and maintain a carport or other structure on the public street or right-
of-way, for the time and under the terms and conditions as the Planning
Commission will permit. The application shall be accompanied by detailed plans
and specifications for the structure, showing the extent to which, it
encroaches upon any public street or public right-of-way. Upon filing of the
application, the same shall be considered by the Planning Commission and acted
upon.
(Prior Code, § 12.32.020) (Ord. 459, passed - -1979; Am. Ord. 869, passed 9-7-
2022)
§ 12.32.025 PERMIT APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS; PROCESSING PROCEDURE FOR
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES.
   Any property owner or commercial tenant contiguous to a public street or
right-of-way, portions of which are not being used for vehicular or pedestrian
traffic, where the owner has no suitable place on his or her own property or
entirely on his or her own property for the erection or construction of a
parklet area and/or enclosure, may make application to the Planning and
Building Department for permission to erect and maintain a parklet area and/or
enclosure within the public sidewalk or the public street or rights-of-way, for
the time and under the terms and conditions as the Public Works Director or
Building Official will permit. The application shall be accompanied by detailed
plans and specifications for the structure, showing the extent to which it
encroaches upon any public street or public right-of-way and that it conforms
required specifications. Upon filing of the application, the same shall be
processed ministerially by the Public Works Director or the Building Official
and issued as long as the parklet enclosure complies with the Parklet
specifications contained in Town Code Title 5.
(Am. Ord. 869, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 12.32.030 FEE.
   At the time an application for an encroachment permit is filed, the
applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with a schedule adopted by resolution
of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 12.32.030) (Ord. 443, passed - -1978)
CHAPTER 12.36: REGULATIONS FOR PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, PUBLIC TENNIS COURTS, AND
CENTRAL BALLFIELD
Section
   
12.36.010   Town Council authorized to adopt rules and regulations
   
12.36.020   Nighttime use; permission of Town Clerk, or designee, required
   
12.36.030   Nighttime use; grant of permission; conditions; construction
   
12.36.040   Operation and maintenance
   
12.36.050   Rules and regulations; establishment; posting
   
12.36.060   Rules and regulations; enforcement
§ 12.36.010 TOWN COUNCIL AUTHORIZED TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Town Council, by resolution, may adopt such rules and regulations as it
deems necessary to regulate the use and occupancy of public parks, playgrounds,
public tennis courts, and the Central Ballfield.
(Ord. 746, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 12.36.020 NIGHTTIME USE; PERMISSION OF TOWN CLERK, OR DESIGNEE, REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, except town employees on duty, to go into,
walk upon, be in or use the town parks, playgrounds, public tennis courts and
Central Ballfield between the hours of sunset and sunrise each day without
permission issued by the Town Clerk, or designee, as provided in §
12.36.030.
(Ord. 746, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 12.36.030 NIGHTTIME USE; GRANT OF PERMISSION; CONDITIONS; CONSTRUCTION.
   The Town Clerk, or designee, is authorized to grant permission on behalf of
the town for the use of the town parks, playgrounds, public tennis courts and
Central Ballfield during hours between sunset and sunrise to groups and
organizations whenever it appears that, during the use, there will be available
sufficient police protection or adult supervision to avoid malicious conduct on
the part of any person in the parks, playgrounds, public tennis courts and
Central Ballfield. Permission thus granted to a group or organization shall be
construed to be permission to each individual member of the group or party.
Public tennis court keys for night use will be available for a fee established
by Town Council Resolution.
(Ord. 746, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 12.36.040 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Public tennis courts, parks, playgrounds, and Central Ballfield in the
town shall be managed, maintained, operated and controlled as a part of the
public recreational facilities of the town as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   The maintenance, management, operation and control of all public
tennis courts, parks, playgrounds, and Central Ballfield shall be under the
direction of the Town Manager, or designee.
(Ord. 746, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 12.36.050 RULES AND REGULATIONS; ESTABLISHMENT; POSTING.
   The rules and regulations adopted by Town Council Resolution applicable to
each property shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the main entrance
thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rule or regulation
so adopted.
(Ord. 746, passed 10-7-2009)
§ 12.36.060 RULES AND REGULATIONS; ENFORCEMENT.
   Provisions of this chapter may be enforced as an Infraction or Misdemeanor
as provided in General Penalty §
1.08.010, or may be enforced by any officer or employee with discretionary duty
as provided in Arrest and Citation Authority §
1.16.010.
(Ord. 746, passed 10-7-2009)
CHAPTER 12.44: STREET TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
12.44.010   Permit required to cut or trim
   
12.44.020   Trees - Property owner maintenance responsibility and duty to
public
   
12.44.030   Maintenance and repair of sidewalks
   
12.44.040   Liability for injuries to public
§ 12.44.010 PERMIT REQUIRED TO CUT OR TRIM.
   It is unlawful for any person to cut, girdle, trim, top, disfigure, remove,
destroy or in any manner injure or to cause to be cut, girdled, trimmed,
topped, disfigured, removed, destroyed or in any manner injured or to aid or
assist in cutting, girdling, trimming, topping, disfiguring, removing,
destroying or in any manner injuring a tree, shrub or plant growing or standing
upon any street sidewalk, lane, alley or public park or place within the town
without first having obtained a written permit from the Town Council to do so.
(Prior Code, § 12.44.010)
§ 12.44.020 TREES - PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY AND DUTY TO
PUBLIC.
   (A)   The owner of a lot fronting on or adjacent to any portion of a street
shall maintain any trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping along said street
or within the street right-of-way adjacent to his or her property in such non-
dangerous condition that the trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping will
not interfere with the public convenience or safety in the use of the streets
and sidewalks. Said owners shall maintain such street trees so that there is a
minimum eight-foot vertical pedestrian clearance from the top of the sidewalk
and a minimum thirteen-foot vertical clearance from the top of the curb or the
edge of pavement if no curb exists, to any part of a street tree.
   (B)   For purposes of this part, maintenance of trees, shrubs, hedges and
other landscaping includes but is not limited to: deep root altering, root
pruning, installing root barriers, clearance and structural trimming,
fertilizing, pest control, and removal of branches, leaves and other debris.
   (C)   Property owners required by this section to maintain trees, shrubs,
hedges and other landscaping shall owe a duty to members of the public using
public streets and sidewalks to maintain such trees, shrubs, hedges or other
landscaping in compliance with provisions under this title in a safe and non-
dangerous condition for users of the public streets and sidewalks.
   (D)   If any fronting or adjacent property owner fails to maintain any
adjacent trees, shrubs, hedges or other landscaping in a non-dangerous
condition as required by this section, and any person suffers damage or injury
to person or property, the fronting or adjacent property owner shall be liable
for all damages or injuries caused by the failure of the owner to maintain
these areas.
   (E)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to any sidewalk
damaged by any tree, shrub, hedge or other landscaping installed and maintained
by the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 713, passed 9-7-2005; Am. Ord. 801, passed 4-6-2016)
§ 12.44.030 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The owners of lots or portions of lots adjacent to or fronting on any
portion of a sidewalk area between the property line of the lots and the street
line, including parking strips, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and persons in
possession of such lots by virtue of any permit or right shall repair and
maintain such sidewalk areas and pay the costs and expenses therefor.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, maintenance and repair of sidewalk
area shall include, but not be limited to, maintenance and repair of surfaces
including grinding, removal and replacement of sidewalks, repair and
maintenance of curb and gutters, removal of impervious paving materials from
street tree planting strips, or other right-of-way landscape planters, removal
of weeds and/or debris, tree root pruning and installing root barriers,
trimming of shrubs and/or ground cover and trimming shrubs within the area
between the property line of the adjacent property and the street pavement
line, including planting strips and curbs, so that the sidewalk area will
remain in a condition that is not dangerous to property or to persons using the
sidewalk in a reasonable manner and will be in a condition which will not
interfere with the public convenience in the use of said sidewalk area.
   (C)   Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, with respect
to maintenance and repair of sidewalk areas and the making, confirming and
collecting of assessment for the costs and expenses of said maintenance and
repair, the town may proceed under the provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways
Code Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 22 as the same is now in effect or may
hereinafter be amended. Should the town choose to proceed under Cal. Streets
and Highways Code Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 22, notwithstanding the
provisions of Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 5614, the Director of Public
Works may, in his or her discretion, and for sufficient cause, extend the
period within which required maintenance and repairs of sidewalk area must
commence by a period not to exceed 74 days from the time the notice referred to
in Cal. Streets and Highways Code § 5614 is given. Costs recoverable by the
town may include a charge for the Town of Fairfax’s costs of inspection and
administration whenever the town awards a contract for such maintenance and
repair and including the costs of collection of assessment for the costs of
maintenance and repair or the handling of any lien placed on the property due
to the failure of the property owner to promptly pay such assessments.
   (D)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to any sidewalk
damaged by any tree, shrub, hedge or other landscaping installed and maintained
by the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 713, passed 9-7-2005; Am. Ord. 801, passed 4-6-2016)
§ 12.44.040 LIABILITY FOR INJURIES TO PUBLIC.
   The property owner of a lot or portion of a lot fronting on or adjacent to
any portion of a street or any portion of a sidewalk area between the property
line of the lot and the street line, and any person in possession of such lot
by virtue of any permit or right, shall owe a duty to members of the public to
keep and maintain the sidewalk area in a safe and non-dangerous condition. If,
as a result of the failure of any property owner or person in possession of the
property, to maintain the sidewalk area in a non-dangerous condition, any
person suffers injury or damage to person or property, the property owner or
person in possession of the property shall be liable to such person for the
resulting damages or injury. The requirements of this section shall not apply
to any sidewalk damaged by any tree, shrub, hedge or other landscaping
installed and maintained by the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 713, passed 9-7-2005; Am. Ord. 801, passed 4-6-2016)
CHAPTER 12.48: HANDBILLS AND CIRCULARS
Section
   
12.48.010   Distribution for commercial purposes prohibited
§ 12.48.010 DISTRIBUTION FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person or any agent or employee of the person to
distribute or place or cause to be distributed or placed to or among
pedestrians, or in or upon or along any public street, sidewalk, square, park
or other public place, or in or upon any automobile or other vehicle parked or
standing upon or along any public street or place in the town, or to distribute
or place or cause to be distributed or placed or thrown into or scattered into
any street or public place or into or upon any private property in the town,
any commercial handbill, pamphlet, circular or dodger, or any advertising
sheet, matter or device designed or intended for advertising or making known in
a general or promiscuous manner, any business, occupation, profession, medical
treatment, medicine or the dealing or selling of any merchandise or thing
whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 12.48.010) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
TITLE 13: PUBLIC SERVICES
   Chapter
      
13.04.   SEWERS
      
13.08.   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
CHAPTER 13.04: SEWERS
Section
   
13.04.010   Definitions
   
13.04.020   County regulations adopted by reference
   
13.04.030   Connection to public sanitary sewer required
   
13.04.040   Permit required to construct or connect to sewer
   
13.04.050   Other activities requiring permits
   
13.04.060   Permit; application; fees
   
13.04.070   Permit; issuance
   
13.04.080   Permit; expiration and revocation
   
13.04.090   Permit; non-transferrability
   
13.04.100   Appeals
   
13.04.110   Rules and regulations; formulation; conformance required
   
13.04.120   Building not connected to public sanitary sewer; building permit
issuance
   
13.04.130   Building not connected to public sanitary sewer; occupancy permit
issuance
   
13.04.140   Enforcement; right of entry
   
13.04.150   Repeal of conflicting provisions
§ 13.04.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHEMICAL TOILET. Any toilet constructed, installed or placed for the purpose
of depositing therein sewage which is disposed of, other than by discharge
directly into a public sewer system.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The county’s Health Officer or his or her authorized
representatives.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, association, corporation or any members, agents or
employees of the foregoing.
   SEWAGE. Any and all waste substances, liquid or solid, which contain or may
be contaminated by human excreta, excrement, offal or feculent matter or
matters, or substances of any kind or nature that may be injurious or dangerous
to health, either directly or indirectly.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.010)
§ 13.04.020 COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Marin County Ord. 1861, entitled “An Ordinance of the Board of Supervisors,
of the County of Marin, Adding Chapter 18.06 to the Marin County Code,
Providing Regulations for the Design and Maintenance of Individual Sewage
Disposal Systems,” is adopted by reference thereto, pursuant to the provisions
of Cal. Gov’t Code § 50022.9.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.020)
§ 13.04.030 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER REQUIRED.
   Every building where persons reside, congregate or are employed which is
situated upon property, an extremity of which is within 400 feet (measured in a
horizontal plane) of an approved public sanitary sewer, shall be connected to
the sewer by the owner of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.030)
§ 13.04.040 PERMIT REQUIRED TO CONSTRUCT OR CONNECT TO SEWER.
   (A)   No person shall connect any sewer with or build or construct any sewer
connecting with or make any opening in or make any connection whatsoever with
any sewer under the jurisdiction of the town without having first obtained a
permit therefor from the Superintendent of Streets.
   (B)   All sewer permits shall be issued in accordance with any regulations
prescribed therefor by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.040)
§ 13.04.050 OTHER ACTIVITIES REQUIRING PERMITS.
   It is unlawful for any person to do any of the following unless a property
is over 400 feet from an approved public sanitary sewer without having first
secured a permit therefor from the health officer:
   (A)   Construct, rebuild, use, occupy or maintain any residence, place of
business or other building or place where persons reside, congregate or are
employed which is not provided with means for the disposal of sewage by
connection to a public sewer system;
   (B)   Construct or maintain any sewage treatment works, sewer pipes or
conduits or other facilities for the treatment or discharge of sewage or impure
waters or any other matter or substance offensive, injurious or dangerous to
health;
   (C)   Construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve or replace a septic tank,
seepage pit, cesspool, drainage field, leaching system or any other type of
individual sewage disposal system or any part thereof; and
   (D)   Install or place a chemical toilet in or upon any property for any
purpose other than for temporary use in connection with the construction of a
building or other structure during the period of the construction.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.050)
§ 13.04.060 PERMIT; APPLICATION; FEES.
   (A)   All applications for permits shall be in writing on a form supplied by
the county’s Health Department and shall be accompanied by fees as set by
resolution of the Town Council.
   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by plot plans showing size and
type of the proposed installation, the site thereof and the work to be done, in
detail.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.060)
§ 13.04.070 PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   If, after investigation, the Health Officer determines that the
installation of the proposed facility is in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, and any regulations issued pursuant thereto, and will not be injurious
to the public health and welfare, he or she shall issue a permit.
   (B)   All permits may be made subject to such conditions as the Health
Officer deems necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter and protection
of the public health and welfare.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.070)
§ 13.04.080 PERMIT; EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Expiration.
      (1)   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire and become
null and void under the following circumstances:
         (a)   If the work authorized therein has not been commenced within 90
days after the permit has been issued. A maximum extension of 90 days may be
granted to the permittee by the Health Officer.
         (b)   If, after commencement of the installation, repair or
modification of a sewage disposal system authorized by a permit and before
completion thereof, the project is abandoned for a continuous period of 90
days, then the permit thereafter shall become null and void.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of any permit as herein provided, no further
work may be done in connection with the installation, repair or modification of
the sewage disposal system unless and until a new permit for such purpose is
obtained.
   (B)   Revocation. The Health Officer may revoke any permit issued under this
chapter if he or she determines that the permittee is acting in contravention
of the provisions of this chapter or the conditions of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.080)
§ 13.04.090 PERMIT; NON- TRANSFERABILITY.
   Any permits issued under this chapter may not be transferred from person to
person or location to location.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.090)
§ 13.04.100 APPEALS.
   (A)   In the event that any applicant or permittee is for any reason
dissatisfied with the actions of the Health Officer by reason of failure to
grant a permit, revocation of a permit or imposition of any conditions
relating to the permit, the applicant or permittee shall have the right to
appeal to the Town Council, in writing, within ten days after notification of
the action of the Health Officer.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an appeal, the Town Council shall call a hearing
within 15 days from receipt of the appeal and give the appellant notice thereof
by registered or certified mail addressed to the appellant at the address shown
on the application or permit.
   (C)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Town Council shall render a
decision, which decision shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.100)
§ 13.04.110 RULES AND REGULATIONS; FORMULATION; CONFORMANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   In order to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter,
the Health Officer is authorized to make and publish such regulations as are
necessary to give effect to the purpose of this chapter.
      (2)   The regulations shall be effective when approved by the Town
Council of the town.
   (B)   The type and manner of installation, construction, repair or
modification of sewage disposal systems shall substantially conform to
regulations issued by the county’s Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.110)
§ 13.04.120 BUILDING NOT CONNECTED TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER; BUILDING PERMIT
ISSUANCE.
   No building permit shall be issued for any building which is not to be
connected to an approved public sanitary sewer without the written approval of
the Health Officer.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.120)
§ 13.04.130 BUILDING NOT CONNECTED TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER; OCCUPANCY PERMIT
ISSUANCE.
   No occupancy shall be permitted in any building which is not to be connected
to an approved public sanitary sewer without the written approval of the Health
Officer.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.130)
§ 13.04.140 ENFORCEMENT; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   It is the duty of the county’s Health Officer to enforce the provisions of
this chapter, and, in the performance of this duty, the Health Officer or his
or her duly authorized agents are authorized to enter, at any reasonable hour,
any premises whereon he or she has reasonable cause to believe that a violation
of such provisions exists.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.140)
§ 13.04.150 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   All ordinances and resolutions or parts of ordinances and resolutions in
conflict with the provisions of this chapter are repealed.
(Prior Code, § 13.04.150)
CHAPTER 13.08: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
   
13.08.010   Definitions
   
13.08.020   Public hearing
   
13.08.030   Designation of underground utility districts
   
13.08.040   Overhead wires and structures; removal required
   
13.08.050   Exceptions; emergency or unusual circumstances
   
13.08.060   Other exceptions
   
13.08.070   Notice requirements
   
13.08.080   Responsibility of utility companies
   
13.08.090   Responsibility of property owners
   
13.08.100   Responsibility of town
   
13.08.110   Extension of time
   
13.08.120   Violation; penalty
§ 13.08.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Public Utilities Commission of the state.
   PERSON. Individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and
employees.
   POLES, OVERHEAD WIRES and ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES. Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces,
transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a
district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service.
   UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT or DISTRICT. The area in the town within which
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such
area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of §
13.08.030.
   UTILITY. All persons or entities supplying electric, communication or
similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.010)
§ 13.08.020 PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Where the Council has determined that the town or a public utility has
voluntarily agreed to pay over 50% of all costs of conversion (excluding costs
of users’ connections to underground electric or communication facilities), the
Council may call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity,
health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures within designated areas of the town and the
underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric,
communication or similar or associated services.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on
the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned, by mail of the
time and place of the hearings at least 15 days prior to the date thereof. Each
such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to
time.
   (C)   At the hearing, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity
to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.020) (Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 13.08.030 DESIGNATION OF UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS.
   (A)   If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public
necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal and the underground
installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution,
declare the designated area an underground utility district and order the
removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within
which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within
which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service.
   (B)   A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground
installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and
equipment necessary for the removal and for the installation of the underground
facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.030)
§ 13.08.040 OVERHEAD WIRES AND STRUCTURES; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in §
13.08.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct,
place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead
facilities are required to be removed by the resolution, except as such
overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant
of property prior to the performance by the owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in §
13.08.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after
the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.040)
§ 13.08.050 EXCEPTIONS; EMERGENCY OR UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without
authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The Council may
grant special permission, on such terms as the Council may deem appropriate, in
cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or
utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.050)
§ 13.08.060 OTHER EXCEPTIONS.
   In any resolution adopted pursuant to §
13.08.030, the town may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:
   (A)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the Town Engineer;
   (B)   Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (C)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when the wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (D)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;
   (E)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (F)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   (G)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and
concealed ducts; and
   (H)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.060)
§ 13.08.070 NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted
pursuant to §
13.08.030, the Town Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons
owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the
adoption thereof. The Town Clerk shall further notify the affected property
owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying the property
desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated
service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on
their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying
utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules,
regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the
Commission.
   (B)   Notification by the Town Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to §
13.08.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as
such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected
utilities.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.070)
§ 13.08.080 RESPONSIBILITY OF UTILITY COMPANIES.
   If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to §
13.08.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits,
conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.080)
§ 13.08.090 RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities
referred to in §
13.08.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure
being served, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the
respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.
   (B)   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting the property does not comply with the provisions of division (A) above
within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to §
13.08.030, the Town Engineer shall post written notice on the property being
served, and 30 days thereafter shall have the authority to order the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated
facilities supplying utility service to the property.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.090)
§ 13.08.100 RESPONSIBILITY OF TOWN.
   The town shall remove, at its own expense, all town-owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the
owner or user of the poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to §
13.08.030.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.100)
§ 13.08.110 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution
adopted pursuant to §
13.08.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage
of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which the act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of the limitation.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.110)
§ 13.08.120 VIOLATION; PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to
comply with any of its requirements is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500, or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both the fine and imprisonment.
   (C)   Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each
day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted by the person, and shall be
punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 13.08.120)
TITLE 14: RESERVED
TITLE 15: BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
   Chapter
      
15.04.   CONSTRUCTION CODES
      
15.05.   ALL-ELECTRIC CONSTRUCTION IN NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDINGS
      
15.08.   REPORTS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING RECORDS
      
15.12.   NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
      
15.16.   CAMP CARS AND TRAILERS
      
15.17.   GATE SAFEGUARDS
CHAPTER 15.04: CONSTRUCTION CODES
Section
   
15.04.010   Adoption of construction codes
   
15.04.015   Definitions
   
15.04.020   Automatic fire sprinkler systems, fire extinguishers, smoke alarms
   
15.04.025   Plan check fees
   
15.04.030   Roof coverings
   
15.04.035   Barriers for swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs
   
15.04.040   Septic systems
   
15.04.045   Correcting past violations
   
15.04.050   Fee adjustments
   
15.04.055   Alternative power supplies
   
15.04.060   Applicability of 2021 Wildland Urban Interface Code
   
15.04.065   Electric vehicle charging stations
   
15.04.070   Green building requirements
   
15.04.075   Requirements for additions and alterations; local amendments to
2022 California Energy Code
   
15.04.080   Requirements for electric vehicle infrastructure; local amendments
to 2022 CALGreen California Green Building Standards Code
   
15.04.085   Standards for compliance
   
15.04.090   Incentives for compliance
   
15.04.095   Administrative procedures
   
15.04.100   Exemptions
§ 15.04.010 ADOPTION OF CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   (A)   The following parts of Title 24, California Code of Regulations are
adopted by reference as construction codes for the Town of Fairfax, subject to
the modifications included later in this
Chapter 15.04:
      (1)   2022 edition of the California Administrative Code (Title 24 Part
1);
      (2)   2022 edition of the California Building Code (Title 24 Part 2)
based upon the 2021 International Building Code (IBC), including:
         (a)   Division II of Chapter 1, but not Section 113;
         (b)   Appendix Chapter A, Employee Qualifications;
         (c)   Appendix Chapter G, Flood-Resistant Construction;
         (d)   Appendix Chapter H, Signs;
         (e)   Appendix Chapter I, Patio Covers; and
         (f)   Appendix Chapter J, Grading.
      (3)   2022 edition of the California Residential Code (Title 24 Part 2.5)
based on the 2021 International Residential Code (IRC) including:
         (a)   Division II of Chapter 1, but not Section 112;
         (b)   Appendix Chapter V Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs,;
         (c)   Appendix Chapter H Patio Covers; and
         (d)   Appendix Chapter J Existing Buildings and Structures; and
         (e)   Appendix Q (Tiny Houses).
      (4)   2022 edition of the California Electrical Code (Title 24 Part 3)
based upon the 2020 National Electrical Code (NEC), including:
         (a)   Article 89, but not Section 89.108.8.
      (5)   2022 edition of the California Mechanical Code (Title 24 Part 4)
based upon the 2021 Uniform Mechanical Code (UMC), including:
         (a)   Division II of Chapter 1, but not Section 107.0, 107.1, 107.2.
      (6)   2022 edition of the California Plumbing Code (Title 24 Part 5)
based upon the 2021 Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), including:
         (a)   Division II of Chapter 1, but not Section 107.0 or 107.1, 107.2.
      (7)   2022 edition of the California Energy Code (Title 24 Part 6);
      (8)   2022 edition of the California Historical Building Code (Title 24
Part 8);
      (9)   2022 edition of the California Existing Building Code (Title 24
Part 10) based upon the 2018 International Existing Building Code (IEBC)
including:
         (a)   Appendix Chapter A1 Seismic Strengthening Provisions For
Unreinforced Masonry Bearing wall Buildings;
         (b)   Appendix Chapter A3 Prescriptive Provisions For Seismic
Strengthening Of Cripple Walls And Sill Plate Anchorage Of Light, Wood-Framed
Residential Buildings; and
         (c)   Appendix Chapter A4 Earthquake Risk Reduction In Wood-Frame
Residential Buildings With Soft, Weak Or Open Front Walls.
      (10)   2022 edition of the California Green Building Standards Code
(CALGreen) (Title 24 Part 11), including:
         (a)   Appendix A4 and Appendix A5 Tier 1 measures, but excluding
Appendix A4.2 and A5.2 (Energy Efficiency). The Tier 1 measures shall be
mandatory for commercial and residential construction, and verification of such
compliance shall be provided by the installer or designer.
      (11)   2022 edition of the California Referenced Standards Code (Title 24
Part 12).
      (12)   2021 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, to
the extent the same is not inconsistent with the California Buildings Standards
Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 12, Parts 1-Part 12), as adopted
and amended herein.
   (B)   A copy of each of these documents is maintained in the office of the
Building Official, and reference is made to them with like effect as if all the
provisions and printed matter therein were herein set forth in full.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 15.04.015 DEFINITIONS.
   Section 202 of the 2022 California Building Code and Section R202 of the
2022 California Residential Code are both hereby amended to add the definitions
of substantial remodel and second unit as follows:
   "Substantial Remodel" shall mean the renovation of any structure, which
combined with any additions to the structure, affects a floor area which
exceeds fifty percent of the existing floor area of the structure within any
twelve-month period. When any changes are made in the building, such as walls,
columns, beams or girders, floor or ceiling joists and coverings, roof rafters,
roof diaphragms, piles or retaining walls or similar components, the floor area
of all rooms affected by such changes shall be included in computing floor
areas for the purposes of applying this definition. This definition does not
apply to the replacement and upgrading of residential roof coverings, repair or
replacement of foundations, the installation of energy efficient windows of
like size, or the removal of interior wall coverings solely for the
installation of insulation.
   "Second Unit" shall mean a completely separate housekeeping unit with
kitchen, sleeping and bathroom facilities which is a part of, an extension to,
or a separate structure on a site developed with a single-family residence, in
excess of the maximum density designated by the zoning district in which the
property is situated or as prescribed thereby.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.020 EXTERIOR FIRE RESISTIVE CONSTRUCTION, AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER
SYSTEMS, FIRE EXTINGUISHERS, SMOKE ALARMS.
   Section 701A.1 of Chapter 7A of the 2022 California Building Code (Title 24,
Part 2, Volume 1), and Section R337.1.1 of the 2022 California Residential Code
(Title 24, Part 2.5, California Code of Regulations) are hereby amended to read
as follows:
   701A.1/R337.1.1 Scope. This chapter applies to building materials, systems,
and/or assemblies used in the exterior design and construction of new
buildings, additions, repairs, and exterior alterations located within a
Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area as defined in section 702A and R337.2.
   Section 701A.3 of Chapter 7A of the 2022 California Building Code (Title 24,
Part 2, Volume 1), and Section R337.1.3 of the 2022 California Residential Code
(Title 24, Part 2.5, California Code of Regulations) are hereby amended to read
as follows:
   701A.3/R337.1.3 Application. New buildings, additions, repairs, and exterior
alterations to buildings located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or any
Wildland Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency
constructed after the application date shall comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   Exceptions:
   1.   Buildings of an accessory character and not exceeding 120 square feet
in floor area, when located at least 30 feet from an applicable building.
   2.   Buildings of an accessory character classified as a Group U occupancy
of any size located at least 50 feet from an applicable building.
   3.   Buildings classified as a Group U Agricultural Building, as defined in
Section 202 and R202 of this code (see also Appendix C - Group U Agricultural
Buildings), when located at least 50 feet from an applicable building.
   Section 707A.3.2 is hereby added to Chapter 7A of the 2022 California
Building Code (Title 24, Part 2, Volume 1), which shall read as follows:
   707A.3.2. When more than fifty percent (50%) of exterior wall coverings of
an existing structure are repaired or replaced within a thirty-six (36) month
period, the entire exterior wall coverings shall comply with Section 707A.3.
   Section R337.7.3.2 is hereby added to the 2022 California Residential Code
(Title 24, Part 2.5), which shall read as follows:
   R337.7.3.2. When more than fifty percent (50%) of exterior wall coverings of
an existing structure are repaired or replaced within a thirty-six (36) month
period, the entire exterior wall coverings shall comply with Section 707A.3.
   Section 903.2 of the California Building Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   903.2 Where Required. All Occupancies and Facilities. Approved automatic
sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the
locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12 and Sections 903.2.14
through 903.2.21. Additionally, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be
installed in all of the following:
   1.   Every newly constructed building and facility.
      Exceptions:
      a.   Free standing Group U Occupancies not more than 1,000 square feet
and provided with exterior wall and opening protection as per Table 602 of the
Building Code.
      b.   Agricultural buildings as defined in Appendix C of the Building Code
and not exceeding 2,000 square feet, having clear unobstructed side yard of
combustible materials, exceeding 60 feet in all directions and not exceeding 25
feet in height.
   2.   In newly created second units.
   
      Exceptions:
      a.   Parcels that are not within the Wildland Urban Interface, as
established by the Town.
      b.   Parcels for which there is less than a thirty percent (30%) grade
change between the subject parcel and Sir Francis Drake Boulevard as
illustrated in the "Map of Parcels Qualifying for Exceptions to Sprinkler
System Requirements for Newly Created Second Units" or as hereafter designated
by resolution of the Town of Fairfax.
      c.   Junior second units.
      d.   For an accessory dwelling unit, as defined by Government Code
Section 65852.2(i)(4), if fire sprinklers are not required for the primary
residence. This exception is intended to comply with Government Code Section
65852.2(c).
   3.   In all buildings which have more than fifty percent (50%) floor area
added or any "substantial remodel" as defined in this code, within any 12 month
period. Exceptions may be granted by the Fire Code Official when alternate
means of protection are installed as approved by the Fire Code Official.
   4.   In all buildings except R-3 occupancies, in excess of 3,000 sq. ft.
which have more than ten per cent (10%) floor area added within any 12 month
period. Exceptions may be granted by the Chief when alternate means of
protection are installed as approved by the Fire Code Official.
   5.   A change in the use of a structure that results in a higher fire or
life safety exposure when the square footage of the area changing use is more
than 50% of the square footage of the building.
   Section R313.1 and R313.2 of the California Residential Code each amended to
read as follows:
   R313.1/R313.2 Where Required. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be
installed in all of the following:
   1.   Every newly constructed building and facility.
      Exceptions:
      a.   Free standing Group U Occupancies not more than 1,000 square feet
and provided with exterior wall and opening protection as per Table 602 of the
Building Code.
      b.   Agricultural buildings as defined in Appendix C of the Building Code
and not exceeding 2,000 square feet, having clear unobstructed side yard of
combustible materials, exceeding 60 feet in all directions and not exceeding 25
feet in height.
   2.   In newly created second units.
      
      Exceptions:
      a.   Parcels that are not within the Wildland Urban Interface, as
established by the Town.
      b.   Parcels for which there is less than a thirty percent (30%) grade
change between the subject parcel and Sir Francis Drake Boulevard as shown on
the "Map of Parcels Qualifying for Exceptions to Sprinkler System Requirements
for Newly Created Second Units" or as hereafter designated by resolution of the
Town of Fairfax.
      c.   Junior second units.
      d.   For an accessory dwelling unit, as defined by Government Code
Section 65852.2(i)(4), if fire sprinklers are not required for the primary
residence. This exception is intended to comply with Government Code Section
65852.2(c).
   3.   In all buildings which have more than fifty percent (50%) floor area
added or any "substantial remodel" as defined in this code, within any 12 month
period. Exceptions may be granted by the Fire Code Official when alternate
means of protection are installed as approved by the Fire Code Official.
   4.   In all buildings except R-3 occupancies, in excess of 3,000 sq. ft.
which have more than ten per cent (10%) floor area added within any 12 month
period. Exceptions may be granted by the Chief when alternate means of
protection are installed as approved by the Fire Code Official.
   5.   A change in the use of a structure that results in a higher fire or
life safety exposure when the square footage of the area changing use is more
than 50% of the square footage of the building.
   Section 903.3 of the California Building Code and Sections R313.1.1 and
R313.2.1 of the California Residential Code are each hereby amended by adding
the following language to the end of each respective section:
   The requirements for fire sprinklers in this code section are not meant to
disallow the provisions for area increase, height increase, or Fire-Resistive
substitution if otherwise allowed by sections 504 and 506 of the Building Code.
All automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in accordance with the
written standards of the Fire Code Official and the following:
   a.   In all residential buildings required to be sprinkled any attached
garages shall be sprinkled, and except for one and two family dwellings, in all
residential occupancies the attics shall be sprinkled.
   b.   In all existing buildings, where fire sprinklers are required by
provisions of this code, they shall be extended into all unprotected areas of
the building.
   c.   All single family dwellings in excess of 5,000 square feet shall have
automatic fire sprinkler systems designed in accordance with NFPA Standard 13
or 13R and standards developed by the Chief.
   d.   All public storage facilities shall have installed an approved
automatic fire sprinkler system. An approved wire mesh or other approved
physical barrier shall be installed 18 inches below the sprinkler head
deflector to prevent storage from being placed to within 18 inches from the
bottom of the deflector measured at a horizontal plane.
   Section 906.11 is hereby added to the California Building Code as follows:
   906.11 Fire Extinguisher Documentation. The owner and/or operator of every
Group R Division 1 and R Division 2 occupancies shall annually provide the
Chief written documentation that fire extinguishers are installed and have been
serviced as required by Title 19 California Code of Regulations when such
extinguishers are installed in residential units in lieu of common areas.
   Section 907.2 of the California Building Code is amended to add the
following paragraphs after the second paragraph and before the Exceptions:
   New Construction: Every new building constructed for non-residential
occupancies greater than 2000 square feet shall have installed therein an
approved fire detection (products of combustion) system in accordance with the
standards established by the National Fire Protection Association. The type of
system installed shall be determined by the Fire Chief.
   Existing Construction: Every existing building remodeled for non-residential
occupancies greater than 2000 square feet shall have installed therein an
approved fire detection (products of combustion) system in accordance with the
standards established by the National Fire Protection Association. The type of
system installed shall be determined by the Fire Chief.
   Section 907.2.11 is hereby amended by changing the first sentence of the
exception to read as follows:
   EXCEPTION: For group R occupancies other than single family dwellings.
   Section 907.8.1 is hereby added as follows:
   Section 907.8.1 Smoke Alarm Documentation. The owner and/or operator of
every Group R Division 1, Division 2, Division 3.1, and Division 4 Occupancies
shall annually provide the Fire Code Official with written documentation that
the smoke alarms installed pursuant to the Building Code have been tested and
are operational. If alarms are found to be inoperable or are missing, such
alarms shall be repaired or replaced immediately.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.025 PLAN CHECK FEES.
   Section 109.2 of the California Building Code ("CBC") is hereby amended to
add the following:
   When submittal documents are required by Section 107.1, a plan review fee
shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan
review. Said plan review fee shall be sixty-five percent (65%) of the building
permit fee.
   When private contractors are retained to conduct project plan checks, the
plan check fee charged by the Town shall be the total cost of the private plan
check plus an additional twenty percent (20%) of that cost to defer
administrative services provided by the Town.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.030 ROOF COVERINGS.
   Section 1505.1 of the California Building Code and Section R902.1 of the
California Residential Code are both amended to add the following language
after the first paragraph and before the exception(s) to each:
   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the roof covering on any structure
regulated by this code shall be a Class A Roof Covering Assembly as classified
by Section 1505.2. When more than fifty percent (50%) of the total roof area of
an existing structure is replaced within a twelve (12) month period, the entire
roof must be replaced with a Class A Roof Covering Assembly.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.035 BARRIERS FOR SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
   The Town Council finds and determines that the maintenance of swimming pools
without protective measures constitutes a hazard to the safety of children and
other inhabitants of the Town, and therefore the regulations contained in
section 3109 of the 2021 International Building Code (to the extent the same
are not inconsistent with the California Building Code) and Appendix AX of the
California Residential Code, are hereby adopted and shall apply to existing as
well as remodeled and new swimming pools.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.040 SEPTIC SYSTEMS.
   California Plumbing Code Section 713.1 is amended to read as follows:
   Every building in which plumbing fixtures are installed and every premises
having drainage piping thereon, shall have a connection to a public sewer,
except as provided in Sections 713.2 and 713.4.
   Exception: A permit may be issued for the repair, replacement, or alteration
of a previously constructed septic tank or sewage disposal system other than a
septic system where no public sewer is available upon approval by the Town
Council, the Planning Commission, the Marin County Health Department, Sanitary
District Number 1 of Marin County, and the Bay Area Water Quality Control
Board.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.045 CORRECTING PAST VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Before a new permit can be issued for any parcel, all expired permits
for a parcel must be reinstated, all work done without a permit on a parcel
must be permitted, and all mandatory correction items noted on the Resale
Inspection Reports for that parcel must be permitted or corrected.
   (B)   Section 109.7 is added to the California Building Code and Section
R108.7 is added to the California Residential Code to read as follows:
   Expired permits which are lacking only a final inspection may be reinstated
for a fee of $50 or the cost of the permit, whichever is less.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.050 FEE ADJUSTMENTS.
   The Town Council may, by resolution, revise the fees established by this
Chapter 15.04.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.055 ALTERNATIVE POWER SUPPLIES.
   Section 1511.9.2 of the California Building Code and Section R324.7.4 of the
California Residential Code are added to read as follows:
   Alternative Power Supplies. Roof-mounted photovoltaic panels/modules and
other alternative electrical power supply sources shall comply with the
requirements of the California Building Code as amended, the California
Residential Code as amended, the California Electrical Code, and the California
Fire Code as amended.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.060 APPLICABILITY OF 2006 WILDLAND URBAN INTERFACE CODE.
   Section 701 of the California Building Code is hereby amended by adding the
following sentence:
   Buildings constructed in designated Wildland Urban Interface areas shall
also comply with the 2018 Edition of the Wildland Urban Interface Code, as
adopted and amended by the Town of Fairfax in
Chapter 8.06 of the Town Code.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.065 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to create an expedited and
streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies
with Cal. Gov't Code § 65850.7 to achieve the timely and cost-effective
installation of electric vehicle charging stations. Pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code
§ 65850.7 and notwithstanding any other provision of this code pertaining to
conditional or accessory uses, only an electrical permit shall be required for
an electric vehicle charging station.
   (B)   Definitions.
      ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The submission of application materials via
electronic mail.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION (EVCS). A parking space that includes
installation of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) at an EV Ready space.
An EVCS space may be used to satisfy EV Ready space requirements. EVSE shall be
installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code, Article 625.
   (C)   Permit.
      (1)   An electrical permit is required prior to installing an electric
vehicle charging station. Installation shall also meet any applicable
requirements of the California Building Standards Code (Cal. Code of
Regulations, Title 24) and state law, including but not limited to, Cal. Gov't
Code § 65850.7, as may be amended from time to time.
      (2)   The Building Official shall adopt and maintain a standard electric
vehicle charging station checklist that is consistent with the checklist in the
most current version of the "Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting
Checklist" of the "Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness
Guidebook" published by the Office of Planning and Research. The checklist and
application shall be made available on the town's website.
      (3)   An application to install an electric vehicle charging station may
be made by electronic submittal. An applicant's electronic signature shall be
accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet
signature.
      (4)   An application will be deemed complete if the Building Official
determines that the application includes all of the information and documents
required by the standard application form and the standard checklist. If an
application is deemed incomplete, the Building Official will notify the
applicant in writing of the additional information needed to complete the
application. After an application is deemed complete, the Building Official
will perform an expedited review of the application.
      (5)   Review of the permit application shall be limited to the Building
Official's review of whether the application meets local, state and federal
health and safety requirements. The application shall be administratively
reviewed by the Building Official as a ministerial permit.
      (6)   Approval of a permit shall not be conditioned on the approval of an
association, as that term is defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080.
      (7)   A permit will be issued following the Building Official's approval
of an application for an electric vehicle charging station and after all
required fees have been paid. If the application was submitted electronically,
the permit may be issued electronically. The decision to approve or deny the
permit shall be issued in accordance with the timeframes adopted by the Town
Council and in no event later than three days after the application is deemed
complete.
      (8)   As soon as practicable after the applicant notifies the Building
Official that an electric vehicle charging station has been installed, the
Building Official will inspect the system to verify compliance with the permit.
No electric vehicle charging station may be operated unless the Building
Official verifies in writing that it complies with the permit.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.070 GREEN BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to meet or exceed all
applicable mandatory measures of the 2022 California Green Building Standards
Code (Title 24, Part 11) of the California Code of Regulations and to enhance
the long-term public health and welfare by contributing to the overall
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and improving the environmental and
economic health of the county through the efficient design, construction,
operation, maintenance and deconstruction of buildings and site development by
incorporating green building practices and materials. The green building
provisions referenced in this chapter are designed to achieve the following
objectives:
      (1)   Increase energy efficiency in buildings;
      (2)   Reduce consumption of fossil fuels in the town;
      (3)   Encourage water and resource conservation;
      (4)   Reduce waste generated by construction projects;
      (5)   Reduce long-term building operating and maintenance costs;
      (6)   Improve indoor air quality and occupant health;
      (7)   Contribute to meeting state and local commitments to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions; and
      (8)   Satisfy all applicable mandatory measures of the 2022 California
Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11) of the California Code of
Regulations.
   (B)   Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all
construction or development projects defined below as a "covered project."
   (C)   Definitions. For the purposes of interpreting this chapter and the
associated standards for compliance, the following terms are defined as
follows. When the definitions below differ from those contained elsewhere in
this title, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. These definitions are
additional to those outlined in Chapter 2 of the California Green Building
Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11.
      2022 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE. Refers to the requirements outlined in the
2022 edition of the California Energy Code known as California Code of
Regulations, Part 6 of Title 24.
      ALL-ELECTRIC BUILDING or ALL-ELECTRIC DESIGN. A building or plans for a
building that uses a permanent supply of electricity as the source of energy
for all space heating (including but not limited to fireplaces), water heating
(including but not limited to pools and spas), cooking appliances (including
but not limited to barbeques), and clothes drying appliances, and has no
natural gas or propane plumbing installed in the building or within the
property lines. An all-electric building may also include solar thermal
collectors.
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT (ADU). A residential unit that meets the
definition of an accessory dwelling unit as outlined in Chapter 17 of the
Fairfax Town Code. This states that "a residential dwelling unit, which is
accessory to a primary dwelling unit, that provides complete independent living
facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or
existing primary dwelling. It shall provide permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, and independent exterior access, on the
same lot as the single-family or multi-family dwelling is or will be situated.
An Accessory Dwelling Unit also includes the following: (1) an efficiency unit
as defined in § 17958.1 of the California Health and Safety Code and (2) a
manufactured home as defined in section 18007 of the California Health and
Safety Code." For purposes of this subchapter, ADU also covers Junior ADUs and
detached or attached ADUs.
      AUTOMATIC LOAD MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ALMS). A control system designed to
manage load across one or more electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE),
circuits, panels, and to share electrical capacity and/or automatically manage
power at each connection point. ALMS systems shall be designed to deliver no
less than 3.3 kVa (208/240 volt, 16-ampere) to each EV Capable, EV Ready or
EVCS space served by the ALMS, and meet the requirements of California
Electrical Code Article 625. The connected amperage to the building site for
the EV charging infrastructure shall not be lower than the required connected
amperage per California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24 Part 11.
      CALGREEN. Refers to the California Green Building Standards Code, as
included in Title 24, Part 11 of the California Code of Regulations.
      CALGREEN MANDATORY. Those measures that are required under Title 24, Part
11. Residential mandatory measures are contained in CALGreen Chapter 4.
Nonresidential mandatory measures are contained in CALGreen Chapter 5.
      CALGREEN TIER 1. Refers to required pre-requisite and elective measures
in addition to the CALGreen mandatory measures, as outlined in CALGreen
Appendix A4.601.4 for residential projects and CALGreen Appendix A5.601.2 for
nonresidential projects.
      COMMERCIAL KITCHEN. Non-retail food facility devoted to the commercial
preparation, production, and cooking of food and beverages for on-site or off-
site consumption.
      COOKING EQUIPMENT. Equipment intended for commercial use, including
ovens, ranges, and cooking appliances for use in a commercial kitchen and
restaurant where food is dispensed.
      COVERED PROJECT(S). A development project provided below as set forth by
the standards for compliance outlined in §
15.04.085, Table 1, 2, or 3 for which one or more building permits are
required:
         (a)   All residential and nonresidential new construction and newly
constructed buildings as defined below in §
15.04.070(C)(27) and (C)(28), respectively; and/or
         (b)   Additions or alterations to an existing single-family
residential building, except for any projects less than 200 square feet.
      DIRECT CURRENT FAST CHARGING (DCFC). A parking space provided with
electrical infrastructure that meets the following conditions:
         (a)   A minimum of 48 kVa (480 volt, 100-ampere) capacity wiring.
         (b)   Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) located within three
feet of the parking space providing a minimum capacity of 80-ampere.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) CAPABLE SPACE. A vehicle space with electrical
panel space and load capacity to support a branch circuit and necessary
raceways, both underground and/or surface mounted, to support EV charging.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING SPACE (EV SPACE). A space intended for future
installation of EV charging equipment and charging of electric vehicles.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION (EVCS). A parking space that includes
installation of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) at an EV Ready space.
An EVCS space may be used to satisfy EV Ready space requirements. EVSE shall be
installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code, Article 625.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE (EV) READY SPACE. A vehicle space which is provided with
a branch circuit; any necessary raceways, both underground and/or surface
mounted, to support EV charging, terminating in a receptacle or a charger.
      LEVEL 1 (L1) EV READY. A parking space that is served by a complete
electric circuit with the following requirements:
         (a)   A minimum of 2.2 kVa (110/120 volt, 20-ampere) capacity wiring.
         (b)   A receptacle labeled "electric vehicle outlet" or electric
vehicle supply equipment located within three feet of the parking space. If
EVSE is provided the minimum capacity of the EVSE shall be 16-ampere.
         (c)   Conduit oversized to accommodate future Level 2 EV Ready (208/
240 volt, 40-ampere) at each parking space.
      LEVEL 2 (L2) EV READY. A parking space that is served by a complete
electric circuit with the following requirements:
         (a)   A minimum of 8.3 kVa (208/240 volt, 40-ampere) capacity wiring.
         (b)   A receptacle labeled "electric vehicle outlet" or electric
vehicle supply equipment located within three feet of the parking space. If
EVSE is provided the minimum capacity of the EVSE shall be 30-ampere.
      ELECTRIC VEHICLE SUPPLY EQUIPMENT (EVSE). The conductors, including the
undergrounded, grounded and equipment grounding conductors and the electric
vehicle connectors, attachment plugs, and all other fittings, devices, power
outlets or apparatus installed for the purpose of transferring energy between
the premises wiring and the electric vehicle.
      ESSENTIAL SERVICES BUILDING. A facility as defined by the Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 16007, as amended from time to time. For purposes of this
chapter, essential services buildings are publicly owned and/or publicly
operated buildings whose purpose is to safeguard the public health and safety.
Essential services buildings generally exclude privately owned residences and/
or commercial buildings; except that, privately owned commercial buildings may
qualify as essential services buildings to the extent they are publicly
operated to safeguard the public health and safety.
      FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any newly constructed or new construction
building with construction plans for a commercial kitchen or cooking equipment.
      INDUSTRIAL PROCESS HEAT. A process or manufacturing equipment for which
sustained temperatures typically in excess of 350 degrees Fahrenheit are
required and demonstrably not achievable with commercial electric equipment.
      LOW POWER LEVEL 2 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING RECEPTACLE. A parking space
that is served by a complete electric circuit with the following requirements:
         (a)   A minimum of 8.3 kVa (208/240 volt, 40-ampere) capacity wiring.
         (b)   A receptacle labeled "electric vehicle outlet" or electric
vehicle supply equipment located within three feet of the parking space. If
EVSE is provided the minimum capacity of the EVSE shall be 30-ampere.
      MIXED-FUEL. A building or unit in a building that is plumbed for the use
of natural gas or propane as fuel for space heating, water heating, cooking or
clothes drying appliances or has gas plumbing within a building or within the
property lines of the premises connected to a gas meter or propane tank.
      MODIFIED PARKING LOT. Those for which paving material and curbing is
removed.
      NATURAL GAS. The same meaning as "fuel gas" as defined in the California
Plumbing Code and Mechanical Code.
      NATURAL GAS INFRASTRUCTURE. Fuel gas piping, other than service pipe, in
or in connection with a building, structure or within the property lines of
premises, extending from the point of delivery at the meter, service meter
assembly, outlet of the service regulator, service shutoff valve, or final
pressure regulator, whichever is applicable, as specified in the California
Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code.
      NEWLY CONSTRUCTED. A building that has never before been used or occupied
for any purpose.
      QUALIFIED GREEN BUILDING RATER. An individual who has been trained and
certified as a CALGreen inspector, LEED AP w/a specialty, GreenPoint rater,
PHIUS consultant, or has similar qualifications and certifications if
acceptable to the chief building official.
      SINGLE-FAMILY. A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one
family. It is used herein to describe one and two-family dwellings and
townhouses with attached private garages. It also includes factory-built,
modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the California Building
Code (CBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations and
agricultural worker housing.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.075 REQUIREMENTS FOR ADDITIONS AND ALTERATIONS; LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO
2022 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
15.04.010(g), Fairfax has adopted the 2022 Edition of the California Energy
Code known as California Code of Regulations, Part 6 of Title 24, with
additions and deletions as provided in this subchapter.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall constitute local amendments to
the cross-referenced provisions of the 2022 California Energy Code and shall be
deemed to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with the
respective provisions set forth in this subchapter.
   (C)   The California Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6, is hereby amended
provided below:
      (1)   Section 100.0 of Subchapter 1 of the 2022 California Energy Code is
modified to add new section (i) as follows:
         (i)   Single-Family Building Remodel Energy Reach Code - Purpose and
Intent. In addition to all requirements of the California Energy Code
applicable to Existing Single-Family Building additions and alterations, the
energy efficiency and renewable energy measures specified in Section 150.0(w)
shall be required for Covered Projects of mixed-fuel buildings.
      (2)   Section 100.1(b) is modified by adding the following definitions:
         "All-electric Building" or "All-electric Design" as defined in §
15.04.070(C)(2), Fairfax Town Code.
         "Covered Project(s)" as defined in §
15.04.070(C)(10), Fairfax Town Code.
         "Mixed-fuel" building as defined in §
15.04.070(C)(23), Fairfax Town Code.
      (3)   Section 150.0 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS - MANDATORY
FEATURES AND DEVICES, first two paragraphs, are modified to read as follows:
         Existing Single-Family residential buildings shall comply with the
applicable requirements of Sections 150(a) through 150.0(v), and Covered
Existing Single-Family Projects, other than projects identified as all-electric
construction for newly constructed or new construction buildings in §
15.04.070(C)(27), Fairfax Town Code, shall comply with the applicable
requirements of Section 150.0(w).
         NOTE: The requirements of Sections 150.0(a) through 150.0(v) apply to
newly constructed buildings. Sections 150.2(a) and 150.2(b) specify which
requirements of Sections 150.0(a) through 150.0(v) also apply to additions or
alterations, with the exception that Covered Existing Single-Family Projects,
other than projects identified as all-electric construction for newly
constructed or new construction buildings, shall also be required to comply
with Section 150.0(w).
   Section 150.0(w) is added to read as follows
      (w)   Requirements for a Covered Project are outlined by project type in
§
15.04.085, Table 1, Fairfax Town Code. A Covered Existing Single-Family
Project, as defined in §
15.04.075(C)(10)(ii), Fairfax Town Code, that includes an electrical panel
upgrade, a kitchen remodel or a laundry room remodel shall comply with the
requirements for Measure ER2 in §
15.04.085, Table 2, Fairfax Town Code. In addition, a Covered Existing Single-
Family Project in a building originally permitted for construction on or before
December 31, 2010, shall install a set of measures from the Measure Menu in §
15.04.085, Table 2, Fairfax Town Code, to achieve a total Measure Point Score
that is equal to or greater than the Target Score in said table and shall
conform to the List of Measure Specifications in §
15.04.085, Table 3, Fairfax Town Code, except as otherwise described below:
         (i)   Projects identified as all-electric construction for newly
constructed or new construction buildings in §
15.04.070(C), Fairfax Town Code.
         (ii)   Projects less than 200 square feet.
         (iii)   Projects that are limited solely to a newly created attached
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) or Junior Accessory Dwelling Unit (JADU) as
defined in §
15.04.070(C)(3), Fairfax Town Code. A newly created ADU and JADU shall include
either additions or conversions of existing space. This exception DOES NOT
apply to a Covered Existing Single-Family Project of an existing ADU or JADU.
         (iv)   Mobile Homes, Manufactured Housing, or Factory-built Housing as
defined in Division 13 of the California Health and Safety 12 Code (commencing
with section 17000 of the Health and Safety Code).
         (v)   If due to conditions specific to the project, it is technically
or economically infeasible to achieve compliance, the chief building official
may reduce the Target Score and/or waive some or all of the mandatory
requirements.
         (vi)   If the applicant demonstrates that the Energy Budget of the
proposed building, as calculated under Section 150.1(b), would be less than or
equal to the Energy Budget of the building if it otherwise complied with this
Section, 150.0(w).
         (vii)   A resident owner or occupant demonstrates that they qualify
for the California Alternative Rates for Energy (CARE) or Family Electric Rate
Assistance (FERA) program may comply by installing, to the specifications in §
15.04.085 Table 3, Fairfax Town Code, the following:
            (a)   E1: Lighting Measures; and
            (b)   E2: Water Heating Package
   (D)   In addition, all mandatory measures listed in §
15.04.085, Table 2, Fairfax Town Code, shall be installed.
   (E)   Measure verification shall be explicitly included as an addendum to
the Certificate of Compliance to be filed pursuant to 2022 Title 24 Section 10-
103.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.080 REQUIREMENTS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE; LOCAL AMENDMENTS
TO 2022 CALGREEN CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE.
   (A)   Pursuant to §
15.04.010(j), Fairfax has adopted the 2022 edition of the California Green
Building Standards Code known as Cal. Code of Regulations, Part 11 of Title 24
(herein referred to as CALGreen Code), including Division A4.6 for Tier 1 with
additions, and deletions as provided in this subchapter. Requirements are
outlined by project type in Table 1 of §
15.04.085, Fairfax Town Code.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall constitute local amendments to
the cross-referenced provisions of the 2022 CALGreen Code and shall be deemed
to replace the cross-referenced sections of said Code with the respective
provisions set forth in this subchapter.
   (C)   Section 202 of Chapter 2 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby amended
to add and amend the following definitions:
      Automatic Load Management System (ALMS). A control system designed to
manage load across one or more electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE),
circuits, panels and to share electrical capacity and/or automatically manage
power at each connection point. ALMS systems shall be designed to deliver no
less than 3.3 kVa (208/240 volt, 16-ampere) to each EV Capable, EV Ready or
EVCS space served by the ALMS, and meet the requirements of California
Electrical Code Article 625. The connected amperage to the building site for
the EV charging infrastructure shall not be lower than the required connected
amperage per California Green Building Standards Code, Title 24 Part 11.
      Direct Current Fast Charging (DCFC). A parking space provided with
electrical infrastructure that meets the following conditions:
      i.   A minimum of 48 kVa (480 volt, 100-ampere) capacity wiring.
      ii.   Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) located within three (3)
feet of the parking space providing a minimum capacity of 80-ampere.
      Electric Vehicle Charging Station (EVCS). A parking space that includes
installation of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) at an EV Ready space.
An EVCS space may be used to satisfy EV Ready space requirements. EVSE shall be
installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code, Article 625.
      Electric Vehicle (EV) Ready Space. [HCD] A vehicle space which is
provided with a branch circuit; any necessary raceways, both underground and/or
surface mounted; to accommodate EV charging, terminating in a receptacle or a
charger.
      Electric Vehicle (EV) Capable Space. A vehicle space with electrical
panel space and load capacity to support a branch circuit and necessary
raceways, both underground and/or surface mounted, to support EV charging.
      Level 2 (L2) EV Capable. A parking space provided with electrical
infrastructure that meets the following requirements:
      i.   Conduit that links a listed electrical panel with sufficient
capacity to a junction box or receptacle located within three (3) feet of the
parking space.
      ii.   The conduit shall be designed to accommodate at least 8.3 kVa (208/
240 volt, 40-ampere) per parking space. Conduit shall have a minimum nominal
trade size of 1 inch inside diameter and may be sized for multiple circuits as
allowed by the California Electrical Code. Conduit shall be installed at a
minimum in spaces that will be inaccessible after construction, either trenched
underground or where penetrations to walls, floors, or other partitions would
otherwise be required for future installation of branch circuits, and such
additional elements deemed necessary by the Building Official. Construction
documents shall indicate future completion of conduit from the panel to the
parking space, via the installed inaccessible conduit.
      iii.   The electrical panel shall reserve a space for a 40-ampere
overcurrent protective device space(s) for EV charging, labeled in the panel
directory as "EV CAPABLE."
      iv.   Electrical load calculations shall demonstrate that the electrical
panel service capacity and electrical system, including any on-site
distribution transformer(s), have sufficient capacity to simultaneously charge
all EVs at all required EV spaces at a minimum of 40 amperes.
      v.   The parking space shall contain signage with at least a 12" font
adjacent to the parking space indicating the space is EV Capable.
      Level 1 (L1) EV Ready. A parking space that is served by a complete
electric circuit with the following requirements:
      i.   A minimum of 2.2 kVa (110/120 volt, 20-ampere) capacity wiring.
      ii.   A receptacle labeled "Electric Vehicle Outlet" or electric vehicle
supply equipment located within three (3) feet of the parking space. If EVSE is
provided the minimum capacity of the EVSE shall be 16-ampere.
      iii.   Conduit oversized to accommodate future Level 2 EV Ready (208/240
volt, 40-ampere) at each parking space.
      Level 2 (L2) EV Ready. A parking space that is served by a complete
electric circuit with the following requirements:
      i.   A minimum of 8.3 kVa (208/240 volt, 40-ampere) capacity wiring.
      ii.   A receptacle labeled "Electric Vehicle Outlet" or electric vehicle
supply equipment located within three (3) feet of the parking space. If EVSE is
provided the minimum capacity of the EVSE shall be 30-ampere.
      Low Power Level 2 (L2) EV Ready. A parking space that is served by a
complete electric circuit with the following requirements:
      i.   A minimum of 4.1 kVA (208/240 Volt, 20-ampere) capacity wiring.
      ii.   A receptacle labeled "Electric Vehicle Outlet" or electric vehicle
supply equipment located within three (3) feet of the parking space. If EVSE is
provided the minimum capacity of the EVSE shall be 16-ampere.
      iii.   Conduit oversized to accommodate future Level 2 EV Ready (208/240
volt, 40-ampere) at each parking space.
      Off-Street Loading Spaces. [BSC-CG, DSA-SS] An area, other than a public
street, public way, or other property (and exclusive of off-street parking
spaces), permanently reserved or set aside for the loading or unloading of
motor vehicles, including ways of ingress and egress and maneuvering areas.
Whenever the term "loading space" is used, it shall, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise, be construed as meaning off-street loading space. This
excludes designated passenger loading/unloading.
   (D)   Section 301.1 of Chapter 3 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby amended
as underlined and struck through:
      301.1 Scope. Buildings shall be designed to comply with applicable
requirements of Town of Fairfax Green Building Requirements beginning at
Chapter
15.04.065(A), Fairfax Town Code, and shall also include the green building
measures specified as mandatory in the application checklists contained in this
code.
   (E)   Section 301.1.1 of Chapter 3 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby
amended as underlined and struck through:
      301.1.1 Additions and alterations. [HCD] The mandatory provisions of
Chapter 4 shall be applied to additions and alterations of existing residential
buildings, in accordance with applicable requirements of Town of Fairfax Green
Building Requirements beginning at Chapter
15.04.065 (A), Fairfax Town Code. The requirements shall apply only to and/or
within the specific area of the addition or alteration.
   (F)   The mandatory provisions of section 4.106.4.1.1 may apply to additions
or alterations of existing parking facilities or the addition of new parking
facilities or the addition of new parking facilities serving existing
multifamily buildings. See Section 4.106.4.1.2 for application.
      NOTE: Repairs including, but not limited to, resurfacing, restriping, and
repairing or maintaining existing lighting fixtures are not considered
alterations for the purpose of this section.
   (G)   Section 301.3 of Chapter 3 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby amended
as underlined and struck through:
      301.3 Nonresidential additions and alterations. [BSC-CG] The provisions
of individual sections of Chapter 5 apply to newly constructed buildings and
building additions and alterations (for occupancies within the authority of
California Building standards Commission). Code sections relative to additions
and alterations shall only apply to the portions of the building being added or
altered within the scope of the permitted work.
   (H)   Section 4.106.4 of Chapter 4 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby
amended as underlined and struck through:
   4.106.4 Electric vehicle (EV) charging. Residential construction shall
comply with Section 4.106.4.1 or 4.106.4.2 to facilitate future installation
and use of EV chargers. Electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE) shall be
installed in accordance with the California Electrical Code, Article 625. For
EVCS signs, refer to Caltrans Traffic Operations Policy Directive 13-01 (Zero
Emission Vehicle Signs and Pavement Markings) or its successor(s). Calculation
for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
      Exceptions:
      1.   On a case-by-case basis, where the local enforcing agency has
determined EV charging and infrastructure are not feasible based upon one or
more of the following conditions:
         1.1.   Where there is no local utility power supply or the local
utility is unable to supply adequate power.
         1.2.   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcing agency
substantiating that additional local utility infrastructure design
requirements, directly related to the implementation of Section 4.106.4, may
adversely impact the construction cost of the project.
      2.   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
(JADU) without additional parking facilities and without electrical panel
upgrade or new panel installation. Detached ADUs, attached ADUs, and JADUs
without additional parking but with electrical panel upgrades or new panels
must have reserved breakers and electrical capacity according to the
requirements of A4.106.8.1.
      3.   Multifamily building projects that have approved entitlements before
the code effective date.
      4.   Parking spaces accessible only by automated mechanical car parking
systems are not required to comply with this code section.
   4.106.4.1 Multifamily dwellings with parking facilities. Requirements apply
to parking spaces that are assigned or leased to individual dwelling units, as
well as unassigned residential parking. Visitor or common area parking is not
included.
      4.106.4.1.1 New Construction. Fifteen percent (15%) of dwelling units
with parking spaces shall be EVCS with Level 2 EV Ready. ALMS shall be
permitted to reduce load when multiple vehicles are charging. Eighty-five
percent (85%) of dwelling units with parking spaces shall be provided with a
Low Power Level 2 EV Ready space. EV ready spaces and EVCS in multifamily
developments shall comply with California Building Code, Chapter 11A, Section
1109A. EVCS shall comply with the accessibility provisions for EV chargers in
the California Building Code, Chapter 11B.
      NOTE: The total number of EV spaces should be one-hundred percent (100%)
of dwelling units or one-hundred percent (100%) of parking spaces, whichever is
less.
      4.106.4.1.2 Additions and alterations of existing buildings.
      1.   When parking facilities upgrade the service panel or parking lot
surface is modified, including the removal of paving material and curbing,
comply with the number of spaces designated for the project type as outlined in
Table 1 of Chapter
15.04.085, Fairfax Town Code. Upgrades shall be required at currently
designated vehicle parking spaces. Upgrades shall be required for remaining
parking spaces after meeting the accessibility requirements of California
Building Code Chapters 11A and 11B.
      2.   When new parking facilities are added and ALMS is installed, the
ALMS system must be designed to deliver no less than 2.2 kVa (110/120 volt, 20-
ampere).
      4.106.4.2.1 Additions and Alterations of Existing Buildings.
      1.   When parking facilities upgrade the service panel or parking lot
surface is modified, including the removal of paving material and curbing,
comply with the number of spaces designated for the project type as outlined in
Table 1 of Chapter
15.04.065(A), Fairfax Town Code. Upgrades shall be required at currently
designated vehicle parking spaces. Upgrades shall be required for remaining
parking spaces after meeting the accessibility requirements of California
Building Code Chapters 11A and 11B.
      2.   When new parking facilities are added and ALMS is installed, the
ALMS system must be designed to deliver no less than 2.2 kVa (110/120 volt, 20-
ampere).
      4.106.4.3 Electric vehicle charging stations (EVCS).
      Electric vehicle charging stations required by Section 4.106.4.1 and
4.106.4.2, shall comply with Section 4.106.4.3.
         Exception: Electric vehicle charging stations serving public
accommodations, public housing, motels, and hotels shall not be required to
comply with this section. See California Building Code, Chapter 11B, for
applicable requirements.
         4.106.4.3.1 Location.
         EVCS shall comply with at least one of the following options:
         1.   The charging space shall be located adjacent to an accessible
parking space meeting the requirements of the California Building Code, Chapter
11A, to allow use of the EV charger from the accessible parking space.
         2.   The charging space shall be located on an accessible route, as
defined in the California Building Code, Chapter 2, to the building.
         Exception: Electric vehicle charging stations designed and constructed
in compliance with the California Building Code, Chapter 11B, are not required
to comply with Section 4.106.4.3.1 and Section 4.106.4.3.2, Item 3.
         4.106.4.3.2 Dimensions.
         The charging spaces shall be designed to comply with the following:
         1.   The minimum length of each EV space shall be 18 feet (5486 mm).
         2.   The minimum width of each EV space shall be 9 feet (2743 mm).
         3.   One in every 25 charging spaces, but not less than one, shall
also have an 8- foot (2438 mm) wide minimum aisle. A 5-foot (1524 mm) wide
minimum aisle shall be permitted provided the minimum width of the EV space is
12 feet (3658 mm).
            a.   Surface slope for this EV space and the aisle shall not exceed
1 unit vertical in 48 units horizontal (2.083 percent slope) in any direction.
            Exception: Where the Town of Fairfax Municipal or Zoning Code
permits parking space dimensions that are less than the minimum requirements
stated in this section 4.106.4.3.2, and the compliance with which would be
infeasible due to particular circumstances of a project, an exception may be
granted while remaining in compliance with California Building Code Section
Table 11B-228.3.2.1 and 11B-812, as applicable.
      4.106.4.4 Direct current fast charging stations (DCFC). One DCFC may be
substituted for up to five (5) EVCS to meet the requirements of 4.106.4.1 and
4.106.4.2. Where ALMS serve DCFC stations, the power demand from the DCFC shall
be prioritized above Level 1 and Level 2 spaces.
   (I)   Section A4.106.8 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby amended as
underlined and struck through:
      New construction shall comply with Sections A4.106.8.1, to facilitate
future installation and use of electric vehicle chargers. Electric vehicle
supply equipment (EVSE) shall be installed in accordance with the California
Electrical Code, Article 625.
   (J)   Section 5.106.5.3 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby amended as
underlined and struck through:
      5.106.5.3 Electric vehicle (EV) charging.
      Construction to provide electric vehicle infrastructure and facilitate
electric vehicle charging shall comply with Section 5.106.5.3.1 and shall be
provided in accordance with regulations in the California Building Code and the
California Electrical Code. Accessible EVCS shall be provided in accordance
with the California Building Code Chapter 11B Section 11B-228.3. For EVCS
signs, refer to Caltrans Traffic Operations Policy Directive 13-01 (Zero
Emission Vehicle Signs and Pavement Markings) or its successor(s). Calculation
for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
      Exceptions:
      1.   On a case-by-case basis, where the local enforcing agency has
determined EV charging and infrastructure are not feasible based upon one or
more of the following conditions:
         a.   Where there is no local utility power supply
         b.   Where the local utility is unable to supply adequate power.
         c.   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcement agency
substantiating that additional local utility infrastructure design
requirements, directly related to the implementation of Section 5.106.5.3, may
adversely impact the construction cost of the project.
      2.   Parking spaces accessible only by automated mechanical car parking
systems are not required to comply with this code section.
   (K)   Section A5.106.5 of Appendix A5 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby
amended as struck through:
      A5.106.5 Electric Vehicle (EV) charging.
      Construction shall comply with Section A5.106.5.3.1 or A5.106.5.3.2, and
in accordance with regulations in the California Building Code and the
California Electrical Code. Accessible EVCS shall be provided in accordance
with the California Building Code Chapter 11B Section 11B-228.3. For EVCS
signs, refer to Caltrans Traffic Operations Policy Directive 13-01 (Zero
Emission Vehicle Signs and Pavement Markings) or its successor(s). Calculation
for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
      Exceptions:
      1.   On a case-by-case basis where the local enforcing agency has
determined compliance with this section is not feasible based upon one of the
following conditions:
         a.   Where there is no local utility power supply.
         b.   Where the local utility is unable to supply adequate power.
         c.   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcement agency
substantiating that additional local utility infrastructure design
requirements, directly related to the implementation of Section A5.106.5, may
adversely impact the construction cost of the project.
      2.   Parking spaces accessible only by automated mechanical car parking
systems are not required to comply with this code section.
         A5.106.5.3 Nonresidential Occupancies - Shared Parking Facilities.
            A5.106.5.3.1 New Construction - Tier 1.
            Table A5.106.5.3.1 shall be used to determine the number of EV
capable spaces required. Refer to section 5.106.5.3 for design space
requirements.
            When EV capable spaces are provided with EVSE to create EVCS per
Table A5.106.5.3.1.
TABLE A5.106.5.3.1
Total Number of Actual Tier 1 Number of Required Tier 1 Number of EVCS (EV
Parking Spaces         EV Capable Spaces         Capable Spaces Provided with
                                                 EVSE)2
TABLE A5.106.5.3.1
Total Number of Actual Tier 1 Number of Required Tier 1 Number of EVCS (EV
Parking Spaces         EV Capable Spaces         Capable Spaces Provided with
                                                 EVSE)2
0-9                    2                         0
10-25                  5                         0
26-50                  11                        2
51-75                  19                        3
76-100                 26                        4
101-150                38                        6
151-200                53                        9
201 and over           30 percent of total1      25 percent of EV capable
                                                 spaces1
1.   Calculation for spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
2.   The number of required EVCS (EV capable spaces provided with EVSE) in
column 3 count toward the total number of required EV capable spaces shown in
column 2.
 
            A5.106.5.3.2 Additions and alterations of existing buildings.
            1.   When parking facilities upgrade the service panel or parking
lot surface is modified, including the removal of paving material and curbing,
comply with the number of spaces designated for the project type as outlined in
Table 1 of Chapter
15.04.085, Fairfax Town Code. Upgrades shall be required at currently
designated vehicle parking spaces. Upgrades shall be required for remaining
parking spaces after meeting the accessibility requirements of California
Building Code Chapters 11A and 11B.
            2.   When new parking facilities are added and ALMS is installed,
the ALMS system must be designed to deliver no less than 2.2 kVa (110/120 volt,
20-ampere).
         A5.106.5.4 Direct current fast charging stations. One DCFC may be
substituted for up to five (5) EVCS to meet the requirements of 5.106.5.3.
Where ALMS serve DCFC stations, the power demand from the DCFC shall be
prioritized above Level 1 and Level 2 spaces.
   (L)   Section 5.106.5.4 of the 2022 CALGreen Code is hereby amended as
struck through:
      5.106.5.4 Electric vehicle charging readiness: medium-duty and heavy-
duty. [N]
      Construction shall comply with Section 5.106.5.4.1 to facilitate future
installation of electric vehicle supply equipment (EVSE). Construction for
warehouses, grocery stores and retail stores with planned off-street loading
spaces shall also comply with Section 5.106.5.4.1 for future installation of
medium- and heavy-duty EVSE. Accessible EVCS shall be provided in accordance
with the California Building Code Chapter 11B Section 11B-228.3. For EVCS
signs, refer to Caltrans Traffic Operations Policy Directive 13-01 (Zero
Emission Vehicle Signs and Pavement Markings) or its successor(s).
      Exceptions:
      1.   On a case-by-case basis where the local enforcing agency has
determined compliance with this section is not feasible based upon one of the
following conditions:
         a.   Where there is no local utility power supply.
         b.   Where the local utility is unable to supply adequate power.
         c.   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcing agency
substantiating that additional local utility infrastructure design
requirements, directly related to the implementation of Section 5.106.5.3, may
adversely impact the construction cost of the project.
         5.106.5.4.1 Warehouses, grocery stores and retail stores with planned
off-street loading spaces.
         [N] In order to avoid future demolition when adding EV supply and
distribution equipment, spare raceway(s) or busway(s) and adequate capacity for
transformer(s), service panel(s) or subpanel(s) shall be installed at the time
of construction in accordance with the California Electrical Code. Construction
plans and specifications shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
         1.   The transformer, main service equipment and subpanels shall meet
the minimum power requirement in Table 5.106.5.4.1 to accommodate the dedicated
branch circuits for the future installation of EVSE.
         2.   The construction documents shall indicate one or more location(s)
convenient to the planned off-street loading space(s) reserved for medium- and
heavy-duty EV charging cabinets and charging dispensers, and a pathway reserved
for routing of conduit from the termination of the raceway(s) or busway(s) to
the charging cabinet(s) and dispenser(s), as shown in Table 5.106.5.4.1.
         3.   Raceway(s) or busway(s) originating at a main service panel or a
subpanel(s) serving the area where potential future medium- and heavy-duty EVSE
will be located and shall terminate in close proximity to the potential future
location of the charging equipment for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles.
         4.   The raceway(s) or busway(s) shall be of sufficient size to carry
the minimum additional system load to the future location of the charging for
medium- and heavy-duty EVs as shown in Table 5.106.5.4.1.
TABLE 5.106.5.4.1, Raceway Conduit and Panel power Requirements for Medium-and-
Heavy-Duty EVSE [N]
                                                           Additional capacity
Building Type Building Size (sq. ft.) Number of Off-street Required (kVa) for
                                      Loading Spaces       Raceway & Busway and
                                                           Transformer & Panel
TABLE 5.106.5.4.1, Raceway Conduit and Panel power Requirements for Medium-and-
Heavy-Duty EVSE [N]
                                                           Additional capacity
Building Type Building Size (sq. ft.) Number of Off-street Required (kVa) for
                                      Loading Spaces       Raceway & Busway and
                                                           Transformer & Panel
              10,000 to 90,000        1 or 2               200
Grocery                               3 or greater         400
              Greater than 90,000     1 or greater         400
Retail        10,000 to 135,000       1 or 2               200
              Greater than 135,000    1 or greater         400
              20,000 to 256,000       1 or 2               200
Warehouse                             3 or greater         400
              Greater than 256,000    1 or greater         400
 
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.085 STANDARDS FOR COMPLIANCE.
   The Town of Fairfax Green Building Requirements define compliance thresholds
for different projects that are covered by this chapter. These standards are
summarized below in Table 1. The energy efficiency and electrification measures
menu and specifications are detailed in Tables 2 and 3.
Table 1: Requirements by Project Type and Size
Project Type and Size Green Building Energy Efficiency Electric Vehicle
                      Requirements   Requirements      Requirements
Table 1: Requirements by Project Type and Size
Project Type and    Green Building      Energy Efficiency   Electric Vehicle
Size                Requirements        Requirements        Requirements
Single and Two-                                             Comply with
Family Newly                                                CALGreen Measure
Constructed or New                                          A4.106.8.1, Tier 1
Construction        All-electric design Meet the standards
                    AND                 outlined for the    Of the total
Multifamily         CALGreen Tier 1     project in the 2022 parking spaces,
Residential                            California Energy   (i) 15% Level 2
Newly Constructed                       Code                (L2) EVCS
or New Construction                                         (ii) 85% Low-Power
                                                            Level 2 (LPL2) EV
                                                            Ready
                                                            For Nonresidential:
                                                            comply with
                                                            CALGreen Measure
                                                            A5.106.5.3.1, Tier
                                        Meet the standards  1;
Nonresidential      All-electric design outlined for the    AND
Newly Constructed   AND                 project in the 2022 For Nonresidential
or New Construction CALGreen Tier 1     California Energy   Grocery, Retail, or
                                        Code                Warehouses planning
                                                            off-street medium-
                                                            heavy-duty loading
                                                            spaces: comply with
                                                            CALGreen Measure
                                                            5.106.5.4
Single and Two-                         Meet the standards
Family Additions                        outlined for the
and Alterations     CALGreen Mandatory  project in the 2022
less than 200                           California Energy
square feet                             Code
                                        Using the Measure   If the project is
                                        Menu in Table 2,    upgrading the main
                                        achieve a total     electrical service
                                        score that is equal panel, comply with
Single and Two-                         to or greater than  CALGreen Measure
Family Additions                        the Target Score    A4.106.8.1,
and Alterations 200 CALGreen Tier 1     for the applicable  Tier 1
square feet or                          climate zone and
greater                                 install the
                                        electric readiness
                                        measures (ER2) as
                                        applicable in Table
                                        3
Multifamily
Residential
Additions and       CALGreen Mandatory
Alterations less                                            If the service
than 200 square                                             panel is modified,
feet                                                        add designated
Multifamily                                                 electrical capacity
Residential                                                 for 20% of onsite
Additions and                                               parking spaces to
Alterations 200                                             be Level 2 EV
square feet or                                              Ready.
greater                                                     If parking lot
                                                            surface is modified
                                                            (paving material
                                                            and curbing
                                                            removed):
                                                            (i) add raceway to
                                                            a minimum of 25% of
                                                            exposed parking
                                                            spaces, AND
                                                            (ii) install at
                                        Meet the standards  minimum 5% EVCS to
                                        outlined for the    parking spaces
                                        project in the 2022 requiring any
                                        California Energy   combination of
                                        Code                Level 2 and Direct
                    CALGreen Tier 1                         Current Fast
Nonresidential                                              Charging EVSE,
Additions and                                               except at least one
Alterations                                                 Level 2 EVSE shall
                                                           be provided.
                                                            Where existing
                                                            electrical service
                                                            will not be
                                                            upgraded in the
                                                            existing project
                                                            scope, designate
                                                            capacity for
                                                            parking spaces to
                                                            the maximum extent
                                                            that does not
                                                            require an upgrade
                                                            to existing
                                                            electrical service.



The following conditions also apply to Table 1:
(a)   Cumulative new construction or remodels during the preceding 36-month
period from the acceptance of this application shall be considered as a single
covered project, and subject to the highest compliance threshold based on the
cumulative project size or valuation.
(b)   Mixed use (residential and commercial) projects must comply either with
the applicable covered project requirements for the respective residential and
commercial portions of the project or may propose to utilize a mixed-use rating
system, subject to approval by the chief building official.
 
Table 2: Energy and Electrification Menu of Measures by Climate Zone
Table 2: Energy and Electrification Menu of Measures by Climate Zone
                                       Climate Zone        Steps
Measure                                                    1) Choose your
                                       2                   Climate Zone using
                                                           CEC toolfinder1
                                       Target Score        2) Minimum Target
                                                           Score needed to
Specification       Spec. ID (Refer to                     comply
                    Table 3)           8                   (1 point = 1MMBTU
                                                           savings per yr.)

Lighting            E1                 Mandatory           3) Choose a measure
Water Heating       E2                 1                   or a combination of
Package                                                    measures that adds
Air Sealing         E3                 1                   up to the minimum
R-49 Attic          E4                 1                   target score above
Insulation                                                 based on CZ.
Duct Sealing        E5                 1                   Measures listed as
New Ducts + Duct    E6                 2                   "Mandatory" MUST be
Sealing                                                    installed.
PV + Electric Ready ER1                12                  4) Use the
Pre-Wire                                                   Specification Number
                                       Mandatory           (Spec. ID) column as
Electric Readiness  ER2                (if remodeling      a key and conform to
Measures                               kitchen, laundry,   the specifications
                                       or upgrading panel) in Table 3 below.
HPWH                FS1                12                  Table 3 describes,
High Eff HPWH       FS2                13                  specifies, and
HVAC Heat Pump      FS3                13                  details compliance
High Eff HVAC Heat  FS4                14                  with each
Pump                                                       corresponding
Heat Pump Clothes   FS5                1                   measure.
Dryer                                                       
Induction Cooktop   FS6                1
1California Energy Commission climate zone tool finder at https://
www.energy.ca.gov/programs-and-topics/programs/building-energy-efficiency-
standards/climate-z one-tool-maps-and
The following conditions also apply to Table 2:
(a)   Unless otherwise specified, the requirements shall apply to the entire
dwelling unit, not just the additional or altered portion.
(b)   Measures from the Measure Menu in Table 2 and specified in Table 3, that
already exist in the home, may be counted towards compliance with these
requirements, unless otherwise specified in Table 3.
(c)   Measures from the Measure Menu in Table 2 that are to be installed to
satisfy requirements under the State Energy Code, Title 24, Part 6, may also be
counted towards compliance with these requirements. Where these requirements
conflict with other Energy Code requirements, the stricter requirements shall
prevail.
 
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
Table 3. List of Measure Specifications
ID Measure Specification
Table 3. List of Measure Specifications
ID  Measure Specification
Energy Measures
    Lighting Measures - Replace all interior and exterior screw-in incandescent, halogen,
E1  and compact fluorescent lamps with LED lamps. Install photocell controls on all
    exterior lighting luminaires.
    Water Heating Package: Add exterior insulation meeting a minimum of R-6 to existing
    storage water heaters. Insulate all accessible hot water pipes with pipe insulation a
    minimum of ¾ inch thick. This includes insulating the supply pipe leaving the water
    heater, piping to faucets underneath sinks, and accessible pipes in attic spaces or
    crawlspaces. Upgrade fittings in sinks and showers to meet current California Green
    Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11) Section 4.303 water efficiency
    requirements.
E2     Exception 1:   Water heater blanket is not required on water heaters less than 20
    gallons.
       Exception 2:   Water heater blanket not required if application of a water heater
    blanket voids the warranty on the water heater.
       Exception 3:   Upgraded fixtures are not required if existing fixtures have rated or
    measured flow rates of no more than ten percent greater than 2022 California Green
    Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11) Section 4.303 water efficiency
    requirements.
       Exception 4:   Water heaters with factory installed insulation of R-24 or greater
    Air Sealing: Seal all accessible cracks, holes, and gaps in the building envelope at
    walls, floors, and ceilings. Pay special attention to penetrations including plumbing,
    electrical, and mechanical vents, recessed can light luminaires, and windows. Weather-
    strip doors if not already present. Verification shall be conducted following a
    prescriptive checklist that outlines which building aspects need to be addressed by the
    permit applicant and verified by an inspector. Compliance can also be demonstrated with
    blower door testing conducted by a certified HERS Rater no more than three years prior
E3  to the permit application date that either: a) shows at least a 30 percent reduction
    from pre-retrofit conditions; or b) shows that the number of air changes per hour at 50
    Pascals pressure difference (ACH50) does not exceed ten. If combustion appliances are
    located within the pressure boundary of the building, conduct a combustion safety test
    by a professional certified by the Building Performance Institute in accordance with
    the ANSI/BPI-1200-S-2017 Standard Practice for Basic Analysis of Buildings1, the Whole
    House Combustion Appliance Safety Test Procedure for the Comfortable Home Rebates
    Program 2020 or the California Community Services and Development Combustion Appliance
    Safety Testing Protocol.
    R-49 Attic Insulation: Attic insulation shall be installed to achieve a weighted
    assembly U-factor of 0.020 or insulation installed at the ceiling level shall have a
    thermal resistance of R-49 or greater for the insulation alone. Recessed downlight
    luminaires in the ceiling shall be covered with insulation to the same depth as the
E4  rest of the ceiling. Luminaires not rated for insulation contact must be replaced or
    fitted with a fire-proof cover that allows for insulation to be installed directly over
    the cover.
       Exception:   In buildings where existing R-30 is present and existing recessed
    downlight luminaires are not rated for insulation contact, insulation is not required
    to be installed over the luminaires.
    Duct Sealing: Air seal all space conditioning ductwork to meet the requirements of the
    2022 Title 24 Section 150.2(b)1E. The duct system must be tested by a HERS Rater no
E5  more than three years prior to the Covered Single Family Project permit application
    date to verify the duct sealing and confirm that the requirements have been met. This
    measure may not be combined with the New Ducts and Duct Sealing measure in this Table.
    New Ducts + Duct Sealing: Replace existing space conditioning ductwork with new R-
    8 ducts that meet the requirements of 2022 Title 24 Section 150.0(m)11. This measure
E6  may not be combined with the Duct Sealing measure in this Table. To qualify, a
    preexisting measure must have been installed no more than three years before the
    Covered Single Family Project permit application date.
E7  Windows: Replace all existing windows with high performance windows with an area-
    weighted average U-factor no greater than 0.32.
    R-13 Wall Insulation: Install wall insulation in all exterior walls to achieve a
E8  weighted U-factor of 0.102 or install wall insulation in all exterior wall cavities
    that shall result in an installed thermal resistance of R-13 or greater for the
    insulation alone.
Fuel Substitution Measures
FS1 Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH): Replace all existing electric resistance and natural gas
    storage water heaters with heat pump water heaters.
    High Efficiency Heat Pump Water Heater (HPWH): Replace all existing electric resistance
FS2 and natural gas storage water heaters with heat pump water heaters with a Northwest
    Energy Efficiency Alliance (NEEA) Tier 3 or higher rating.
FS3 HVAC Heat Pump: Replace all existing gas space heating system and existing electric
    resistance heating systems with electric heat pump systems.
    High Efficiency HVAC Heat Pump: Replace all existing gas space heating system and
FS4 existing electric resistance heating systems with electric heat pump systems with a
    SEER rating of 21 or greater and an HSPF rating of 11 or greater.
FS5 Heat Pump Clothes Dryer: Replace all existing electric resistance clothes dryers with
    heat pump dryers with no resistance element and cap the gas lines.
FS6 Induction Cooktop: Replace all existing gas and electric resistance stove tops with
    inductive stove tops and cap the gas lines.
Solar PV and Electric-Readiness Measures
    PV+ Electric Ready Pre-Wire:
    For New PV Systems: Install a new solar PV system that meets the requirements of 2022
    Title 24 Section 150.1(c)14 and upgrade the service panel to meet the requirements of
ER1 ER2.G. and install any two of the other measures from ER2.A - ER2.F.
    For Existing PV Systems: If the home already has an existing PV system, to claim credit
    for this measure, ER1, upgrade the service panel to meet the requirements of ER2.G. and
    install any two of the other measures from ER2.A - ER2.F.
    Electric Readiness Measures:
    To claim credit for Item ER1, in addition to the solar PV system installed, upgrade the
    panelboard to meet the requirements of Item ER2.G and install any two of the other
    measures ER2.A - ER2.F, below to allow for installation of electric appliances at a
    future date.
    For any Covered Project, if the service panel is being upgraded, install any two of the
    other measures below.
    If the laundry room is being remodeled, comply with Item ER2.D and upgrade the
    panelboard to meet the requirements of Item ER2.G.
    If the kitchen is being remodeled, comply with Item ER2.C and upgrade the service panel
    to meet the requirements of Item ER2.G.
       A.   Heat Pump Water Heater Ready, as specified in Section 150.0(n)1.
       B.   Heat Pump Space Heater Ready, as specified in Section 150.0(t).
       C.   Electric Cooktop Ready, as specified in Section 150.0(u).
ER2    D.   Electric Clothes Dryer Ready, as specified in Section 150.0(v).
       E.   Energy Storage Systems (ESS) Ready, as specified in Section 150.0(s).
       F.   EV Charger Ready. Install a listed raceway for an EV charger, that meets the
    requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11)
    Section A4.106.8.1, Tier 1 and 2, which otherwise applies to new construction.
       G.   Upgrade the panelboard serving the individual dwelling to either:
          (i)   a minimum 200 amp panel with a minimum 225 amp busbar rating to accommodate
    future connection of electric appliances, including heat pump water heaters, heat pump
    space heaters, electric cooktops, electric clothes dryers as specified in California
    Energy Code Section 150.0 (n), (t), (u) and (v) and Level 2 electric vehicle supply
    equipment; or,
          (ii)   provide electrical load calculations and appliance specifications for
    serving all of these end-uses with a minimum 100-amp panel.
             Exception: If an electrical permit is not otherwise required for the project
    other than compliance with this Item, ER2.
 
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.090 INCENTIVES FOR COMPLIANCE.
   In addition to the required standards for compliance, the Town Council may
establish by resolution, financial or application processing incentives and/or
award or recognition programs to encourage higher levels of green building
compliance for a project.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.095 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   The procedures for compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall
include, but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Project design. Applicants for a covered project are strongly
encouraged to involve a qualified green building rater in the initial design
phases of the project in advance of submittal of an application to determine
applicable green building compliance thresholds and the most cost effective and
appropriate means of achieving compliance.
   (B)   Planning applications. If a discretionary planning application is
required for a covered project, applicants should be prepared to identify
expected green building measures to be included in the project to achieve the
compliance thresholds. Applicants should identify any anticipated difficulties
in achieving compliance and any exemptions from the requirements of this
chapter that may be requested.
   (C)   Building plan check review. Upon submittal of an application for a
building permit, building plans for any covered project shall include a green
building program description and completed checklist. The checklist shall be
incorporated onto a separate full-sized plan sheet included with the building
plans. Evidence that the project, as indicated by the project plans and green
building program description, will achieve the standards for compliance
outlined in §
15.04.085, shall be provided prior to issuance of a building permit.
   (D)   Changes during construction. During the construction process,
alternate green building measures may be substituted, provided that
documentation of the proposed change and the project's continued ability to
achieve the standards for compliance to the chief building official shall be
provided.
   (E)   Final building inspection. Prior to final building inspection and
occupancy for any covered project, evidence that project construction has
achieved the required compliance set forth in the standards for compliance
outlined in §
15.04.085 shall be provided. The chief building official shall review the
documentation submitted by the applicant and determine whether the project has
achieved the compliance threshold as set forth in the standards for compliance
outlined in §
15.04.085. If the chief building official determines that the applicant has met
these requirements, the final building inspection may proceed.
   (F)   Conflict with other laws. The provisions of this chapter are intended
to be in addition to and not in conflict with other laws, regulations and
ordinances relating to building construction and site development. If any
provision of this chapter conflicts with any duly adopted and valid statutes or
regulations of the federal government or the state of California, the federal
or state statutes or regulations shall take precedence.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 15.04.100 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Buildings which are temporary (such as construction trailers).
      (2)   Building area which is not or is not intended to be conditioned
space.
      (3)   Any requirements of this chapter which would impair the historic
integrity of any building listed on a local, state or federal register of
historic structures, as determined by the chief building official and as
regulated by the California Historic Building Code (Title 24, Part 8). In
making such a determination, the chief building official may require the
submittal of an evaluation by an architectural historian or similar expert.
   (B)   As outlined in the 2022 CALGreen code, section 4.106.4 and A5.106.5,
applicants may be exempted from the electric vehicle changing requirements on a
case-by-case basis where the local enforcing agency has determined EV charging
and infrastructure are not feasible based upon one or more of the following
conditions:
      (1)   Where there is no commercial power supply or the local utility is
unable to supply adequate power.
      (2)   Where there is evidence suitable to the local enforcing agency
substantiating that additional local utility infrastructure design
requirements, directly related to the implementation of section 4.106.4 and
A5.106.5 may adversely impact the construction cost of the project.
      (3)   ADUs and JADUs without additional parking facilities.
      (4)   Parking spaces accessible only by automated mechanical car parking
systems are not required to comply with CALGreen Code section 4.106.4 and
A5.106.5
   (C)   Hardship or infeasibility exemption. If an applicant for a covered
project believes that circumstances exist that make it a hardship or infeasible
to meet the requirements of this chapter, the applicant may request an
exemption as set forth below. In applying for an exemption, the burden is on
the applicant to show hardship or infeasibility.
      (1)   Application. Based on the following, the applicant shall identify
in writing the specific requirements of the standards for compliance that the
project is unable to achieve and the circumstances that make it a hardship or
infeasible for the project to comply with this chapter. The applicant may not
petition for relief from any requirement of the 2022 California Energy Code
(Title 24, Part 6) and referenced standards, or the 2022 California Green
Building Standards (Title 24, Part 11) of the California Building Standards
Code. Circumstances that constitute hardship or infeasibility shall include one
of the following:
         (a)   That the cost of achieving compliance is disproportionate to the
overall cost of the project;
         (b)   That strict compliance with these standards would create or
maintain a hazardous condition(s) and present a life safety risk to the
occupants;
         (c)   There is a conflict between the provisions of the applicable
green building rating system and the California Building Standards Code, other
state code provisions, other requirements of this title or conditions imposed
on the project through a previously approved planning application;   
         (d)   That compliance with certain requirements would impair the
historic integrity of buildings listed on a local, state or federal list or
register of historic structures as regulated by the California Historic
Building Code (Title 24, Part 8).
      (2)   Granting of exemption. If the chief building official determines
that it is a hardship or infeasible for the applicant to fully meet the
requirements of this chapter and that granting the requested exemption will not
cause the building to fail to comply with the 2022 California Energy Code
(Title 24, Part 6) and referenced standards, or the 2022 California Green
Building Standards (Title 24, Part 11) of the California Building Standards
Code, the chief building official shall determine the maximum feasible
threshold of compliance reasonably achievable for the project. In making this
determination, the chief building official shall consider whether alternate,
practical means of achieving the objectives of this chapter can be satisfied,
such as reducing comparable energy use at an off-site location within the
county. If an exemption is granted, the applicant shall be required to comply
with this chapter in all other respects and shall be required to achieve the
threshold of compliance determined to be achievable by the chief building
official.
      (3)   Denial of exception. If the chief building official determines that
it is reasonably possible for the applicant to fully meet the requirements of
this chapter, the request shall be denied, and the applicant shall be notified
of the decision in writing. The project and compliance documentation shall be
modified to comply with the standards for compliance.
      (4)   Appeal. Any aggrieved applicant or person may appeal the
determination of the chief building official regarding the granting or denial
of an exemption or compliance with any other provision of this chapter. An
appeal of a determination of the chief building official shall be filed in
writing and processed in accordance with the provisions of § 15.04.028 of this
code.
(Ord. 872, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 15.05: ALL-ELECTRIC CONSTRUCTION IN NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.05.010   Findings and purpose
   
15.05.020   Applicability
   
15.05.030   Definitions
   
15.05.040   Requirement for all-electric construction in newly constructed
buildings
   
15.05.050   Public interest exemption
   
15.05.060   Revocable building and infrastructure exemption
   
15.05.070   Revocation of natural gas infrastructure exemption
   
15.05.080   Appeals
   
15.05.090   Periodic review
§ 15.05.010 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The Fairfax Town Council finds and expressly declares as follows:
   (A)   Scientific evidence has established that natural gas combustion as
well as leakage occurring during natural gas procurement, transportation,
storage, and distribution produce significant greenhouse gas emissions that
contribute to global warming and climate change.
   (B)   The following addition to the Fairfax Municipal Code is reasonably
necessary because of local climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions as
listed below:
      (1)   The town is situated along a wildland-urban interface and is
extremely vulnerable to wildfires and firestorms, and human activities
releasing greenhouse gases into the atmosphere cause increases in worldwide
average temperature, drought conditions, vegetative fuel, and length of fire
seasons.
      (2)   Structures in the town are located in close proximity to the San
Andreas and Hayward seismic faults, which collectively and individually
maintain the potential to produce serious damage, fires, and/or explosions as a
result of damage to natural gas infrastructure in buildings due to
unforeseeable seismic activity.
      (3)   The town has a history of significant flooding from the Fairfax and
San Anselmo Creeks and their tributaries. Extreme weather conditions resulting
from climate change may result in sudden, prolonged rainfall leading to further
flooding events.
   (C)   The following addition to the Fairfax Municipal Code is also
reasonably necessary because of health and safety concerns as Fairfax residents
suffer from asthma and other health conditions associated with poor indoor and
outdoor air quality exacerbated by the combustion of natural gas.
   (D)   As described in the Town of Fairfax Climate Action Plan and Fairfax
Climate Emergency Declaration (Resolution No. 19-04) rapid, far-reaching and
unprecedented changes in all aspects of society are required to limit global
warming and the resulting environmental threat posed by climate change,
including the prompt phasing out of natural gas as a fuel for heating and
cooling infrastructure in new buildings.
   (E)   Substitute electric heating and cooling infrastructure in new
buildings fueled by less greenhouse gas intensive electricity is linked to
significantly lower greenhouse gas emissions and is cost competitive because of
the aggregate cost savings associated with all electric designs that avoid new
gas infrastructure and increasing natural gas fuel prices.
   (F)   All-electric building design benefits the health, welfare, and
resiliency of Fairfax and its residents.
   (G)   The most cost-effective time to integrate electrical infrastructure is
in the design phase of a building project because building systems and spaces
can be designed to optimize the performance of electrical systems inasmuch as
projects can take full advantage of avoided costs and space requirements from
the elimination of natural gas piping and equipment venting systems.
   (H)   The intent of this chapter is to eliminate natural gas infrastructure
and associated greenhouse gas emissions in new buildings where all-electric
infrastructure can be most practicably integrated, thereby reducing the
environmental and health hazards produced by the consumption and transportation
of natural gas.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The requirements of this chapter shall apply to building permit
applications submitted on or after the effective date of this chapter for all
newly constructed buildings proposed to be located in whole or in part within
the town.
   (B)   The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to portable propane
appliances for outdoor cooking and heating.
   (C)   This chapter shall in no way be construed as amending Energy Code
requirements under Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, Part 6 or
Part 1, nor as requiring the use or installation of any specific appliance or
system as a condition of approval.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-ELECTRIC BUILDING. A building that uses a permanent supply of
electricity as the source of energy for all space heating, water heating
(including pools and spas), cooking appliances, and clothes drying appliances,
and has no natural gas or propane plumbing installed in the building.
   APPLICANT. An applicant for a building permit.
   COMMERCIAL KITCHEN. A non-retail food facility devoted to the commercial
preparation, production, and cooking of food and beverages for off-site
consumption.
   COOKING EQUIPMENT. Equipment intended for commercial use, including ovens,
ranges, and cooking appliances for use in a commercial kitchen, restaurant, or
other business establishment where food is dispensed.
   ENERGY CODE. The California Energy Code as adopted in Fairfax Municipal Code
§
15.04.010.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any newly constructed building with construction
plans for a commercial kitchen or cooking equipment.
   GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS. Gases that trap heat in the atmosphere.
   NATURAL GAS. The same meaning as "Fuel Gas" as defined in the California
Plumbing Code and Mechanical Code.
   NATURAL GAS INFRASTRUCTURE. Fuel gas piping, other than service pipe, in or
in connection with a building, structure or within the property lines of
premises, extending from the point of delivery at the meter, service meter
assembly, outlet of the service regulator, service shutoff valve, or final
pressure regulator, whichever is applicable, as specified in the California
Mechanical Code and Plumbing Code.
   NEWLY CONSTRUCTED BUILDING. A building that has never before been used or
occupied for any purpose.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.040 REQUIREMENT FOR ALL- ELECTRIC CONSTRUCTION IN NEWLY CONSTRUCTED
BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Newly constructed buildings shall be all-electric buildings as defined
in §
15.05.030.
      (1)   Exception: Natural gas infrastructure may be permitted in a newly
constructed building if the applicant establishes that it is not physically
feasible to construct the building without natural gas infrastructure. For
purposes of this exception, "physically feasible" to construct the building
means either an all-electric prescriptive compliance approach is available for
the building under the Energy Code or the building is able to achieve the
performance compliance standards under the Energy Code using commercially
available technology and an approved calculation method.
      (2)   Exception: The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to
development projects that have obtained vested rights prior to the effective
date of this chapter pursuant to a preliminary affordable housing project
application in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65589.5(o), a development
agreement in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65866, a vesting tentative map
in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66998.1, or pursuant to the ruling in Avco
Community Developers Inc. v. South Coast Regional Communication (1976) 17
Cal.3d 785, or pursuant to other applicable statutory or case law.
   (B)   To the extent that natural gas infrastructure is permitted, it shall
be permitted to extend to any system, device, or appliance within a building
for which an equivalent all-electric system or design is not available.
   (C)   Newly constructed buildings shall nonetheless be required at a minimum
to have sufficient electric capacity, wiring and conduit to facilitate future
full building electrification.
   (D)   The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed objective planning
standards under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65913.4 and objective development standards
under Cal. Gov’t Code § 65589.5.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.050 PUBLIC INTEREST EXEMPTION.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter and the greenhouse
gas emissions and other public health and safety hazards associated with
natural gas infrastructure, minimally necessary and specifically tailored
natural gas infrastructure may be allowed in a newly constructed building
provided that the entitling or permitting body establishes that the use serves
the public interest. In determining whether the construction of natural gas
infrastructure is in the public interest, the town may consider:
      (1)   The availability of alternative technologies or systems that do not
use natural gas;
      (2)   Any other impacts that the decision to allow natural gas
infrastructure may have on the health, safety, or welfare of the public.
   (B)   If the installation of natural gas infrastructure is granted under a
public interest exemption, the newly constructed buildings shall nonetheless be
required at the minimum to have sufficient electric capacity, wiring and
conduit to facilitate future full building electrification.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.060 REVOCABLE BUILDING AND INFRASTRUCTURE EXEMPTION.
   Notwithstanding the requirements of this chapter and the greenhouse gas
emissions and other public health and safety hazards associated with natural
gas infrastructure, minimally necessary and specifically tailored natural gas
infrastructure shall be allowed in a newly constructed building on a revocable
basis limited to the duration of time during which the conditions set forth
below are satisfied and the building continues occupancy as the original design
specified in the construction drawings permitted by the town as a newly
constructed building:
   (A)   Food service establishment. A newly constructed building meeting the
definition of “food service establishment” in §
15.05.030. The scope of the exemption extends to the preparation of food only,
not HVAC, or water heating appliances.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.070 REVOCATION OF NATURAL GAS INFRASTRUCTURE EXEMPTION.
   At such time as the conditions of the revocable building and infrastructure
exemption of §
15.05.060 cease to be satisfied, the natural gas delivery infrastructure shall
either be capped, otherwise terminated, or removed by the entity previously
entitled to the exemption, in a manner pursuant to all applicable codes.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.080 APPEALS.
   Any decision made by the Building Official under this chapter may be
appealed to the Town Council. Appeals shall be addressed to the Town Council,
in writing, and shall state the basis of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed in
the office of the Clerk not later than 5:00 p.m. on the tenth calendar day
following the date of the action from which an appeal is taken. Appeals shall
be accompanied by the applicable filing fee as specified by resolution adopted
by the Town Council.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
§ 15.05.090 PERIODIC REVIEW.
   The town shall review the requirements of this chapter every 18 months for
consistency with the California Energy Code and the Energy Commission's mid-
cycle amendments and triennial code adoption cycle as applicable.
(Ord. 856, passed 9-1-2021)
CHAPTER 15.08: REPORTS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING RECORDS
Section
   
15.08.010   Intent
   
15.08.020   Definitions
   
15.08.030   Required prior to sale or exchange; period of validity
   
15.08.040   Application; fee; contents
   
15.08.050   Report; delivery; receipt evidence of chapter compliance
   
15.08.060   Report; endorsement to extend validity; fee
   
15.08.070   Exceptions
   
15.08.080   Violation; penalty; invalidation of sale or exchange
   
15.08.090   Liability of town
   
15.08.100   Statement of settlement charges; performance of agreed repairs
§ 15.08.010 INTENT.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov't Code §§ 38780 to and including
38785, it is the intent of the Council to assure that the grantee of a
residential building within the town is furnished a report of matters of town
record pertaining to the authorized use, occupancy and zoning classification of
real property prior to sale or exchange. It is the further intent to protect
the unwary buyer of residential property against undisclosed restrictions on
the use of the property.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.010) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGREEMENT OF SALE. Any agreement or written instrument which provides that
title to any property shall thereafter be transferred from one owner to another
owner.
   OWNER. Any person, co-partnership, association, corporation or fiduciary
having legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any improved real property designed or permitted to be
used for dwelling purposes, situated in the town and includes the building or
structures located on the improved real property.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.020) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.030 REQUIRED PRIOR TO SALE OR EXCHANGE; PERIOD OF VALIDITY.
   Prior to entering into an agreement of sale or exchange of any residential
building, the owner shall obtain from the town a report of the residential
building record showing the regularly authorized use, occupancy and zoning
classification of the property. The report shall be valid for a period not to
exceed 12 months from date of issue.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.030) (Ord. 485, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 730, passed 12-5-
2007; Am. Ord. 773, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 15.08.040 APPLICATION; FEE; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Upon application of the owner and the payment to the town of a fee in
accordance with the schedule of fees as fixed by resolution of the Town
Council, the Building Inspector shall review pertinent town records and inspect
the premises in question.
   (B)   Upon completion of the review and the inspection, he or she shall
deliver a report to the buyer which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The street address or other appropriate description of the subject
property;
      (2)   A parcel drawing of the subject property, which may be a
reproduction of a portion of the maps of the County Assessor;
      (3)   A statement of the zoning classification applicable to the property
in question, together with a summary of the uses permitted within that zone;
      (4)   A statement of the variances and use permits, if any, granted to
that property, together with the conditions and restrictions of the permits;
      (5)   A statement as to whether any construction, electrical, plumbing or
comfort heating building permits have been issued for work not yet completed on
those premises;
      (6)   A statement as to whether there appears to be any non-conformity or
illegality in the structures on the property or the uses being made thereof;
and
      (7)   The resale report shall also contain a statement identifying those
toilets in the residential structure that need to be replaced with water
conserving toilets.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.040) (Ord. 440, passed - -1978; Am. Ord. 441, passed - -
1978; Am. Ord. 687, passed 10-2-2001; Am. Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.050 REPORT; DELIVERY; RECEIPT EVIDENCE OF CHAPTER COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The report of residential building record shall be delivered by the
owner or his or her authorized agent to the buyer or transferee of the
residential building prior to the consummation of the sale or exchange.
   (B)   The buyer or transferee shall execute a receipt therefor, as furnished
by the town, and the receipt shall be delivered by the owner to the Building
Inspector, as evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.050) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.060 REPORT; ENDORSEMENT TO EXTEND VALIDITY; FEE.
   (A)   Upon written request of the owner prior to the expiration of the 12-
month period referred to in §
15.08.030, the Building Inspector may issue an endorsement to the report,
extending its validity for one additional three-month period, showing any
changes to the information shown on the original report.
   (B)   The fee for the issuance of the endorsement shall be one-third of the
original filing fee.
   (C)   In cases where the Inspector makes a site visit prior to issuing the
endorsement a special inspection fee authorized by resolution of the Town
Council shall be charged.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.060) (Ord. 485, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 730, passed 12-5-
2007; Am. Ord. 773, passed 12-4-2013)
§ 15.08.070 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to the first sale of a
residential building located in a subdivision whose final map has been approved
and recorded in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act not more than two years
prior to the first sale.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.070) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.080 VIOLATION; PENALTY; INVALIDATION OF SALE OR EXCHANGE.
   (A)   Anyone in violation of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided by
the provisions of Municipal Code §§
1.08.010 and
1.08.040.
   (B)   No sale or exchange of residential property shall be invalidated
solely because of the failure of any person to comply with any provisions of
this chapter unless the failure is an act or omission which would be a valid
ground for rescission of the sale or exchange in the absence of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.080) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.090 LIABILITY OF TOWN.
   The residential building record report shall be compiled from the records of
the town and from an inspection of the property. The issuance of the report is
not a representation by the town that the subject property or its present use
is or is not in compliance with the law. Neither the enactment of this chapter
nor the preparation and delivery of any report required hereunder shall impose
any liability upon the town for any errors or omissions contained in the
report, nor shall the town bear any liability not otherwise imposed by law.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.090) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.08.100 STATEMENT OF SETTLEMENT CHARGES; PERFORMANCE OF AGREED REPAIRS.
   (A)   Upon completion of sale of property as required by this chapter, the
seller shall furnish the Building Official with a statement of settlement
charges between buyer and seller, indicating which one will be making repairs
required by the resale inspection report.
   (B)   If the buyer is responsible, the buyer will, within 30 days from close
of escrow, obtain necessary permits to perform the required work and complete
all of the repair work within a reasonable time; if the seller has agreed to
perform required repairs or necessary work, the permit must be obtained by the
seller prior to close of escrow and the work or repair commenced forthwith and
completed within a reasonable time.
(Prior Code, § 15.32.100) (Ord. 440, passed - 1978; Am. Ord. 441, passed -
1978; Am. Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
CHAPTER 15.12: NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
15.12.010   Definitions
   
15.12.020   Required; display
   
15.12.030   System generally; official map
   
15.12.040   New construction
   
15.12.050   Numbers required on all main entrances; unofficial numbers unlawful
   
15.12.060   Size; color; material
   
15.12.070   Allotment of numbers per block
   
15.12.080   Change of numbers limited
   
15.12.090   Temporary use of old numbers
   
15.12.100   Compliance required; notice of violation
§ 15.12.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended to be used for human occupancy or
for business purposes, but shall not include any private garage or stable or
any structure used in connection with a building which is properly numbered.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. Any block in any street in the town where a majority of
the front footage of the property facing upon the street is used for business
purposes.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. Any block in any street in the town where a majority of
the front footage of the property facing upon the street is used for residence
purposes or consists of vacant lots.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.010) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.020 REQUIRED; DISPLAY.
   Every building in the town shall be numbered by placing on or over the door
or gate used as the main entrance to the building or to the enclosure in which
the building is situated, or adjacent to the gate so as to be readily seen from
the street upon which the building or enclosure is situated, the appropriate
number for the building, as specified in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.020) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.030 SYSTEM GENERALLY; OFFICIAL MAP.
   (A)   The numbering of buildings in the town on the streets therein, as
shown on the official maps of the streets on file in the office of the Town
Clerk, is adopted and declared as the official numbering of the buildings.
   (B)   For the purpose of carrying out and continuing the system thereby
shown, the system is declared to be as follows.
      (1)   In a residence district, two numbers shall be allowed to each lot
or piece of land approximating 50 feet of frontage upon any street in the
district.
      (2)   In a business district, two numbers shall be allowed to each 25
feet of frontage upon any street in the district.
      (3)   The numbering of buildings shall commence at the beginning of each
street, the even numbers being on the right side and the odd numbers on the
left side, and such directions being determined from the point of beginning of
the streets and the commencement of numbering thereon, as herein stated:
         (a)   Sir Francis Drake Boulevard, starting at the boundary line
between the town of San Anselmo and the Town of Fairfax, on Sir Francis Drake
Boulevard;
         (b)   Forrest Avenue, starting at the boundary line between the Town
of San Anselmo and the Town of Fairfax;
         (c)   Bolinas Avenue, at its intersection with Broadway;
         (d)   Porteous Avenue, at its intersection with Bolinas Road;
         (e)   Cascade Drive, at its intersection with Bolinas Road;
         (f)   Park Road, at its intersection with Bolinas Road;
         (g)   Azalea Avenue, at its intersection with Broadway;
         (h)   Willow Avenue, at its intersection with Sir Francis Drake
Boulevard;
         (i)   Scenic Avenue, at its intersection with Acacia Road; and
         (j)   Laurel Drive, at its intersection with Cascade Drive.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.030) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.040 NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   Every person owning any building, or the agent thereof, shall, within ten
days after the completion or occupation thereof, obtain from the Chief of
Police the appropriate number therefor and cause the building to be numbered as
required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.040) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.050 NUMBERS REQUIRED ON ALL MAIN ENTRANCES; UNOFFICIAL NUMBERS
UNLAWFUL.
   All main entrances from streets to buildings or to separate apartments in
buildings shall be numbered, and it is unlawful for any person, whether owner
or occupant of any building or any apartment therein, to place, maintain or
allow to remain thereon any number other than the one required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.050) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.060 SIZE; COLOR; MATERIAL.
   (A)   The number placed upon any entrance shall be of a different color from
the background upon which it is placed, and each figure of the number shall be
at least one and three-quarters inches in height and of proportionate width.
   (B)   All numbers must be made of substantial and permanent material and so
placed or affixed as not to be easily effaced or removed.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.060) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.070 ALLOTMENT OF NUMBERS PER BLOCK.
   (A)   One hundred numbers or as many thereof as may be necessary shall be
allotted to the property frontage in each block between two main streets;
provided, however, that, when the length of any block in a residence district
exceeds 1,250 feet or the length of any block in a business district exceeds
625 feet, 200 numbers shall be allotted to the block.
   (B)   When any street is intersected on its opposite sides by different
streets, the hundreds on one side shall be made to correspond as closely as
possible to the hundreds on the opposite side by allotting only 25 numbers,
even or odd, as the case may require, to the side on which the blocks are
shorter.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.070) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.080 CHANGE OF NUMBERS LIMITED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall authorize the Chief of Police to renumber any
block which is not uniformly numbered in accordance with this chapter, unless
the renumbering is made necessary by the construction or alteration of the
buildings, whereby the number of entrances to buildings on the blocks has been
so increased as to prevent consecutive numbers without confusion.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.080) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.090 TEMPORARY USE OF OLD NUMBERS.
   Whenever the owner, agent or occupant of any property has been notified to
change the number of his or her building, the old number may be temporarily
retained in addition to the new number; provided, however, that, in no case
shall the old number be retained for a period longer than 30 days after the
official notice to change the same.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.090) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.12.100 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED; NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever it comes to the notice of the Chief of Police that any building is
not numbered as required by this chapter, he or she shall notify, in writing,
the owner, agent or occupant of the building of the appropriate number
therefor, and require the building to be so numbered as required by this
chapter. A failure on the part of the owner, agent or occupant to cause the
building to be so numbered within ten days after receiving the notice shall be
deemed a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 15.36.100) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
CHAPTER 15.16: CAMP CARS AND TRAILERS
Section
   
15.16.010   Definitions
   
15.16.020   Use for sleeping purposes prohibited
   
15.16.030   Lease of land for trailers prohibited
   
15.16.040   Storage by owners on home premises permitted
§ 15.16.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMP CAR or TRAILER. Any unit used for living or sleeping purposes and which
is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the purpose of transporting
the unit from place to place, whether by motive power or other means.
(Prior Code, § 15.44.010) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.16.020 USE FOR SLEEPING PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to use or occupy any camp car or trailer for
living or sleeping purposes upon any lot, piece or parcel of land in the town.
(Prior Code, § 15.44.020) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.16.030 LEASE OF LAND FOR TRAILERS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot, piece or parcel
of land within the town, whether for gain, hire, reward or gratuitously, or
otherwise, to permit the premises to be occupied by any camp car or trailer
used for living or sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 15.44.030) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
§ 15.16.040 STORAGE BY OWNER ON HOME PREMISES PERMITTED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the parking or storage
of any camp car or trailer on the home premises of its owner, as long as the
camp car or trailer is not used for living or sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 15.44.040) (Ord. 730, passed 12-5-2007)
CHAPTER 15.17: GATE SAFEGUARDS
Section
   
15.17.010   Findings and purpose
   
15.17.020   Definitions
   
15.17.030   Scope
   
15.17.040   Installation and safety requirements
   
15.17.050   Maintenance, inspection, and certificate of inspection
   
15.17.060   Time limits for compliance
   
15.17.070   Violations and enforcement
§ 15.17.010   FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare and
reduce the risk of death or injury that may result from improperly installed or
maintained gates by imposing safety requirements for the installation of gates,
and requiring periodic and professional gate inspection and a certificate of
inspection.
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 15.17.020   DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   AUTOMATIC VEHICULAR GATE. A gate that is intended for use at a vehicular
entrance or exit a property that is not intended for pedestrian traffic, and is
designed and operated automatically without manual human intervention.
   CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION. A document signed and/or stamped by a gate
inspector attesting that the inspector performed an in-person inspection of the
gate and based on that inspection has determined that the gate meets all of the
standards set  forth in this chapter, the gate has been properly maintained,
and the gate is in good working order. In addition, the document shall include
the following:
      (1)   Inspection date.
      (2)   Site address.
      (3)   Name of the property owner.
      (4)   Contact information of inspector.
      (5)   Signature and/or stamp of the inspector.
   GATE INSPECTOR. Any licensed fence installer, licensed automatic system
installer, ICC-certified building inspector, licensed architect, or licensed
engineer as reasonably approved by the town.
   PROPERTY OWNER. Includes, without limitation, the fee owner(s) of real
property, their agents, or the person(s) in possession of the real property.
   VEHICULAR GATE. A gate that is intended for use at a vehicular entrance or
exit to a property that is not intended for pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 15.17.030   SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all automatic vehicular gates,
vehicular gates, and any gate that is more than 48 inches (1219 mm) in width
and/or more than 84 inches (2134 mm) in height (collectively, “gates”).
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 15.17.040   INSTALLATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements for all gates.
      (1)    All gates must comply with this chapter and with all applicable
building regulations set forth in Fairfax Municipal Code Title 15 "Buildings
and Construction", and any other applicable law.
      (2)    Any gate more than 48 inches (1219 mm) in width and/or more than
84 inches (2134 mm) in height shall meet the requirements of ASTM F1184, shall
be installed per the manufacturer's recommendations, and shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to meet all the following:
      (a)   Gate shall not fall over more than 45 degrees from a vertical plane
when the gate is detached from supporting hardware.
      (b)   Gate shall be balanced and not move under the gate's own weight or
by gravity.
      (c)   Rolling wheels shall be covered.
      (d)   Gate shall have positive stops.
   (B)   Automatic vehicular gates.
      (1)   Shall be designed, constructed and installed in compliance with
ASTM F2200.
      (2)   Vehicular gate openers, where provided, shall comply with UL 325.
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 15.17.050   MAINTENANCE, INSPECTION, AND CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION.
   The property owner shall keep all gates on the property well-maintained and
in good working order. The property owner shall submit a certificate of
inspection at least once every three years for each gate to the Town Building
Department. The property owner shall maintain a copy of the most recent
certificate of inspection and make it available to the building official upon
request.
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 15.17.060   TIME LIMITS FOR COMPLIANCE.
   Newly installed gates are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Gates
that are in existence as of the effective date of Ordinance 881 must comply
with this chapter by January 1, 2024, including obtaining any permits as
required under local or State code.
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
§ 15.17.070   VIOLATIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
    Violations of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance subject to
the enforcement, abatement, and the imposition of penalties allowed in the Town
Municipal Code and pursuant to State law. All remedies are cumulative. Each act
of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 881, passed 8-2-2023)
TITLE 16: SUBDIVISIONS
   Chapter
      
16.04.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
16.08.   TENTATIVE MAPS
      
16.12.   VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
      
16.16.   FINAL MAPS
      
16.20.   PARCEL MAPS
      
16.22.   URBAN LOT SPLITS
      
16.24.   GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS
      
16.28.   STATUTORY MERGERS
      
16.32.   VOLUNTARY MERGERS
      
16.36.   REVERSION TO ACREAGE
      
16.40.   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
      
16.44.   CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
      
16.48.   NOTICE OF VIOLATION
CHAPTER 16.04: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
16.04.010   Purpose of title
   
16.04.020   Advisory agency
   
16.04.030   Definitions
   
16.04.040   Applications
   
16.04.050   Required mapping
   
16.04.060   Compliance
   
16.04.070   Monuments
§ 16.04.010 PURPOSE OF TITLE.
   This title is enacted for the following purposes:
   (A)   Adopt regulations to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act
of the State of California (Cal. Gov’t Code, Title 7, Division 2, commencing
with § 66410) and may be cited as the “Subdivisions Ordinance of the Town of
Fairfax”; (In instances where this chapter is in direct conflict with the
Subdivision Map Act, the latter shall control.)
   (B)   Implement the Fairfax general plan, any planned development plan or
specific plan and zoning ordinance; and
   (C)   Establish reasonable standards of design and reasonable procedures for
subdivision and resubdivision in order to further the orderly layout and use of
land and insure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.04.020 ADVISORY AGENCY.
   The Planning Commission of the town is designated as the “advisory agency”
as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act and this title and shall have
all of the powers and duties specified in the Subdivision Map Act and in this
title.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.04.030 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions below and contained in the Subdivision Map Act shall apply
to the terms used in this title unless the context otherwise dictates.
   ADVISORY AGENCY. The town’s Planning Commission.
   APPROVAL. Favorable action on a map, with any conditions by the review
authority, prior to the expiration date specified by law. Previous favorable
action on a map which has expired or time extension thereof, which has expired,
does not constitute approval.
   APPROVED ACCESS. A way or means of vehicular approach to a parcel from
either an abutting public road or from a private road, street or right-of-way
approved by the town.
   CONDOMINIUM. Condominium, community apartment, stock cooperative as defined
in Cal. Civil Code § 1351(d)(f)(m) and undivided interest project which is
defined as any parcel of land containing five or more residential dwelling
units in which five or more individuals own an undivided interest coupled with
the right of exclusive occupancy of any unit located thereon.
   DESIGN. Standards relating to the following:
      (1)   Street alignments, grades and widths;
      (2)   Drainage and sanitary facilities, utilities and flood control
projects including sizes, alignments and grades thereof;
      (3)   Location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way,
existing or future;
      (4)   Fire roads and firebreaks;
      (5)   Lot size and configuration, including proposed building setbacks;
      (6)   Access;
      (7)   Grading and erosion control including retaining structures and
other permanent slope stabilization measures;
      (8)   Land to be dedicated for park, open space or recreational purposes;
      (9)   Land to be dedicated for public access to public resources; and
      (10)   Such other specific physical requirements in the plan and
configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure
consistency with, or implementation of, the general plan, any applicable
specific plan or any other provision of the Fairfax town code.
   ENVIRONMENTAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 66418.2 for biotic and wildlife purposes that meets all of the conditions
specified in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66417.2(b).
   FINAL MAP. The map or recording instrument for a major subdivision. A FINAL
MAP may also be used to record a minor subdivision at the option of either the
subdivider or the town.
   FRONTAGE. The property line abutting on a street.
   IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any street work, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, utilities and the like
which is:
         (a)   Installed or agreed to be installed on the land by a subdivider
as a condition precedent to approval and acceptance of a final or parcel map;
         (b)   To be used for public or private streets, highways, rights-of-
way, flood control projects, utilities or easements; and
         (c)   Necessary for the general use of the parcel or lot owners in the
subdivision and the provision of adequate traffic and circulation and water
drainage.
      (2)   Any other specific improvements or types of improvements, the
installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private
utilities, by any other entity approved by the review authority or by a
combination thereof, is necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation
of, the general plan or any applicable specific plan.
   LOT. A parcel of land having frontage on a street and which meets the zoning
regulations for width and area of the zoning district in which the property is
located, or for which a variance or exception to the required width or area is
in effect.
   LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT. A relocation of a property line between existing
parcels which would not result in a greater number of parcels than existed
previously.
   MAJOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land creating five or more parcels or a
condominium project having five or more condominiums units.
   MERGER, VOLUNTARY. The process by which an owner initiates an action to
combine contiguous parcels of land owned by the owner,
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.203/4 and
Chapter 16.32 of this title.
   MINOR SUBDIVISION. A subdivision of land where the subdivision would create
four parcels or fewer or four or fewer condominiums.
   PARCEL. A contiguous measure of real property, owned as a single unit, which
was established legally under the subdivision regulations in force at the time
of its creation. Easements, public or private roadways and conveyances do not
constitute parcels of land.
   PARCEL MAP. The map and recording instrument for a minor subdivision or any
other subdivision wherever allowed by the Subdivision Map Act.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. Sidewalks, public thoroughfares and public access.
   REVIEW AUTHORITY. The body that has final approval authority for an action
pursuant to this chapter.
   SUBDIVIDER. A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who
proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a
subdivision for herself, himself or for others. A consultant, engineer or
surveyor who does not hold title to the land is not considered a subdivider.
   SUBDIVISION. The division by any subdivider of any unit or units of improved
or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized
county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purpose of
sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be
considered as contiguous units even if separated by roads, streets, utility
easements or railroad rights-of-way. SUBDIVISION includes a condominium
project. A conveyance of land for rights-of-way to a governmental agency,
public entity, public utility or
subsidiary of a public utility shall not be considered a division of land for
purposes of computing the number of parcels. SUBDIVISION does not include those
exclusions in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66412.
   TENTATIVE MAP. A map submitted for approval for a major subdivision or minor
subdivision.
   TOWN STANDARDS. Improvement standards set forth in this title or otherwise
adopted by the town.
   TOWN ENGINEER. The Town Engineer of the Town of Fairfax.
   VESTING TENTATIVE MAP. A tentative map for a residential subdivision that,
when filed with the town, has conspicuously printed on its face the words
“vesting tentative map.” Such a map confers rights as set forth in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66498.1.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.04.040 APPLICATIONS.
   The regulations established by this title shall apply to all subdivisions
and lot line adjustments, or parts thereof, lying wholly or in part within the
incorporated territory of the town and are declared to be the minimum
reasonably necessary to promote and protect the public health, peace, morals,
comfort and general welfare and for the accomplishment thereof. The regulations
of this title shall be inapplicable to the matter set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code
§§ 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2 and any other divisions of land which may hereafter
be exempted from the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.04.050 REQUIRED MAPPING.
   All subdivisions shall require a tentative map or a vesting tentative map,
except where exempted by the Subdivision Map Act, Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66412,
66412.1, 66426 and 66428. All major subdivisions shall be recorded with a final
map. All minor subdivisions shall be recorded with a parcel map or a final map,
except as provided in §
16.20.090.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.04.060 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No land shall be used, nor any building be constructed, on any lot or
parcel not in conformance with this title.
   (B)   No permit for construction of a building or the use of land shall be
issued on a parcel of land which does not comply with the provisions of the
general plan, this title and the Subdivision Map Act.
   (C)   At the time of issuance of a permit, if required by the town, the
applicant shall submit evidence that the parcel of land complies with this
title and the mandatory provisions of the current Subdivision Map Act, and a
certification from the Marin County Environmental Health Department as to the
adequacy of the parcel to meet sanitary requirements.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.04.070 MONUMENTS.
   Centerline monuments shall be located, identified and inspected as set forth
in this section.
   (A)   Location of monuments.
      (1)   Street, alley and way centerline monuments shall be set to mark the
intersections of streets, intersections of streets with alleys or ways,
intersections of alleys with alleys or ways or at the intersection of any
street, alley or way with a tract boundary.
      (2)   Street centerline monuments shall also be set to mark the beginning
and end of curves or the points of intersection of tangents thereof.
      (3)   The centerline monuments shall be of not less than three-quarters
inch iron pin at least 30 inches long set in the subgrade.
      (4)   A monument box and cover in conformance with town general
requirements and improvements shall be set above the monument with top of the
box flush with the finish.
   (B)   Alternative locations.
      (1)   In the event that, due to the construction of subdivision
improvements or the location of trees or other physical features, the monuments
specified above cannot be located at the points specified, a reference monument
or monuments shall be set subject to the approval of the Town Engineer.
      (2)   Notes as to the location of the monument or monuments with
reference to the referenced point shall be furnished to the Town Engineer.
   (C)   Monument identification. All monuments set as required herein shall be
permanently marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the
civil engineer or land surveyor under whose supervision the survey was made.
   (D)   Monument inspection. All monuments shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Town Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16.02.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.08: TENTATIVE MAPS
Section
   
16.08.010   Size and scale
   
16.08.020   Requirements for application
   
16.08.030   Additional data
   
16.08.040   Conformance with requirements
   
16.08.050   Review procedures
   
16.08.060   Planning Commission action
   
16.08.070   Town Council action
   
16.08.080   Notice of public hearing
   
16.08.090   Appeals
   
16.08.100   Review findings
   
16.08.110   Expiration of tentative map
§ 16.08.010 SIZE AND SCALE.
   (A)   Tentative maps shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor and shall be drawn to a size and scale to clearly show
the details of the plan at no less than one inch equals 40 feet.
   (B)   Tentative maps shall be signed by the civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.020 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION.
   (A)   Filing of tentative subdivision map.
      (1)   A tentative map shall be required for all requests for a major
subdivision or a minor subdivision.
      (2)   The subdivider shall file 15 copies of the tentative map and any
accompanying information to the Planning Director, as required on town
application forms.
   (B)   Fees. The subdivider shall pay the fees established by the Town
Council by resolution upon the filing of the tentative subdivision plan.
   (C)   Contents.  Tentative maps shall show the proposed subdivision’s design
and improvements and conditions existing in and around the subdivision, and
shall contain information sufficient to allow the Planning Commission or the
Town Council to make the findings required by §
16.08.100. Information which cannot be conveniently shown on the tentative
subdivision map shall be contained in a written statement accompanying the map.
All lettering on the tentative map shall be of one-eighth inch minimum in size.
      (1)   The map shall include, but shall not be limited to the following
general notes, unless the information is waived by the Town Engineer or
Planning Director:
         (a)   The subdivision name as selected by the subdivider;
         (b)   Date, north point, scale (not less than one inch equals 40 feet)
and sufficient boundaries to define the proposed subdivision;
         (c)   Name, address and telephone number of record owners, subdivider
and engineer or surveyor;
         (d)   A description of the proposed subdivision, including Assessor’s
parcel number and sufficient legal description to define the boundary of the
proposed subdivision, its location, streets and street names, their present
width and grades of adjacent or abutting roads, streets, highways and ways;
         (e)   Project area;
         (f)   Existing use or uses of property;
         (g)   Existing town general plan land use designations including
allowed density or intensity of use as modified by any adopted slope density
standards;
         (h)   Source of water supply;
         (i)   The method of sewage disposal proposed;
         (j)   Other improvements proposed;
         (k)   A description of how the subdivision provides, to the extent
feasible, for future passive or natural heating and cooling opportunities in
the subdivision;
         (l)   A description of how the subdivision will affect the housing
needs of the region and how this has been balanced against public service needs
of the residents of Fairfax and available fiscal and environmental resources;
and
         (m)   If the subdivision is to be developed in increments, a statement
to that effect shall be included.
      (2)   Topographical contour map. A topographical contour map showing
accurately the existing watercourses terrain within the subdivision, existing
drainage channels, roads, culverts, overhead and underground utility lines
which may affect the design of the subdivision, wells and springs, major
structures, irrigation ditches, utility poles and other improvements in their
correct location. Elevation shall be referenced to current National Geodetic
Survey data. The map shall be drawn to an engineer’s scale large enough to show
all information clearly, but not smaller than 40 feet to the inch. Contour
intervals shall not be greater than five feet or at such intervals that the
contour lines will not be spread more than 150 feet apart (ground distance).
The map shall show all of the following information, unless the information is
waived by the Town Engineer or Planning Director:
         (a)   Map(s) showing area(s) of property which is (are) affected by
geologic conditions posing potential safety hazard(s) and areas subject to
inundation or ponding;
         (b)   The edges of pavement of existing paved roads and driveways
within the public right-of-way and easements or within private rights-of-way
and easements;   
         (c)   Location of existing property lines and approximate boundaries
of existing easements within the subdivision with the names of the owners of
record of easements, exclusions, the properties abutting subdivision;
         (d)   The proposed lot and street layout with scaled dimensions and
area of each lot;
         (e)   The location of all proposed public easements;
         (f)   Street names, widths of streets, whether public or private, and
easements, approximate street grades and radii of curves along property lines
of each street;
         (g)   Typical cross-sections and profiles for streets showing pavement
widths, curbs, sidewalks, grading and marginal strips, slopes of cuts and fills
and other construction proposed;
         (h)   Dedications for public purposes and reservations and proposed
disposition of all parcels and easements;
         (i)   Location, approximate grade, direction of flow and type of
existing and proposed storm drainage channels, storm drains and retention and
detention areas;
         (j)   Location, alignment and tops and bottoms of all banks of all
natural drainage ways;
         (k)   Location of all existing and proposed utilities necessary to
serve the subdivision;
         (l)   A vicinity map showing roads, adjoining subdivisions and other
data sufficient to locate the proposed subdivision and show its relationship to
community development;
         (m)   Boundary lines of existing land use zones (if more than one
zoning exists on the property they shall be delineated);
         (n)   Statement or plan as to proposals for draining the areas subject
to 100- and 250-year flooding or inundation by waters flowing into or from the
subdivision;
         (o)   Preliminary grading plan;
         (p)   A map showing areas of property where evidence of known or
possible archaeological site(s) are discerned;
         (q)   Map and statement indicating and describing any historical
landmark;
         (r)   The net lot areas excluding access easements shall be calculated
and shown on all maps;
         (s)   Location of rock outcroppings;
         (t)   Location of stands of trees;
         (u)   Species, trunk diameter and drip line of all trees 20 inches or
more in circumference measured 24 inches above ground level and notation
whether they will remain or be removed;
         (v)   Location of existing structures and notation whether they are to
remain or be removed; and
         (w)   Location of geologic hazards.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.030 ADDITIONAL DATA.
   Information on the following matters shall be either on the tentative map or
contained in a written statement accompanying the same.
   (A)   Site reconnaissance statement. Two copies of a statement of a site
reconnaissance by a geotechnical or certified engineering geologist regarding
slide conditions, existing or anticipated; geologic features; topography; soil
conditions within or immediately adjoining the proposed development and their
effect on the design of the proposed subdivision; and
   (B)   Statement regarding hazardous waste. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §
65962.5, before the tentative map application may be accepted as complete, the
subdivider shall submit a signed statement to the Planning Director indicating
whether the subdivision is located on a site which is included on any of the
local lists prepared by the California Integrated Waste Management Board of all
solid waste facilities from which there is a known migration of hazardous
waste. The Secretary for Environmental Protection maintains a statewide list
and will distribute this information to any person upon request.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.040 CONFORMANCE WITH REQUIREMENTS.
   Tentative map shall comply with all requirements of the town code,
including, but not limited to this title and the State Subdivision Map Act, as
amended.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.050 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The review procedures for tentative subdivision maps shall be as set forth
in this section.
   (A)   Determination of completeness. Upon receipt of a tentative subdivision
map and any accompanying information, the Planning Director shall make a
determination of application completeness pursuant to §
16.08.020 of this code.
   (B)   Incomplete applications. Applications deemed incomplete shall be
subject to the procedures set forth in §
16.08.020 of this code.
   (C)   Transmittal. If the application is found to be complete, the Planning
Director shall transmit copies of the tentative map together with accompanying
data to such public agencies and utilities as may be concerned or required by
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66453 and 66455.
   (D)   Town Engineer review. The Town Engineer shall submit a written report
to the Planning Director of recommendations in relation to the requirements of
this chapter, the Subdivision Map Act and other applicable ordinances and
regulations and changes that are necessary for proper consideration of the map.
      (1)   Water and sewer recommendations. If the tentative map proposes
sewage disposal by a means other than a public sewer system or water supply by
means other than a public facility, then the applicant shall consult with the
Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) and the Marin County Environmental
Health Department and the Engineer’s report shall state whether the proposed
method of sewage disposal or water supply does or does not create a biological
or chemical water quality and/or health hazard. If it would create such a
hazard then a proven and RWQCB approved alternate system may be recommended and
such recommendation must be included as a condition of approval of the
tentative map. If no satisfactory method of sewage disposal or water supply is
presented, then the tentative map shall be disapproved. If the tentative map
shows sewage disposal by a public sewer system or water by means of a public
water system, then the Planning Director shall, within three days after the
filing of the tentative map, transmit a copy thereof to the appropriate water
or sewer agency with a request that the agency report within ten days showing
its ability to serve the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Transmittal to school districts. Within five days after accepting a
tentative map application, the Planning Director shall send a notice of the
acceptance to the governing board of any elementary school, high school or
unified school district within the boundaries of which the subdivision is
proposed to be located. The notice shall identify information about the
location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density and other
information which would be relevant to the affected school district. Within 15
days after receiving the notice, the school district may make recommendation to
the town regarding the effect of the proposed subdivision upon the school
district. If the school district fails to respond within 15 days the failure to
respond shall be deemed approval of the proposed subdivision. The town shall
consider any recommendations before acting on the tentative map.
   (E)   Planning Director review. The Planning Director shall submit a written
report to the Planning Commission of recommendations in relation to the
requirements of this chapter, the general plan, the zoning ordinance and the
other applicable ordinances and regulations.
   (F)   Recommendations to subdivider. Pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.3,
all recommendations and reports prepared by town staff on the tentative map
shall be forwarded to the subdivider prior to any hearing or action on the map.
In instances of a residential condominium conversion, all tenants shall receive
the town staff reports.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.060 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)   For minor subdivisions, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing and shall approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative
map within 50 days after the filing of the tentative map with the Planning
Director. This time period shall commence after certification of the EIR or
negative declaration, or a determination that the project is exempt from the
requirements of Cal. Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.
   (B)   For major subdivisions, the Planning Commission shall hold a public
hearing and shall make its recommendation to the Town Council within 50 days
after the filing of the tentative map with the Planning Director.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.070 TOWN COUNCIL ACTION.
   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.2, at the next regular meeting
following the filing of the Planning Commission’s recommendation with it, the
Town Council shall fix the meeting date at which the tentative map will be
considered by it. The scheduled date shall be within 45 days of the Town
Council meeting and the Town Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or
disapprove, the tentative map within the 30-day period. The 45-day period shall
commence after certification of the EIR or negative declaration or
determination that the project is exempt from the requirements of Cal. Public
Resources Code Division 13.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.080 NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   Notification of any public hearings shall be given pursuant to Cal.
Gov’t Code §§ 65090, 65091 and 66451.3(a).
   (B)   In addition, notice shall be given in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
      (1)   A notice setting forth the time, place, purpose of hearing and map
or physical description of the land involved shall be sent by mail at least ten
days before the meeting to the following persons:
         (a)   All owners of real property subject to the subdivision of land;
and
         (b)   Each property owner within 300 feet of the property subject to
the subdivision of land.
      (2)   A notice setting forth the date, time and place shall be published
at least ten days prior to the hearing date in a newspaper of general
circulation in the town. The notice shall describe the proposed subdivision;
describe the parcels, properties or areas that are affected by the subdivision
request; and provide other pertinent information in such a manner that the
subdivision request and its effect(s) can be clearly identified.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.080) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.090 APPEALS.
   Appeals of any Planning Commission decision on the tentative map for a minor
subdivision shall be filed with the Town Clerk within ten days after the date
of the decision, in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.5.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.090) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.100 REVIEW FINDINGS.
   Prior to approving an application for a tentative map, the Town Council
shall find that all of the following are true:
   (A)   The proposed map is consistent with the general plan and any
applicable specific plan or planned development plan or any other provision of
this code;
   (B)   The design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent
with the general plan and any applicable planned development plan or specific
plan or any other provision of this code;
   (C)   The site is physically suitable for the type of development proposed;
   (D)   The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of
development;
   (E)   Neither the design of the subdivision nor any proposed improvements is
likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantial and avoidable
injury to fish or wildlife or their habitat;
   (F)   The design of the subdivision or type of improvement is not likely to
cause significant public health problems;
   (G)   The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will not
conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through, or
use of property within, the proposed subdivision;
   (H)   Any land or improvement to be dedicated to the town is consistent with
the general plan, or any other provision of this code;
   (I)   Except for minor subdivisions, that the design of the subdivision
provides, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or
cooling opportunities in the subdivision, as required by Cal. Gov’t Code §
66473.1;
   (J)   The subdivision will not violate existing waste discharge requirements
prescribed by the Regional Water Quality Control Board, as required by Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66474.6; and
   (K)   The proposed subdivision is compatible with the housing needs of the
region, the public service needs of residents and available fiscal and
environmental resources.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.100) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.08.110 EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAP.
   Except as provided in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66452.6, an approved or
conditionally approved tentative map shall expire 24 months after its approval
or conditional approval. The expiration of the approved or conditionally
approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map or
parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the
tentative map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative map. The
review authority may grant an extension of the expiration date for, a period or
periods not to exceed three years. Requests for extensions shall be submitted
in writing to the Planning Director prior to the expiration date. Upon
submittal of an application by the subdivider to extend the expiration date of
a tentative map, the expiration date shall automatically be extended until the
application is acted upon by the review authority. If the review authority
denies a subdivider’s application for extension, the subdivider may appeal the
decision within ten days after the denial.
(Prior Code, § 16.03.110) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.12: VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Section
   
16.12.010   Purpose
   
16.12.020   Consistency
   
16.12.030   Applicability
   
16.12.040   Filing
   
16.12.050   Contents
   
16.12.060   Information required
   
16.12.070   Processing
   
16.12.080   Expiration and extension
   
16.12.090   Vesting on approval
   
16.12.100   Fees
§ 16.12.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe rules and procedures for the
regulation of vesting tentative maps.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.020 CONSISTENCY.
   No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative
map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the Subdivision Map Act, the
general plan and planned development plan or applicable specific plan, or any
other provision of this code.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.030 APPLICABILITY.
   A vesting tentative map may be filed pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
   (A)   Filing permitted. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act, as
implemented and supplemented by this chapter, requires the filing of a
tentative map for any development, a vesting tentative map may be filed
instead, in accordance with the provisions hereof.
   (B)   Vesting tentative map not required. If a subdivider does not seek the
rights conferred by the vesting tentative map statute, the filing of a vesting
tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed
subdivision, permit for construction or work preparatory to construction.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.040 FILING.
   (A)   A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same manner as set forth
in
Chapter 16.08, except as provided otherwise by this chapter.
   (B)   At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have “vesting
tentative map” printed conspicuously on its face.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.050 CONTENTS.
   A vesting tentative map shall contain the information required by
Chapter 16.24.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.060 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   A vesting tentative map shall be accompanied by the accompanying data and
reports required in
Chapter 16.08.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.070 PROCESSING.
   A vesting tentative map shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative
map as set forth in
Chapter 16.08.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.080 EXPIRATION AND EXTENSION.
   The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire
at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same
extensions, as established for the expiration of the approval or conditional
approval of a tentative map.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.080) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.090 VESTING ON APPROVAL.
   An approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall confer
rights as set forth in this section.
   (A)   Vested rights. The approval or conditional approval of a vesting
tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in
substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in
the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66498.1.
   (B)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, a permit,
approval, extension or entitlement may be conditioned or denied if either of
the following is determined:
      (1)   Failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision, the
immediate community or both in a condition dangerous to their health, safety or
both; or
      (2)   The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state
or federal law.
   (C)   Time periods. The vested rights referred to herein shall expire if a
final map or parcel map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting
tentative map as provided in §
16.12.080. If the final map or parcel map is approved, vested rights shall
continue as follows:
      (1)   Vested rights shall remain in effect for an initial time period of
one-year from recordation of the final or parcel map. Where several final maps
are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting
tentative map, this one-year initial time period shall begin for each phase
when the final map for that phase is recorded. All of the final maps must be
recorded within the time period set forth in §
16.08.080 or the vesting tentative map approval shall expire for those parcels
for which final maps are not timely recorded.
      (2)   At any time prior to the expiration of the one-year time period set
forth in division (C)(1) of this section, the subdivider may apply for a one-
year extension. Requests for extension shall be submitted in writing to the
Planning Director and shall be subject to fees as established by the Town
Council.
      (3)   The one-year initial time period set forth in division (C)(1) of
this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a
complete application for a grading permit, if one is required, or for any
required design or architectural review, if the processing exceeds 30 days from
the date a complete application is filed.
      (4)   If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building
permit during the periods of time specified in divisions (C)(1), (2) and (3) of
this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the expiration
of that permit, or any extension of that permit.
   (D)   Subsequent conditioning. Consistent with division (A) of this section,
an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall not limit the
review authority from imposing reasonable conditions on subsequent required
approvals or permits necessary for the development.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.090) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.12.100 FEES.
   Upon filing a vesting tentative map, a fee as established by resolution of
the Town Council shall be required. As a condition of approval, the review
authority may require the payment, by the subdivider, of all development fees
at the time of the application for a building permit or other similar permit.
The rate for the fees shall be that which is in effect at the time of the map
application.
(Prior Code, § 16.04.100) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.16: FINAL MAPS
Section
   
16.16.010   Purpose
   
16.16.020   Preparation
   
16.16.030   Phasing
   
16.16.040   Survey required
   
16.16.050   Form and contents
   
16.16.060   Submittal for town approval
   
16.16.070   Action on final map
   
16.16.080   Recordation
   
16.16.090   Fees
§ 16.16.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth the practices and procedures
regarding the preparation and approval of final maps.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.020 PREPARATION.
   The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered
civil engineer, duly licensed to practice land surveying, or a licensed land
surveyor; shall be based upon a field survey; and shall conform to the
provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code § 66434.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.030 PHASING.
   Phasing of multiple final maps shall be in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (A)   Filing. Multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally
approved tentative map may be filed prior to the expiration of a tentative map
if:
      (1)   The subdivider, at the time the tentative map is filed, notifies
the town’s Planning Director in writing of the subdivider’s intention to file
multiple final maps on the tentative map; or
      (2)   After filing of the tentative map, the Planning Commission and the
subdivider concur in the filing of multiple final maps.
   (B)   Requirements. In submitting such a request, the subdivider shall not
be required to define the number or configuration of the proposed multiple
maps.
   (C)   Tentative maps. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved
or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the
tentative map, including the expiration date.
   (D)   Conditions. The right of the subdivider to file multiple final maps
shall not limit the authority of the town to impose reasonable conditions
relating to the filing of multiple final maps.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.040 SURVEY REQUIRED.
   Required surveys shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Survey accuracy. An accurate and complete survey of the land to be
subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land
surveyor. All monuments, property lines, center lines of streets, alleys and
easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey.
The allowable error of closure on any portion of the final map shall not exceed
1/10,000 for field closure and 1/20,000 for calculated closures.
   (B)   Boundary monuments. At the time of making the survey for the final
map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform
with the standards described in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 8771 so
that another engineer or surveyor may readily retrace the survey. At least one
exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map.
Other monuments shall be set as required by the Town Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.050 FORM AND CONTENTS.
   (A)   The form of the final map shall comply with the requirements of Cal.
Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 2, Article 2 and shall be as approved
by the Town Engineer. The town may require additional information to be filed
or recorded simultaneously with a final or parcel map as authorized by Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66434.2.
   (B)   The contents of the final map shall consist of:
      (1)   Title. The title sheet of each final map shall contain a title
consisting of the number and name of the subdivision, followed by the words
“Town of Fairfax,” and a subtitle consisting of a description of all property
being subdivided.
      (2)   Property description. The property description shall be by
reference to the map or maps of the property as shall have been previously
recorded or filed in the office of the County Recorder under authority of Cal.
Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 3, § 66499.50, or by reference to the plat of any
United States survey.
      (3)   Certificates and statements. The following certificates or
statements shall appear on the title sheet:
         (a)   The statement of consent as set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §
66430; provided, however, that, the exceptions in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66430 shall
apply;
         (b)   A statement, signed and acknowledged by any trustees of record
at the time of Town Council approval of the final map, consenting to the
recording of the map and any offers of dedications;
         (c)   A statement offering dedications of interest in real property
for any public use pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66439(a);
         (d)   A statement by the Engineer or surveyor responsible for the
survey and final map that is consistent with the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 66441;
         (e)   A geotechnical report, if applicable, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66434.5;
         (f)   A certificate by the Town Engineer consistent with Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66442;
         (g)   A certificate for execution by the Town Clerk in accordance with
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66440;
         (h)   A certificate to be executed by the County Recorder pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66492; and
         (i)   A certificate to be executed by the county recorder in
accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66466(c).
      (4)   Index map. If more than one sheet is used in preparing the final
map, there shall be included, either on the title sheet or the first map sheet,
an index map showing the general plan of the subdivision, street names, lot
numbers and the portions of the subdivision included on each map sheet.
      (5)   Boundary monuments. Each final map shall show boundary monuments,
which have been set pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66495.
      (6)   Deferment of monuments. In the event any or all required monuments
are to be set subsequent to the filing of the final map, the map shall show
which future monuments, or the furnishing of notes thereon, as required by §
16.16.100, shall be agreed to be set and furnished by the subdivider. The
agreement shall be accompanied by a bond.
      (7)   Bearings and distances. The bearing and length of each lot line,
block line and boundary line shall be shown on the final map. Each required
bearing and distance shall be shown in full and no ditto mark or other
designation of repetition shall be used.
      (8)   Basis of bearings. The basis of bearings shall appear on the title
sheet or other map sheet. Reference shall be made to some filed final map,
parcel map, record of survey map, Town Engineer’s map or other record
acceptable to the Town Engineer. The basis of bearings shall be derived from at
least two found monuments of record.
      (9)   Lot areas. For lots containing one acre or more, final maps shall
show net acreage to at least the nearest one-hundredth of an acre.
      (10)   Lot numbers.
         (a)   Lots shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number
“1,” except as otherwise approved by the Town Engineer, with no omissions or
duplications.
         (b)   Each numbered lot shall be shown to scale entirely on one sheet.
      (11)   Curve data. The following curve data shall be shown on the final
map:
         (a)   Terminal radii. The arc length, chord length and bearing, radius
and total central angle and bearings of terminal radii of each curve;
         (b)   Bearing. The bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on
each curve; and
         (c)   Central angle. The central angle of each segment within each
lot.
      (12)   Dedications. Dedications shall be made in accordance with Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66439 and shall be shown on the final map.
      (13)   Limited access designation.
         (a)   When the vehicular access rights from any lot to appropriately
designated roads are or will be restricted by a subdivision, such rights, if
not already a matter of record, shall be offered for dedication to the town by
an appropriate statement on the title sheet of the final map.
         (b)   A note which clearly defines the extent and nature of the
restriction shall be lettered on the final map for any subdivision adjacent to
the lots affected.
      (14)   Town, city or county boundary lines. Any town, city or county
boundary line adjoining the subdivision shall be clearly designated and tied in
upon the final map.
      (15)   Easements. All easements of record shall be shown on the map,
together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify
the conveyance, e.g., Recorder’s serial number and date or book and page of
official records.
         (a)   Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the
County Recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing shall be
specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements
for which the easement was created.
         (b)   The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by
dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths and bearings of record.
         (c)   The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the
Town Engineer.
      (16)   Other information. Other information such as leases, options, deed
restriction and other encumbrances shall be indicated as provided in division
(B)(17) of this section.
      (17)   Additional information.
         (a)   No additional survey and map information shall be included on a
final map which do not affect record title interests.
         (b)   However, the town engineer may require additional information,
in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet, to be filed or
recorded simultaneously with the final map in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §
66434.2.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.060 SUBMITTAL FOR TOWN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Prior to expiration of the tentative map, the subdivider shall submit
three prints of the final map to the Town Engineer for checking.
   (B)   The preliminary prints shall bear original signatures of all parties
required to execute the statements on the map, and shall be accompanied by the
following data, reports and documents in a form as approved by the Town
Engineer and, where applicable, the Town Attorney:
      (1)   Improvement plans and specifications. Three complete sets of
improvement plans, specifications and Engineer’s cost estimates of
improvements;
      (2)   Geotechnical reports. A complete set of geotechnical reports;
      (3)   Sub-surface geotechnic report. A complete set of preliminary sub-
surface geotechnic reports, if applicable;
      (4)   Statement regarding hazardous waste. A signed statement indicating
whether the subdivision is located on a site which is included on any of the
local lists prepared by the California Integrated Waste Management Board of all
solid waste facilities from which there is a known migration of hazardous
waste, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 95962.5;
      (5)   Hydrology and hydraulic calculations. Storm drain calculations
(e.g., hydrology, sub-area map, pipe line, hydraulic design, ponding basin,
pump system and the like, if applicable);
      (6)   Utility requirements. Evidence that all requirements of the
sanitary district, water district and other affected agencies and utilities
have been met;
      (7)   Guarantee of title. A subdivision guarantee of title, in a form
acceptable to the Town Engineer and Town Council issued by a competent title
company to and for the benefit and protection of the town; (The guarantee of
title shall be current as of the date of filing the final map with the County
Recorder, guaranteeing by certified letter from the title company that the
owner is as shown, that the names of all persons whose consent is necessary to
pass a clear title to the land being subdivided, and all public easements being
offered for dedication, and all acknowledgments thereto, appear on the proper
statements and are correctly shown on the map, both as to contents as to the
making thereof and affidavits of dedication where necessary.)
      (8)   Traverse closures. Traverse closures for the boundary, blocks,
lots, road centerline, easements and offset lines;
      (9)   References. Copies of the deed and unfiled surveys referenced on
the final map;
      (10)   Deeds for easements of rights of way. Deeds for off-site easements
or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been
dedicated on the final map; and (Written evidence, acceptable to the town,
establishing rights of entry or permanent easements across private property
outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary
construction work and permitting the maintenance for the facility.)
      (11)   Other information. Other information as may be required by the
tentative map, the Town Engineer and by law or by conditions of approval of the
tentative map.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.070 ACTION ON FINAL MAP.
   (A)   The town designated civil engineer shall review the final map and any
other required information and the subdivider shall make corrections and
additions until the following determinations are made by the town designated
civil engineer:
      (1)   Comparison with tentative map. The subdivision as shown is
substantially the same as it appeared on the approved tentative map, and any
approved alterations thereof;
      (2)   Compliance with laws. All provisions of law and of this chapter
applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map have been complied
with; and
      (3)   Correctness. The map is technically correct.
   (B)   The subdivider shall submit to the Town Engineer the original tracing
of the map and any duplicates per town requirements, corrected to its final
form and signed by all parties required to execute the statements on the map.
Original signatures shall appear on the original drawing. Upon receipt of all
required certificates and this submittal, the Town Engineer shall sign the
appropriate statements and transmit the original map to the Town Clerk.
   (C)   Prior to approval of the final map by the Town Council, the subdivider
shall enter into an improvement agreement with the town in accordance with the
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66462. The subdivider shall file, with the improvement
agreement required in §
16.16.050, security for the faithful performance of the agreement in accordance
with Cal. Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 5, commencing at § 66499.
   (D)   (1)   Following receipt of the final map, the Planning Director shall
file the same with the Town Council at its next regular meeting.
      (2)   At that meeting, or at the next following regular meeting after the
meeting at which it receives the map, the Town Council shall approve the same
if it conforms to all of the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this
title applicable at the time of approval or conditional approval of the
tentative map and any ruling made thereunder.
   (E)   The Town Council shall disapprove the map if the map does not conform
as described in division (D) of this section.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.080 RECORDATION.
   Upon approval by the Town Council of the final subdivision map, and receipt
of the necessary recording fee, the Town Clerk shall transmit the map to the
County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.080) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.16.090 FEES.
   Subdivider shall pay an improvement plan checking fee, a final map checking
fee, a recording fee as established by the Town Council and other applicable
fees as required by town ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 16.05.090) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.20: PARCEL MAPS
Section
   
16.20.010   Purpose
   
16.20.020   Parcel map required
   
16.20.030   Preparation
   
16.20.040   Dedication or offers
   
16.20.050   Field survey
   
16.20.060   Necessary statements
   
16.20.070   Preliminary submittal
   
16.20.080   Review and approval
   
16.20.090   Waiver of parcel map
   
16.20.100   Fees
§ 16.20.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe the requirements for, and waiver
of, parcel maps.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.020 PARCEL MAP REQUIRED.
   The filing of a parcel map, in conformance with an approved or conditionally
approved tentative map obtained pursuant to
Chapter 16.08, shall be a condition of approval of any minor subdivision,
except as provided in §
16.20.090.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.030 PREPARATION.
   The parcel map shall be prepared by, or under the direction of, a registered
civil engineer, duly licensed to practice land surveying, or a licensed land
surveyor; shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the
property; and shall conform to the provisions set forth in the Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 66445.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.040 DEDICATIONS OR OFFERS.
   Dedications or offers of dedication shall conform to the provisions of the
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66447.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.050 FIELD SURVEY.
   Parcel maps shall be based upon field surveys in accordance with the Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66448.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.060 NECESSARY STATEMENTS.
   An engineer’s or surveyor’s statement shall appear on a parcel map in
accordance with the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66449(a). A Recorder’s certificate or
statement and a Town Engineer’s statement shall appear on a parcel map in
accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66449(b) and 66450.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.070 PRELIMINARY SUBMITTAL.
   The subdivider shall submit prints of the parcel map to the Town Engineer
for checking. Where applicable, the preliminary prints shall be accompanied by
copies of the data, plans, reports and documents as required for final maps by
§ 16.05.050.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.080 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   Parcel maps shall be reviewed and approved as provided in this section.
   (A)   Review. The Town Engineer shall review the preliminary parcel map and
cause any changes to be made which are legally required for approval,
including:
      (1)   All provisions of law applicable at the time of approval of the
parcel map have been complied with; and
      (2)   The map is technically correct.
   (B)   Original map. The subdivider shall submit to the Town Engineer the
original tracing of the map and any duplicates per town requirements, corrected
to its final form, and signed by all parties required to execute the statements
or certificates on the map.
   (C)   Approval by town designated civil engineer. Upon receipt of all
required certificates and submittal, the Town Engineer shall sign the
appropriate statements and transmit the original map to the Town Clerk.
   (D)   Approval by Town Council.
      (1)   At the meeting at which it receives the map, or at its next regular
meeting following receipt, the Town Council shall approve the parcel map if it
conforms to all the legal requirements applicable at the time of approval or
conditional approval of the tentative map and any rulings made thereunder,
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66458. If the map does not conform, the Town
Council shall disapprove the map.
      (2)   In accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66458(c), the meeting at which
the Town Council receives the map shall be the date on which the Town Clerk
receives the map from the Town Engineer.
   (E)   Filing for record. After approval, the Town Clerk or authorized agent
shall transmit the approved parcel map directly to the County Recorder for
recording.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.080) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.090 WAIVER OF PARCEL MAP.
   The requirement for filing a parcel map for minor subdivisions may be waived
by the review authority upon the recommendation of the Planning Director and
Town Engineer if they find all of the following:
   (A)   Conformity with laws. The proposed minor subdivision conforms with the
Subdivision Map Act and this chapter;
   (B)   Conformity with regulations. The proposed minor subdivision conforms
to state and town requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater
drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal
facilities and water supply availability;
   (C)   Environmental effects. The proposed minor subdivision will not have an
adverse effect on the environment;
   (D)   Conformity with general plan. The proposed minor subdivision conforms
to the general plan;
   (E)   Change in nonconformity. No existing non- conformity with this title
or Title 17 of this code will be increased;
   (F)   Conformity with other ordinances. The proposed minor subdivision
conforms with all other town ordinances;
   (G)   Lack of need. A parcel map is not necessary to insure proper legal
description of property, location of property lines and monumenting of property
lines; and
   (H)   Facilities. Appropriate improved public roads, adequate sanitary
disposal facilities and adequate water supplies are available.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.090) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.20.100 FEES.
   Subdividers shall pay an improvement plan checking fee and a parcel map
checking fee, as established by the Town Council and this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.06.100) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.22: URBAN LOT SPLITS
Section
   
16.22.010   Urban lot splits
§ 16.22.010 URBAN LOT SPLITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow and appropriately
regulate urban lot splits in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 66411.7.
   (B)   Definition. An URBAN LOT SPLIT means the subdivision of an existing,
legally subdivided lot into two lots in accordance with the requirements of
this section.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   Only individual property owners may apply for an urban lot split.
INDIVIDUAL PROPERTY OWNER means a natural person holding fee title individually
or jointly in the person's own name or a beneficiary of a trust that holds fee
title. INDIVIDUAL PROPERTY OWNER does not include any corporation or corporate
person of any kind (partnership, LP, LLC, C corp, S corp, etc.) except for a
community land trust (as defined by Cal. Rev. & Tax Code § 402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii))
or a qualified nonprofit corporation (as defined by Cal. Rev. & Tax Code §
214.15).
      (2)   An application for an urban lot split shall be submitted on the
town's approved form. Only a complete application will be considered. The town
will inform the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within 30 days after
the application is submitted.
      (3)   The town may establish a fee to recover its costs for adopting,
implementing, and enforcing this section of the code, in accordance with
applicable law. The Town Council may establish and change the fee by
resolution. The fee shall be paid with the application.
   (D)   Approval.
      (1)   An application for a parcel map for an urban lot split is approved
or denied ministerially, by the Director of Planning and Building Services,
without discretionary review.
      (2)   A parcel map for an urban lot split shall be ministerially approved
if it complies with all the requirements of
Chapter 16.20 (Parcel Maps) of this Title with the exception of §
16.20.080(D) "Approval by Town Council", which is herein waived for
applications processed under this chapter.
      (3)   The approval shall require the owner and applicant to hold the town
harmless from all claims and damages related to the approval and its subject
matter.
      (4)   The approval shall require the owner and applicant to reimburse the
town for all costs of enforcement, including attorneys' fees and costs
associated with enforcing the requirements of this code.
   (E)   Requirements. An urban lot split shall satisfy each of the following
requirements:
      (1)   Map Act compliance.
         (a)   The urban lot split shall conform to all applicable objective
requirements of the Subdivision Map Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq.),
including implementing requirements as set forth in Title 16, except as
otherwise expressly provided in this section.
         (b)   If an urban lot split violates any part of the Subdivision Map
Act, the town's subdivision regulations, including this section, or any other
legal requirement:
            1.   The buyer or grantee of a lot that is created by the urban lot
split has all the remedies available under the Subdivision Map Act, including
but not limited to an action for damages or to void the deed, sale, or
contract.
            2.   The town has all the remedies available to it under the
Subdivision Map Act, including but not limited to the following:
               a.   An action to enjoin any attempt to sell, lease, or finance
the property.
               b.   An action for other legal, equitable, or summary remedy,
such as declaratory and injunctive relief.
               c.    Criminal prosecution, punishable by imprisonment in county
jail or state prison for up to one year, by a fine of up to $10,000, or both;
or a misdemeanor.
               d.    Record a notice of violation.
               e.    Withhold any or all future permits and approvals.
         (c)   Notwithstanding § 66411.1 of the Subdivision Map Act, no
dedication of rights-of-way or construction of offsite improvements is required
for an urban lot split.
      (2)   Zone. The lot to be split is in a single-family residential zone.
For purposes of this section, a single-family residential zone is a zone where
the only residential use that is allowed as a primary use is a single
residential dwelling on a lot.
      (3)   Lot location.
         (a)   The lot to be split is not located on a site that is any of the
following:
            1.   Prime farmland, farmland of statewide importance, or land that
is zoned or designated for agricultural protection or preservation by the
voters.
            2.   A wetland.
            3.   Within a very high fire hazard severity zone, unless the site
complies with all fire-hazard mitigation measures required by existing building
standards.
            4.   A hazardous waste site that has not been cleared for
residential use.
            5.   Within a delineated earthquake fault zone, unless all
development on the site complies with applicable seismic protection building
code standards.
            6.   Within a 100-year flood hazard area, unless the site has
either:
               a.   been subject to a Letter of Map Revision prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and issued to the local jurisdiction, or
               b.   meets Federal Emergency Management Agency requirements
necessary to meet minimum flood plain management criteria of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
            7.   Within a regulatory floodway, unless all development on the
site has received a no-rise certification.
            8.   Land identified for conservation in an adopted natural
community conservation plan, habitat conservation plan, or other adopted
natural resource protection plan.
            9.   Habitat for protected species.
            10.   Land under conservation easement.
         (b)   The purpose of division (E)(3)(a) above is merely to summarize
the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 65913.4(a)(6)(B)-(K). (See Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66411.7(a)(3)(C).)
      (4)   Not historic. The lot to be split shall not be a historic property
or within a historic district that is included on the State Historic Resources
Inventory. Nor may the lot be or be within a site that is designated by
ordinance as a town or county landmark or as a historic property or district.
      (5)   No prior urban lot split.
         (a)   The lot to be split was not established through a prior urban
lot split.
         (b)   The lot to be split is not adjacent to any lot that was
established through a prior urban lot split by the owner of the lot to be split
or by any person acting in concert with the owner.
      (6)   No impact on protected housing.
         (a)   The urban lot split shall not require or include the demolition
or alteration of any of the following types of housing ("protected housing"):
            1.   Housing that is income-restricted for households of moderate,
low, or very low income.
            2.   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of its policy power.
            3.   Housing, or a lot that used to have housing, that has been
withdrawn from rental or lease under the Ellis Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 7060-
7060.7) at any time in the 15 years prior to submission of the urban lot split
application.
            4.   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years.
         (b)   The application for the urban lot split shall include a sworn
affidavit from the applicant and the owner of the property that the urban lot
split will not demolish or alter protected housing as set forth in division (E)
(6)(a)1. - 4. above. The town may require additional evidence of the applicant
and owner as necessary to determine compliance with this requirement.
      (7)   Lot size.
         (a)   The lot to be split shall be at least 2,400 square feet.
         (b)   The resulting lots shall each be at least 1,200 square feet.
         (c)   Each of the resulting lots shall be between 60 percent and 40
percent of the original lot area.
      (8)   Easements.
         (a)   The owner shall enter into an easement agreement with each
public-service provider to establish easements that are sufficient for the
provision of public services and facilities to each of the resulting lots.
         (b)   Each easement shall be shown on the parcel map.
         (c)   Copies of unrecorded and recorded easement agreements shall be
submitted with the application. All easement agreements shall be recorded
against the property prior to approval of the parcel map.
         (d)   If an easement is recorded and the project is not completed,
making the easement moot, the property owner may request termination of the
parcel map, and the city will provide a notice of termination of the easement
and the parcel map, which the owner may record.
      (9)   Lot access.
         (a)   Each resulting lot shall adjoin the public right of way.
         (b)   Each resulting lot shall have frontage on the public right of
way of at least 20 feet.
      (10)   Unit standards.
         (a)   Quantity. No more than two dwelling units of any kind may be
built on a lot that results from an urban lot split. For purposes of this
paragraph, "unit" means any dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, a
primary dwelling unit, a unit created under
Chapter 17.049 (Two-Unit Projects), an accessory dwelling unit, or a junior
accessory dwelling unit (
Chapter 17.048).
         (b)   Unit size.
            1.   The total floor area of each primary dwelling that is
developed on a resulting lot shall be
               a.   less than or equal to 800 and
               b.   more than 500 square feet.
            2.   A primary dwelling that was legally established prior to the
urban lot split and that is larger than 800 square feet is limited to the
lawful floor area at the time of the urban lot split. It may not be expanded.
            3.   A primary dwelling that was legally established prior to the
urban lot split and that is smaller than 800 square feet may be expanded to 800
square feet after the urban lot split.
         (c)   Height restrictions.
            1.   On a resulting lot that is larger than 2,000 square feet, no
new primary dwelling unit may exceed a single story or 16 feet in height,
measured from grade to peak of the structure.
            2.   On a resulting lot that is smaller than 2,000 square feet, no
new primary dwelling unit may exceed two stories or 22 feet in height. Any
portion of a new primary dwelling that exceeds one story shall be stepped back
by an additional five feet from the ground floor; no balcony, deck, eave, or
other portion of the second story may project into the stepback.
            3.   No rooftop deck is permitted on any new or remodeled dwelling
or structure on a lot resulting from an urban lot split.
         (d)   Lot coverage. No resulting lot subject to this division may
result in the total lot coverage of the resulting lot to exceed 35 percent.
This lot coverage standard is only enforced to the extent that it does not
prevent two primary dwelling units on the lot at 800 square feet each.
         (e)   Open space. No dwelling unit on a resulting lot subject to
division (E)(10)(d) may cause the open space area to fall below 300 square feet
per unit. "Open space area" shall not include any required yard or setback,
required building separation, access area, or area with dimensions of less than
ten feet or slope of greater than ten percent, subject to division (E)(10)(d)
above. This open space standard is only enforced to the extent that it does not
prevent two primary dwelling units on the lot at 800 square feet each.
         (f)   Setbacks.
            1.   Generally. All setbacks shall conform to those objective
setbacks that are imposed through the underlying zone.
            2.   Exceptions. Notwithstanding division (E)(10)(f) above:
               a.    Existing structures. No setback is required for an
existing legally established structure or for a new structure that is
constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing
legally established structure.
               b.   The setbacks imposed by the underlying zone shall yield to
the degree necessary to avoid physically precluding the construction of up to
two units on the lot or either of the two units from being at least 800 square
feet in floor area; but in no event may any structure be less than four feet
from a side or rear property line.
            3.   Front setback area. Notwithstanding any other part of this
code, dwellings that are constructed after an urban lot split shall be at least
ten feet from the front property lines. The front setback area shall:
               a.   be kept free from all structures greater than three feet
high;
               b.   be at least 50 percent landscaped with landscaping on the
FireSafe Marin Fire-Smart Plant list, drought-tolerant landscaping is
encouraged, with vegetation and irrigation plans approved by a licensed
landscape architect;
               c.   allow for vehicular and fire-safety access to the front
structure.
         (g)   Parking. Each new primary dwelling unit that is built on a lot
after an urban lot split shall have at least one off-street parking space per
unit unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The lot is located within one-half mile walking distance of
either
               a.   a corridor with fixed route bus service with service
intervals no longer than 15 minutes during peak commute hours or
               b.   a site that contains the intersection of two or more major
bus routes with a frequency of service interval of 15 minutes or less during
the morning and afternoon peak commute periods.
            2.   The site is located within one block of a permanently
designated car-share vehicle location.
         (h)   Architecture.
            1.   If there is a legal primary dwelling on the lot that was
established before the urban lot split, any new primary dwelling unit shall
match the existing primary dwelling unit in exterior materials, color, and
dominant roof pitch. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by the largest
portion of the roof.
            2.   If there is no legal primary dwelling on the lot before the
urban lot split, and if two primary dwellings are developed on the lot, the
dwellings shall match each other in exterior materials, color, and dominant
roof pitch. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by the largest portion
of the roof.
            3.   All exterior lighting shall be downward directed, shielded to
prevent direct offsite illumination, the minimum number of fixtures necessary
to provide pathway, stair/step, and entry illumination, and a maximum of two
foot candles lighting intensity. No landscape lighting is allowed.
            4.   No window or door of a dwelling that is constructed on the lot
after the urban lot split may have a direct line of sight to an adjoining
residential property. Fencing, landscaping, or privacy glass may be used to
provide screening and prevent a direct line of sight.
            5.   If a dwelling is constructed on a lot after an urban lot split
and any portion of the dwelling is less than 30 feet from a property line that
is not a public right-of-way line, then all windows and doors in that portion
shall either be (for windows) with the bottom of the glass at least six feet
above the finished floor, or (for windows and for doors) utilize frosted or
obscure glass.
         (i)   Landscaping.
            1.   Evergreen landscape screening shall be planted and maintained
between each dwelling and adjacent lots (but not rights of way) as follows:
               a.   At least one 15-gallon size plant shall be provided for
every five linear feet of exterior wall.
               b.   Plant specimens must be at least six feet tall when
installed. As an alternative, a solid fence of at least six feet in height may
be installed.
               c.   All landscaping shall be on FireSafe Marin Fire-Smart Plant
list and is encouraged to be drought-tolerant.
               d.   No undesirable tree species as defined by §
8.36.020 shall be planted.
               e.   Any heritage tree, as defined by §
8.36.020, removed shall require two 36" box trees FireSafe Marin Fire-Smart
Plant list to be planted on the lot prior to final inspection.
         (j)   Nonconforming conditions. An existing legal nonconformity shall
not require any correction prior to approval of an urban lot split.
         (k)   Utilities.
            1.   Each primary dwelling unit on the resulting lots shall have
its own direct utility connection to the utility service provider.
            2.   Each primary dwelling unit on the resulting lots that is or
that is proposed to be connected to an onsite wastewater treatment system shall
comply with current county wastewater treatment system requirements for new
parcels.
         (l)   Building and safety. All structures built on the lot shall
comply with all current local building standards. An urban lot split is a
change of use.
      (11)   Fire-hazard mitigation measures.
         (a)   A lot shall comply with each of the following fire-hazard
mitigation measures:
            1.   All enclosed structures on the site shall have fire
sprinklers.
            2.   Windows in any portion of a dwelling with less than a five-
foot setback to a property line shall be equipped with heat activated self-
closing shutters.
            3.   All sides of all dwellings on the site shall be within a 150-
foot hose-pull distance from either the public right of way or of an onsite
fire hydrant or standpipe.
            4.   A lot shall have direct access to a public right of way with a
paved street with a minimum width consisting of a net horizontal unobstructed
clearance of not less than 20 feet exclusive of gutters, curbs, and shoulders,
that connects to a designated evacuation route.
         (b)   Prior to submitting an application for an urban lot split, the
applicant shall obtain a certificate of compliance with all applicable fire-
hazard mitigation measures in accordance with this division (E)(11). The town
or its authorized agent shall inspect the site, including all structures on the
site, and certify as to its compliance. The certificate shall be included with
the application. The applicant shall pay the town's costs for inspection.
Failure to pay is grounds for denying the application.
      (12)   Separate conveyance.
         (a)   Within a resulting lot.
            1.   Primary dwelling units on a lot that is created by an urban
lot split may not be owned or conveyed separately from each other.
            2.   Common interest developments, as defined by Cal. Civil Code §
4100, are not permitted on a lot that is created by an urban lot split.
            3.   All fee interest in a lot and all dwellings on the lot shall
be held equally and undivided by all individual property owners.
         (b)   Between resulting lots. Separate conveyance of the resulting
lots is permitted. If dwellings or other structures (such as garages) on
different lots are adjacent or attached to each other, the urban lot split
boundary may separate them for conveyance purposes if the structures meet
building code safety standards, including but not limited to
Chapter 8.04 and
Chapter 15.04, and are sufficient to allow separate conveyance. If any attached
structures span or will span the new lot line, the owner shall record
appropriate covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&R's), easements, or
other documentation that is necessary to allocate rights and responsibility
between the owners of the two lots.
      (13)   Regulation of uses.
         (a)   Residential-only. No non-residential use is permitted on any lot
created by urban lot split.
         (b)   No short term rentals. No dwelling unit on a lot that is created
by an urban lot split may be rented for a period of less than 30 days.
         (c)   Owner occupancy. The applicant for an urban lot split shall sign
an affidavit stating that the applicant intends to occupy one of the dwelling
units on one of the resulting lots as the applicant's principal residence for a
minimum of three years after the urban lot split is approved.
      (14)   Notice of construction.
         (a)   At least 30 business days before starting any construction of a
structure on a lot created by an urban lot split, the property owner shall give
written notice to all the owners of record of each of the adjacent residential
parcels, which notice shall include the following information:
            1.   Notice that construction has been authorized,
            2.   The anticipated start and end dates for construction,
            3.   The hours of construction,
            4.   Contact information for the project manager (for construction-
related complaints), and
            5.   Contact information for the Department of Planning and
Building Services.
         (b)   This notice requirement does not confer a right on the noticed
persons or on anyone else to comment on the project before permits are issued.
Approval is ministerial. Under state law, the town has no discretion in
approving or denying a particular project under this section. This notice
requirement is purely to promote neighborhood awareness and expectation.
      (15)   Deed restriction. The owner shall record a deed restriction,
acceptable to the town, that does each of the following:
         (a)   Expressly prohibits any rental of any dwelling on the property
for a period of less than 30 days.
         (b)   Expressly prohibits any non-residential use of the lots created
by the urban lot split.
         (c)   Expressly prohibits any separate conveyance of a primary
dwelling on the property, any separate fee interest, and any common interest
development within the lot.
         (d)   States that the property is formed by an urban lot split and is
therefore subject to the town's urban lot split regulations, including all
applicable limits on dwelling size and development.
   (F)   Specific adverse impacts.
      (1)   Notwithstanding anything else in this section, the town may deny an
application for an urban lot split if the Building Official makes a written
finding, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that the project would have
a "specific, adverse impact" on either public health and safety or on the
physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.
      (2)   "Specific adverse impact" has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65589.5(d)(2): "a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable
impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety
standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application
was deemed complete" and does not include (1) inconsistency with the zoning
ordinance or general plan land use designation or (2) the eligibility to claim
a welfare exemption under Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code section 214(g).
      (3)   The Building Official may consult with and be assisted by planning
staff and others as necessary in making a finding of specific, adverse impact.
(Ord. 860, passed 12-1-2021)
CHAPTER 16.24: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
16.24.010   Purpose
   
16.24.020   Applicability
   
16.24.030   Lot requirements
   
16.24.040   Streets and pedestrian ways
   
16.24.050   Street names
   
16.24.060   Minimum standards
   
16.24.070   Existing vegetation
   
16.24.080   Ridgelines and views
   
16.24.090   Utility easements and installation
   
16.24.100   Dedication of land for public purposes
   
16.24.110   Watercourses
   
16.24.120   Sewage disposal
   
16.24.130   Water supply; fire hydrants
   
16.24.140   Soils report required
   
16.24.150   Subsurface geotechnic reports
   
16.24.160   Drainage and flood control
   
16.24.170   Grading and erosion control
   
16.24.180   Public access to public resources
   
16.24.190   Supplemental improvements and reimbursement agreements
   
16.24.200   Dedication of solar access easements
   
16.24.210   Indemnification
   
16.24.220   Non-residential subdivisions
   
16.24.230   Land capacity reports
§ 16.24.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to set forth standards required for the
subdivision of land consistent with the Subdivision Map Act and the town
general plan.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.020 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The standards and requirements set forth in this chapter shall be
applicable to all subdivisions of land within the town unless otherwise
specified herein, or unless specifically proposed to be modified or waived by
the town’s Engineer and ratified by the review authority because of unique site
conditions. The Town Engineer shall provide explanations in writing for
proposed modifications or waivers of standards and requirements. The
explanations shall be attached to the subdivision map application prior to any
public hearing on the map.
   (B)   Bonds. Subdividers may be required to post a bond, cash or other
financing mechanism acceptable to the town to ensure fulfillment of
improvements within an established schedule and specified manner.
   (C)   Maintenance agreements. In addition to the agreement for completion of
all specified improvements, the subdivider shall, prior to filing the final
map, execute a contract with the town specifying maintenance requirements
including duration, extent and nature of and a financing mechanism to ensure
the maintenance.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.030 LOT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Areas and widths of lots.
      (1)   No lot shall have an average width of less than 65 feet unless
otherwise established by a planned development ordinance plan or conditional
use permit. No lot shall have an area of less than 5,500 square feet.
      (2)   In any case, lots shall conform with the requirements of any town
zoning regulations effective for the area in which the proposed subdivision is
located.
      (3)   Where property is zoned for business uses, other widths and areas
may be permitted at the discretion of the review authority.
   (B)   Frontage. Lots shall have a minimum frontage of 65 feet on a street.
   (C)   Side lines. Side lines of lots shall be as near as possible to right
angles to the street line upon which the lot faces.
   (D)   Double frontage. Lots other than corner lots having double frontage
with depths of less than 200 feet will not be approved, except where
necessitated by topographic or other physical conditions or where ingress or
egress to and from one of the streets is prohibited.
   (E)   Corner lots. Corner lots shall have an average width of at least 65
feet.
   (F)   Future division. Where parcels of land are subdivided into larger
building sites than required by the town zoning regulations, each lot indicated
thereon shall be restricted against resubdivision unless it can be divided in
accordance with divisions (B), (C) and (D) of this section and other provisions
of this chapter.
   (G)   Division of jurisdiction. No lot or parcel shall be permitted to be
divided by a town or county boundary line.
   (H)   Water and sewer.  All newly created lots and unimproved lots shall be
served for domestic purposes by the public water system, or in accordance with
§
16.08.050(D)(1) of this code. The lots also shall be served by the public sewer
system unless specifically exempted by the Town Council.
   (I)   Exception. This section shall not apply to any lot or parcel which the
subdivider offers to dedicate to the town or any public agency or district.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.040 STREETS AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS.
   (A)   Streets and alleys, where appropriate, shall be provided subject to
approval by the review authority and subject to the following standards unless
exceptions are approved by the Planning Commission as recommended by the
Planning Director and Director of Public Works consistent with safe and
efficient flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic:
      (1)   Widths. Streets and alleys shall be provided with a minimum width
of 20 feet or greater as determined by the Town Engineer and Planning Director
and approved by the review authority.
      (2)   Intersections. Streets shall intersect at a right angle or near
approximate.
      (3)   Grades. Grades shall not exceed six percent on major or secondary
highways, ten percent on major residential streets or 20 percent on any street.
      (4)   Alleys. May be required in the rear of all prospective business
property and shall be subject to intersection design and point of intersection
consistent with safe and efficient flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
      (5)   All streets and highways shall be graded, rocked and paved or
surfaced to widths and grades as provided herein and in accordance with the
approved improvement plan.
      (6)   The subdivider shall make application with the Town Engineer for an
encroachment permit to do work within the rights of way of existing town
streets and shall, under the terms of the permit, improve the extension of all
subdivision streets, highways or public ways to the intercepting paving of any
town streets.
      (7)   Concrete curbs and gutters conforming with the uniform construction
standards of the cities and County of Marin shall be required along all streets
and highways.
      (8)   Roadbeds shall be designed according to soil tests of the subgrade
material, and in accordance with the standard procedure used by the California
Department of Transportation in the design of roads under their jurisdiction or
by such other method as is in general use and considered sound practice.
         (a)   Minimum aggregate base shall be six inches in thickness, placed
over the properly prepared subgrade.
         (b)   Where asphaltic pavement is used, there shall be a minimum of
two and one-half inches of asphaltic surfacing, as approved by the Town
Engineer.
         (c)   Where Portland cement (P.C.) concrete paving is used, the
minimum thickness shall be six inches, Class B, P.C. concrete.
   (B)   Four-foot wide pedestrian ways shall be provided on at least one side
of the street as determined by the Director of Public Works and Planning
Director and approved by the review authority.
      (1)   Pedestrian ways ten feet in width and paved shall be required along
all business streets. Pedestrian ways, curbs and gutters shall be constructed
of Class B concrete in accordance with the most current standards in effect for
quality and durability.
      (2)   Pedestrian ways of a width determined by the Planning Director and
approved by the review authority may also be required through the center of
long blocks, to connect cul-de-sac streets and to provide access to school,
park and playground areas and to river, stream, lake, bay and ocean frontages.
      (3)   Pedestrian ways may be eliminated on both sides of streets where
the Director of Public Works and Planning Director determine that the slope of
the ground or the nature of the development makes them impractical or
inappropriate and the review authority concurs.
   (C)   The Town Engineer or designee shall make such inspections as deemed
necessary to insure that all construction is in accordance with the approved
improvement plan, and in no case shall the inspection be less than:
      (1)   An inspection of the subgrade prior to placing the aggregate base;
      (2)   An inspection of the aggregate base prior to placing of surfacing;
      (3)   The inspection of concrete forms;
      (4)   The inspection of the pouring of any concrete or spreading of
asphalt;
      (5)   All other structures, facilities, utilities, improvements, grading
and filling shall be inspected on a schedule approved by the Town Engineer;
      (6)   A final inspection upon completion of all improvements; and
      (7)   Each stage of construction shall require a written direction from
the Town Engineer to proceed.
   (D)   Fees. Subdividers shall pay fees as established by the Town Council,
and other applicable fees as required by the town codes for plan checking,
inspection, town consultant and other costs associated with the approval,
construction and inspection of streets and other improvements subject to
engineering standards.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.050 STREET NAMES.
   (A)   Street name signs shall be placed at all street intersections and
shall be in accordance with specifications on file in the Public Works
Department.
   (B)   The proposed name of each street shown on the tentative map shall be
submitted to the review authority for its approval.
   (C)   The words “street,” “avenue,” “boulevard,” ‘place,” “way,” “court” or
other designation of any street shall be spelled out in full on the tentative
map.
   (D)   Proposed names for any public streets shall be referred to the Fairfax
Historical Society for its recommendation.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.060 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   In all cases, materials used, preparation of base, methods of placing
materials, workmanship, grading and tests of materials shall not be less than
those standards required by the most recent standard specifications of the
California Department of Transportation, except where special provisions are
required.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.070 EXISTING VEGETATION.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be designed to preserve desirable existing
native, indigenous vegetation, especially trees, to the maximum extent
feasible.
   (B)   Where there are insufficient natural trees, the Planning Director may
require a tree plan to be approved by the review authority that is prepared by
a licensed landscape architect or arborist for the location and planting of
trees of approved, suitable species.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.080 RIDGELINES AND VIEWS.
   All subdivisions shall be designed to protect ridgelines pursuant to
Chapter 17.060, and to assure adequate light, air, privacy and views on all
parcels regardless of land use.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.080) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.090 UTILITY EASEMENTS AND INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Unless otherwise approved by the Town Engineer, utility easements as
required by the utility authorities shall be provided within subdivisions where
required for public utility purposes.
   (B)   All underground utilities, sanitary sewers and storm drains installed
in streets, service roads, alleys or highways shall be constructed prior to the
surfacing of the streets, service roads, alleys or highways.
   (C)   Service connections for all underground utilities and sanitary sewers
shall be laid to a length as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the
street or alley improvements when service connections thereto are made.
   (D)   Undergrounding requirements.
      (1)   All utility distribution facilities (including, but not limited to
electric, communication and cable television lines) installed in and for the
purpose of supplying service to any new residential subdivision or commercial
subdivision shall be placed underground.
      (2)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-
mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and
concealed ducts shall be placed in underground vaults.
      (3)   Exceptions may be recommended by the Town Engineer for review
authority approval for subdivisions of less than five lots with findings that
the topographical, soil or other conditions or circumstances make underground
installation of the facilities as required by this section unreasonable or
impracticable.
      (4)   The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements
of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility
companies involved for the installation of the facilities.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.090) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.100 DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES.
   (A)   As a condition to the approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the
subdivider shall dedicate land, pay fees, or a combination of both for park or
recreational facilities in accordance with the provisions of this section, Cal.
Gov’t Code § 66477, and the parks and recreation element of the general plan.
   (B)   The fees or dedications shall bear reasonable relationship to the use
of the park and recreational facilities by the future inhabitants of the
subdivision.
      (1)   Dedication of land. An irrevocable offer of dedication shall be
made to the town or other appropriate governing bodies of all parcels of land
intended or designated to be used for public purposes. Such offer of dedication
shall be by certificate on the final or parcel map or by such other method as
may be appropriate.
      (2)   Easements. A conservation or recreation easement established for
specific purposes consistent with this section and to be held in perpetuity for
such purposes shall be conveyed to the town or to an entity, governmental or
non-governmental, approved by the Town Council.
      (3)   General. The payment of fees, or the dedication of land, or both,
shall be in a proportionate amount necessary to provide five acres of property
devoted to local park or recreational purposes for each 1,000 persons residing
in the town.
      (4)   Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the provisions of
this section:
         (a)   Subdivisions containing less than five parcels and not used for
residential purposes shall be exempted from the requirements of this section.
However, a condition may be placed on the approval of the parcel map that if a
building permit is requested for construction of a residential structure or
structures on one or more of the parcels within four years, the fee may be
required to be paid by the owner of each such parcel as a condition to the
issuance of the permit.
         (b)   Commercial and industrial subdivisions and condominium projects
or stock cooperatives which consist of subdivision of airspace in an existing
apartment building more than five years old when no new dwelling units are
added.
      (5)   Payment of fees. Only the payment of fees may be required in
subdivisions containing 50 parcels or less, except that when a condominium
project exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required
notwithstanding the number of parcels may be less than 50.
      (6)   Land dedication and fees.
         (a)   At the time of approval of a tentative map or parcel map, the
Town Council shall determine the land to be dedicated and fees to be paid by
the subdivider based on the provisions of division (B)(7) below.
         (b)   Covenants for dedicated land shall be submitted to the town
prior to approval of a final subdivision map and shall be recorded at the same
time as the final map.
         (c)   Fees shall be paid to the town and other public agencies, if
applicable, in accordance with the provisions set forth in Cal. Gov’t Code §
66477(f).
      (7)   Dedications and fees. Land dedications and fees shall be determined
as set forth in this division.
         (a)   Formula for dedication of land. Where a park or recreation
facility has been designated in the town general plan, and is to be located in
whole or in part within the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and
future needs of the residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate
land for a local park sufficient in size and topography that bears a reasonable
relationship to serve the present and future needs of the residents of the
subdivision. The amount of land to be provided shall be determined pursuant to
the following formulas:
            1.   Alternative 1: formula based on population estimate. The
formula for determining acreage to be dedicated shall be as set forth in the
Table 16.24-1. This table is based on 1990 U.S. Census information and has been
established pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66477(b).
Table 16.24-1
 
Dwelling Type   Assumed Density (Person/ Standard (Acres/ Dwelling Unit)
                Dwelling Unit)
Single-family   2.5 persons/DU           0.0075
Duplex/         1.87 persons/DU          0.00561
multiple-family
 
            2.   Alternative 2: formula based on dwelling units. Table 16.24-2,
which contains the formula for determining acreage to be dedicated based on
dwelling units, is based on 1990 U.S. Census information and has been
established pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66477(b).
Table 16.24-2
 
Dwelling Type  Zoning District          Assumed Density  Standard
Single- family RS-7.5, RS-6             2.5 person/ DU   5 acres/ 400 DUs
Duplex/        RD 5.5-7, UR-7 (PDD), RM 1.87 persons/ DU 5 acres/ 535 DUs
multiple
 
            3.   Alternative 3; population formula. At any future point in
time, after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, when updated
U.S. Census information is released to the general public and accepted as
accurate by the town, the formula set forth in the following table for
determining parkland to be dedicated shall be substituted for divisions (G)(1)
(a) and (b) of this section.
Table 16.24-3
 
Average number of persons/unit - 1,000 population = Minimum acreage dedication
                                 5 acres
 
         (b)   Improvements. The subdivider shall, without credit:
            1.   Provide full street improve- ments and utility connections
including, but not limited to curbs, gutters, street paving, traffic control
devices, street lighting, street trees, retaining walls and sidewalks to land
which is dedicated pursuant to this section;
            2.   Provide for fencing along the property line of that portion of
the subdivision contiguous to the dedicated land; and
            3.   Provide other minimal improvements which the Town Council
determines to be essential to the acceptance of the land for recreational
purposes.
         (c)   Formula for fees. If there is no park or recreation facility
designated in the town general plan, to be located in whole or in part within
the proposed subdivision to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall, in lieu of dedicating land,
pay a fee equal to value of that land. Fees shall be determined in accordance
with Table 16.24-4. The fees shall be used for a local park which bears a
reasonable relationship to serve the present and future residents of the area
being subdivided.
Table 16.24-4
 
DUs X Population X 5 Acres          X FMV of Land  = In Lieu Fee
      DU           1,000 Population   Land acreage
NOTES TO TABLE:
Where:
DUs = Number of dwelling units
FMV = Fair market value as determined by division (B)(7)(e) of this
section
Land acreage = The total acreage of the property
 
         (d)   Number of dwelling units. For the purpose of this section, the
number of new dwelling units shall be based upon the number of parcels
indicated on the map when in an area zoned for one dwelling unit per parcel.
When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for more than
one dwelling unit per parcel, the number of proposed dwelling units in the area
so zoned shall equal the maximum allowed under the zone. In the case of a
condominium project, the number of new dwelling units shall be the number of
condominium units. The term “new dwelling units” does not include dwelling
units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the parcel or final map is
filed.
         (e)   Fair market value. The fair market value shall be determined by
the town with a written appraisal report prepared and signed by an appraiser
acceptable to the town. The appraisal shall be made immediately prior to the
filing of the final map. The subdivider shall notify the town of the expected
filing date at least six weeks prior to filing the final map. If more than one
year elapses prior to filing the final map, the town will prepare a new
appraisal and will bill the subdivider for the cost of the reappraisal. If the
subdivider objects to the determined fair market value, the subdivider may
appeal to the Town Council. The determination of the fair market value shall
consider, but shall not be limited to the following:
            1.   Approval of and conditions of the tentative subdivision map;
            2.   The general plan;
            3.   Zoning;
            4.   Property location;
            5.   Off-site improvements facil- itating use of the property;
            6.   Site characteristics of the property; and
            7.   Comparable property transactions within the market area.
         (f)   Use of money. Any in-lieu fees collected shall be used only for
the purpose of acquiring necessary land and developing new or rehabilitating
existing park or recreational facilities reasonably related to serving the
subdivision.
      (8)   Fees. Any fees collected pursuant to this section shall be
committed within five years after payment of the fees or the issuance of
building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever
occurs later. If the fees are not committed, they, without any deductions,
shall be distributed and paid to the then record owners of the subdivision in
the same proportion that the size of each lot bears to the total area of all
lots in the subdivision.
      (9)   Development schedule. The Town Council shall specify in a public
lands development plan how, when and where it will use the land or fees or both
to develop park or recreational facilities.
      (10)   Credits. Credit against the payment of fees or dedication of land
required by this section shall be given in accordance with the provisions of
the following divisions:
         (a)   If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to
the dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any equipment
located thereon shall be a credit against the payment of fees or dedication of
land required by this section.
         (b)   Planned developments, real estate developments, stock
cooperatives and community apartment projects, as defined in Cal. Business and
Professions Code §§ 11003, 11003.1, 11003.2, 11003.4 and 11004 and
condominiums, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 783 shall be eligible to receive
a credit, as determined by the Town Council, against the amount of land
required to be dedicated, or the amount of the fee imposed, pursuant to this
section, for the value of private open space within the development which is
usable for active recreational uses. For the purposes of this section, private
open space is that open space which is available to all residents within the
development.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.100) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.110 WATERCOURSES.
   The subdivider shall make an irrevocable offer of dedication to the town or
other appropriate public agency of a right-of-way for storm drainage purposes
conforming substantially with the lines of any natural watercourse or channel,
stream or creek that traverses the subdivision or, if required by the town,
provide by irrevocable offer dedication for further and sufficient easements or
construction or both to dispose of surface and storm waters. Such an offer of
dedication shall be accepted, except upon recommendation of town’s Civil
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.110) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.120 SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   Provision shall be made for adequate sewage disposal by:
   (A)   Connection to a public sanitary sewer, when available, in which case a
letter from the governing board having jurisdiction shall be submitted showing
the ability of the system to handle sewage from the proposed subdivision and
evidence that a satisfactory agreement has been entered into for connection to
the system; or
   (B)   Individual or community septic tanks or other Regional Water Quality
Control Board (RWQCB) approved community disposal systems, in which case
detailed plans shall be approved by the Town Council pursuant to the federal
and state standards for the protection of the water basin’s biological and
chemical water quality. No construction shall be commenced upon any systems
until the same have been approved in writing by the RWQCB and Town Council, a
provision has been made for future maintenance as approved by the RWQCB and the
subdivider has given the guarantee, or posted a bond, as deemed effective by
the RWQCB and necessary to insure the installation of property facilities
within the proposed subdivision and provision has been made for future
connection to a public sanitary sewer when available.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.120) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.130 WATER SUPPLY; FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Provisions shall be made for the domestic water supply as may be
necessary to protect public health by connection to a public utility or public
water agency and a letter from the utility or agency shall be submitted showing
its ability to serve the proposed subdivision and evidence indicating that a
satisfactory agreement has been entered into for the installation of the
service. The procedures for determining water supply ability shall be based on
Cal. Water Code § 10910.
   (B)   (1)   Individual wells shall be discouraged and only permitted upon a
hydrologic unit assessment directed by the Town Engineer to determine the
effect of well water extraction on the water table and associated streams and
springs.
      (2)   Proposed wells shall also comply with Chapter 8.40 of this code.
   (C)   The subdivider shall provide a water connection for each lot and fire
hydrants at such intervals as may be required by the town and the Ross Valley
Fire District.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.130) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.140 SOILS REPORT REQUIRED.
    Soils reports shall be provided in accordance with the Cal. Gov’t Code §§
66490 and 66491. Soils reports shall be submitted to the Town Engineer and
shall include at least, but not only: a preliminary soils report based upon
adequate test borings and prepared by a civil engineer registered in this state
shall be required for every subdivision requiring a final map. If it is
determined that a potential soils problem or soils related hazard may exist,
such a preliminary soils report may be required for a subdivision requiring a
parcel map.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.140) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.150 SUBSURFACE GEOTECHNIC REPORTS.
   Subsurface geotechnical investigation and reports may require the
information listed in this section, as determined by the Town Engineer.
   (A)   Subsurface investigations. Subsurface investigations (including
drilling to establish bedrock) to consider the potential, on the entire slope
face, both on and adjacent to the subject property, for ground failure, erosion
subsidence, differential settlement, liquefaction and any other adverse
geologic conditions.
   (B)   Development recommendations. Recommendations for restrictions on
development where development poses a hazard and proposed mitigation measures
for hazardous conditions.
   (C)   General plan conformance. Reference to all geologic safety concerns
and events discussed in the safety element of the general plan as they relate
to the subject property.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.150) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.160 DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL.
   A study shall be prepared of the proposed drainage system for the
development which details, at a minimum, the following:
   (A)   The effects of any runoff on other drainage systems;
   (B)   The ability of the proposed drainage system and affected drainage
systems to convey run-off volumes generated by the 100-year storms, as approved
by the Town Engineer;
   (C)   If division (B) above cannot be shown, an on-site detention system to
regulate storm water discharge to avoid conveying any additional run-off to the
affected drainage system during a ten- to 100-year storm, as approved by the
Town Engineer; and
   (D)   Proposed development flood management plans shall be consistent with
floodplain management purposes in the floodplain ordinance (17.068) and in no
case shall there be net wetlands loss due to fill or other development
activities.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.160) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.170 GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL.
   Grading and erosion control, including the prevention of sedimentation or
damage to off-site property, shall be consistent with
Chapter 8.32 and the current best management practices of the town and Marin
County storm water pollution prevention program or as approved by the Regional
Water Quality Control Board and non-point source pollution standards consistent
with its watershed management plan, and shall be approved by the town’s Civil
Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.170) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.180 PUBLIC ACCESS TO PUBLIC RESOURCES.
   (A)   Reservations of land for public uses shall be in accordance with the
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66479 through 66482.
   (B)   Reserved strips controlling the access to public ways or which will
not prove accessible or assessable for special improvements will not be
approved unless the strips are necessary for the protection of the public
welfare or of substantial private property rights, or both, and in no case,
except when the control and disposal of the land comprising the strips, is
irrevocably offered for dedication to the town under conditions approved by the
town.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.180) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.190 SUPPLEMENTAL IMPROVEMENTS AND REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS.
   As a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel or tentative map, the
subdivider may be required to install improvements, for the benefit of property
not within the subdivision, and dedicate those improvements to the public,
pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66485 through 66489.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.190) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.200 DEDICATION OF SOLAR ACCESS EASEMENTS.
   As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may be
required, in accordance with the provisions of the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66475.3 to
dedicate solar access easements.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.200) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.210 INDEMNIFICATION.
   As a condition to map approval, the town shall require that the subdivider
defend, indemnify and hold harmless the town against any claim or action
brought under the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.37 to attack an approval by the town,
or any of its entities, concerning a subdivision.
   (A)   General. Such a condition may require indemnification of any agent,
officer and employee of the town, as well as indemnification of the town, the
Town Council and the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Exception. The town may not require, as a condition of tentative,
final or parcel map application or approval, that the subdivider defend,
indemnify, or hold harmless the town or its agents, officers and employees from
any claim, action or proceeding against the town as a result of its failure to
review or act upon the map within the required time limit.
   (C)   Notice.
      (1)   The town shall promptly notify the subdivider of a claim against
it.
      (2)   If the town fails to promptly give the notice, the subdivider shall
not be responsible to defend, indemnify or hold harmless the town.
   (D)   Cooperation.
      (1)   The town shall cooperate fully in the defense.
      (2)   If the town fails to cooperate fully in the defense, the subdivider
shall not be responsible to defend, indemnify or hold harmless the town.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.210) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.220 NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   Non-residential subdivisions shall conform to the provisions of this
section.
   (A)   Adjacent residential areas. Every effort shall be made to protect
adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from the proposed non-
residential subdivisions, including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for
a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary.
   (B)   Streets carrying non-residential traffic, especially truck traffic,
shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or
potential residential areas, or connected to streets intended for predominantly
residential traffic.
   (C)   Subdivision for proposed commercial development shall take into
account and specifically designate all areas proposed for vehicular circulation
and parking, for pedestrian circulation and for buffer strips and other
landscaping.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.220) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.24.230 LAND CAPACITY REPORTS.
   A land capacity report (LCR) shall be required with all applications for
major subdivisions.
   (A)   Submittal. An LCR shall be submitted before or in conjunction with the
tentative map application for subdivision.
   (B)   An LCR shall contain the following:
      (1)   A slope map depicting existing conditions and which shows, by
shading or other clear means, areas of slope less than 20 percent, areas of
slope 20 percent to 30 percent, areas of slope 30 percent to 40 percent and
areas of slope in excess of 40 percent. The acreage of each slope category
shall be estimated.
      (2)   A resource conservation analysis consisting of text and maps
describing the land features and environmental resources including an
identification and analysis of the following:
         (a)   Floodplains and areas where ponding may occur;
         (b)   Geologic and soils conditions, including hazard potential;
         (c)   Hydrology;
         (d)   Existing trees and areas of riparian vegetation;
         (e)   Scenic areas;
         (f)   Rare or endangered plant and animal species and habitat areas;
         (g)   Rock outcroppings;
         (h)   Existing roads, trails and pathways;
         (i)   Primary wildlife habitats and resources, including wildlife
movement corridors;
         (j)   Cultural resources such as archaeological, historical and
paleontological resources;
         (k)   Knolls, ridges and other promontories where tong-range views are
possible; and
         (l)   Other noteworthy or unusual site characteristics.
   (C)   Waiver. An LCR may be waived by the Planning Director where a finding
is made that the report would serve no useful purpose.
   (D)   Notice. A determination by the Planning Director to waive the
requirement or a refusal to do so after a waiver is requested by the applicant,
shall be reported, in writing, to the applicant and to the Planning Commission
within ten days of the decision.
   (E)   Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall, at its next
regular meeting following receipt of the decision, affirm or reverse the
Planning Director’s decision. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be
final.
(Prior Code, § 16.07.230) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.28: STATUTORY MERGERS
Section
   
16.28.010   Purpose
   
16.28.020   Definitions
   
16.28.030   Requirements for application
   
16.28.040   Review procedure
§ 16.28.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for the town-initiated
merger of two or more existing, contiguous parcels or units of land in order to
achieve orderly development, protect new development and implement the policies
of the general plan.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.28.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTIGUOUS. Sharing a common boundary.
   MERGER. The process whereby contiguous parcels or units of land under the
same ownership are merged, pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 66451.10 et seq. and
this chapter.
   SLOPE STABILITY. The maximum stable inclination of an unsupported slope
under the most adverse conditions that it will likely experience, as determined
by current engineering practice.
   SLOPE STABILITY STANDARDS. Those standards that are necessary in order to
insure that a slope achieves slope stability.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.28.030 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for town-initiated mergers may be initiated by the
Planning Director, the Planning Commission or the Town Council.
   (B)   A town-initiated merger may proceed only if one of the parcels or
units has less area than the minimum parcel area or lot area required for new
parcels or lots by the regulating zone, and if the following requirements of
divisions (B)(1) and (2) below are satisfied.
      (1)   Development. At least one of the affected parcels is not developed
with a structure for which a building permit was issued, or for which a
building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed
only with an accessory structure or structures or is developed with a single
structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a
contiguous parcel or unit.
      (2)   Substandard conditions. With respect to any affected parcel, one or
more of the following conditions exists:
         (a)   The parcel comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the
time of the determination of merger;
         (b)   The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation;
         (c)   The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal
and domestic water supply;
         (d)   The parcel has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular
and safety equipment access and maneuverability;
         (e)   Development of the parcel would create health or safety hazards;
         (f)   Existence of the parcel is inconsistent with the general plan
and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density
standards; or
         (g)   The parcel does not meet slope stability standards.
      (3)   Ownership. For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels
are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that
the notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to this
chapter.
      (4)   Exceptions. Division (B)(2) above shall not apply if any of the
conditions stated in Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.11(b)(A), (C) or (D) exist.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.28.040 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Merger applications shall be reviewed by Planning Department staff.
   (B)   Notice of hearings and all other procedures shall be in accordance
with the provisions of this section, pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code §§
66451.15 through 66451.21.
      (1)   Notice of intention to declare status. Prior to recording a notice
of merger, the Planning Director shall mail by certified mail a notice of
intention to determine status to the current record owner of the property.
         (a)   The notice of intention to determine status shall state that the
affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this chapter and that the owner may
require a hearing before the Planning Director to present evidence that the
property does not meet the criteria for merger.
         (b)   The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for
record with the county recorder on the date the notice is mailed to the
property owner.
      (2)   Hearing.  A written request for a hearing by the owner of the
affected parcel may be filed to determine whether the parcel should or should
not be merged. When a hearing is requested, the following procedures shall be
followed:
         (a)   At any time within 30 calendar days after the recording of the
notice to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file a
written request for a hearing with the Planning Department.
         (b)   Upon receipt of the written request for a hearing, the Planning
Director shall set a time, date and place for the hearing and notify the
property owner of the information by certified mail. The hearing shall be
conducted not more than 60 days following the filing of the property owner’s
request for hearing, or may be postponed or continued by mutual written consent
of the Director and the property owner.
         (c)   At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the
opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet
the requirements for merger specified in §
16.28.030(B)(1) and (2).
         (d)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Director shall
make a determination that the parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged,
based on the standards for merger specified in §
16.28.030(B)(1) and (2). The owner shall be notified of the Director’s
determination.
         (e)   The owner of the property may appeal the Planning Director’s
determination pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Chapter 17.036.
      (3)   Notice of merger. If it is decided that the parcels are to be
merged, the Planning Director shall record a notice of merger with the County
Recorder within the following time limits:
         (a)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing specified by
division (B)(2) above;
         (b)   Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing convened as a
result of the appeal specified in division (B)(2) above; or
         (c)   Within 90 days after the mailing of the notice of intention to
determine status specified in division (B)(1) above, if the owner of the
affected parcels has not filed a request for hearing within the time period
specified in division (B)(2) above.
      (4)   Release of notice. If it is decided that the parcels are not to be
merged, the Planning Director shall record a release of the notice of intention
to determine status with the County Recorder and shall mail a clearance letter
to the recorded owner of the affected parcels.
(Prior Code, § 16.08.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.32: VOLUNTARY MERGERS
Section
   
16.32.010   Purpose
   
16.32.020   Initiation by property owner
   
16.32.030   Review procedures
   
16.32.040   Development requirements
§ 16.32.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the owner-initiated merger of
contiguous parcels under common ownership without reversion to acreage,
pursuant to Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.203/4.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.32.020 INITIATION BY PROPERTY OWNER.
   Proceedings to merge contiguous parcels may be initiated by petition of the
owner of record of the parcels. The petition shall be in a form and contain the
information prescribed by the Planning Director.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.32.030 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The Planning Director has the authority to approve a voluntary merger. A
voluntary merger may be approved if it is found that all of the properties
involved in the merger are in common ownership.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.32.040 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Mergers approved under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
only to those conditions which insure that the proposal meets the minimum area
and width requirements of the regulating zone.
   (B)   All mergers shall be recorded with a notice of merger, pursuant to
Cal. Gov’t Code § 66451.12.
(Prior Code, § 16.09.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.36: REVERSION TO ACREAGE
Section
   
16.36.010   Purpose
   
16.36.020   Initiation of proceedings by owners
   
16.36.030   Initiation of proceedings by Town Council
   
16.36.040   Documents used for reversion to acreage
   
16.36.050   Required information for final map procedure
   
16.36.060   Required information for parcel map procedure
   
16.36.070   Fees
   
16.36.080   Review procedures
   
16.36.090   Findings
   
16.36.100   Conditions
   
16.36.110   Return of fees and deposits
   
16.36.120   Delivery of final map
   
16.36.130   Effect of filing final map
   
16.36.140   Effect of filing parcel map
§ 16.36.010 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this chapter is to specify the procedures by, and under which
conditions, subdivided property may be reverted to acreage.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.020 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY OWNERS.
   (A)   Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated
by petition of all the owners of record of the property.
   (B)   The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the Planning Director
and shall contain the information required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.030 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS BY TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Town Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion, may, by
resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The Council
shall direct the Planning Director to obtain the necessary information to
initiate and conduct the proceedings and make recommendations concerning the
reversion.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.040 DOCUMENTS USED FOR REVERSION TO ACREAGE.
   (A)   Either a parcel map or a final map shall be used for reversion to
acreage.
   (B)   Both mapping procedures shall be subject to the provisions of this
title.
      (1)   Four or fewer parcels. A parcel map shall be the document used for
reverting to acreage land previously subdivided and consisting of four or fewer
contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
      (2)   Five or more parcels. A final map shall be the document used for
reverting to acreage all other previously approved subdivisions not described
in division (B)(1) above.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.050 REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR FINAL MAP PROCEDURE.
   Petitioners shall file the following when a final map is required for
reversion to acreage:
   (A)   Tentative map. A tentative map in the form prescribed by Chapter 16.08
of this title;
   (B)   Evidence of title. Evidence of title to the real property;
   (C)   Evidence of consent. Evidence that all owners of the property consent
to the reversion;
   (D)   Evidence of non-use. Evidence of the non- use or lack of necessity of
any roads, streets or easements which are to be vacated or abandoned;
   (E)   Delineation of features. The delineation of all roads, streets or
easements to be left unaffected after the reversion, with appropriate
notations;
   (F)   Evidence on improvements. Evidence that required improvements have not
been made within two years from the date the final map or parcel map was filed
for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements, whichever is later;
   (G)   Evidence of sales. Evidence of all sales of lots or parcels shown on
the final or parcel map that have been made within five years from the date the
final or parcel map was filed for record;
   (H)   Final map. A final map in the form prescribed by Chapter 16.16 of this
title with the inclusion of all conditions placed on the tentative map; and
   (I)   Other information. Other information as is required by the Planning
Director.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.060 REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR PARCEL MAP PROCEDURE.
   Petitioners shall file the following when a parcel map is required for
reversion to acreage:
   (A)   Tentative map. A tentative map of the form prescribed by
Chapter 16.08 of this title showing the merger of the four or fewer parcels
into one parcel;
   (B)   Evidence of title. Evidence of title to the real property under one
ownership;
   (C)   Evidence of consent. Evidence that all owners of the property consent
to the reversion;
   (D)   Evidence of non-use. Evidence of non-use or lack of necessity of any
roads, streets, easements which are to be vacated or abandoned;
   (E)   Delineation of features. Clear delineation and notation on the parcel
map of all roads, streets and easements to be left unaffected after the
reversion;
   (F)   Evidence on improvements. Evidence that no required improvements have
been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for
record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements, whichever is later;
   (G)   Evidence of sales. Evidence of all sales of lots or parcels shown on
the final or parcel map that have been made within five years from the date the
final or parcel map was filed for record;
   (H)   Parcel map. A parcel map with the inclusion of all conditions required
on the tentative map; and
   (I)   Other information. Other information as is required by the Planning
Director.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.070 FEES.
   Petitions to revert property to acreage shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by the Town Council. This fee is not refundable.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.080 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   A reversion to acreage application shall be reviewed by the Planning
Commission.
   (B)   Notice and hearing procedures shall be as provided in this section.
      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given as required by the Cal. Gov’t Code §
66451.3.
      (2)   Planning Commission recommends approval. In the event the Planning
Commission recommends that the reversion to acreage be approved, the Town
Council shall hold a public hearing to consider the Planning Commission’s
recommendation.
      (3)   Planning Commission denial. In the event the Planning Commission
denies a reversion to acreage application, that action is final unless appealed
to the Town Council subject to
Chapter 17.036.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.080) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.090 FINDINGS.
   The Town Council may approve a reversion to acreage, to be recorded in the
County Recorder’s office, only if upon adoption of written findings that
dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion
to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes, based
upon the policies and designations in the general plan, and either:
   (A)   Consent. All owners of an interest in the real property within the
subdivision have consented to reversion;
   (B)   Lack of Improvements. None of the improvements required to be made
have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed
for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the
improvements, whichever is later; or
   (C)   Recordation. No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold
within five years from the date the map was filed for record.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.090) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.100 CONDITIONS.
   The Town Council shall require as conditions of the reversion:
   (A)   Dedication. The owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets or
easements that are not to be abandoned; and
   (B)   Retentions. The retention of all or a portion of previously paid
subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities if the same are necessary
to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.100) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.110 RETURN OF FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   Except as provided in §
16.36.100, upon filing of the final map for reversion of acreage with the
County Recorder, all fees and deposits shall be returned to the subdivider and
all improvement securities shall be released by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.110) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.120 DELIVERY OF FINAL MAP.
   After the Town Council approval of the reversion, the final map shall be
delivered to the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.120) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.130 EFFECT OF FILING FINAL MAP.
   Reversion shall be effective upon the filing of the final map for record by
the County Recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not
shown on the final map for reversion shall be of no further force or effect and
shall be shown as such on the assessment roll.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.130) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.36.140 EFFECT OF FILING PARCEL MAP.
   The recording of the parcel map shall constitute a legal reversion to
acreage of the land, abandonment of all streets and easements not shown on the
parcel map, and a merger of the separate parcels into one parcel, and shall be
shown as such on the assessment roll.
(Prior Code, § 16.10.140) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.40: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
Section
   
16.40.010   Purpose
   
16.40.020   Requirements for application
   
16.40.030   Review procedure
   
16.40.040   Development requirements
§ 16.40.010 PURPOSE.
   It is the intent of this chapter to provide for a method of reviewing
applications for lot line adjustments.
(Prior Code, § 16.11.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.40.020 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION.
   An application for a lot line adjustment shall include a site plan and may
be accepted only if the following apply:
   (A)   Number of lots. The application approval will not result in more lots
than currently exist.
   (B)   Minimum area.
      (1)   The application approval will not result in a parcel that has less
area than the minimum lot area required for new parcels by the regulating zone.
      (2)    If a lot is already below the minimum size for its zone, then the
lot area shall not be further reduced.
   (C)   Encroachment. The application approval will not result in an
encroachment into any public easement, right-of-way or required yard (without a
variance).
   (D)   Building and zoning regulations. The application approval will result
in conformance with the zoning and building ordinances of the town or will not
increase the non-conformance if such already exists.
   (E)   Agreement. Written agreement of all owners of lots whose size or
configurations will be affected by the proposed lot line adjustment.
   (F)   Other requirements. All other requirements of this chapter are
complied with.
(Prior Code, § 16.11.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.40.030 REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   The Planning Director has the authority to approve a lot line adjustment,
though the Director may refer an application to the Planning Commission for
action.
(Prior Code, § 16.11.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.40.040 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Lot line adjustments approved under the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to those conditions which ensure that the proposed parcels meet the
minimum requirements of the town. Approved lot line adjustments shall require a
recorded deed or a record of survey, if required by Cal. Business and
Professions Code § 8762.
(Prior Code, § 16.11.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.44: CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
Section
   
16.44.010   Purpose
   
16.44.020   Requirements for application
   
16.44.030   Review procedures
   
16.44.040   Determinations and requirements for issuance
   
16.44.050   Documents constituting certificates of compliance
   
16.44.060   Real property approved for development
   
16.44.070   Date of subdivision regulations
§ 16.44.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method of reviewing requests to
determine the compliance of property with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.44.020 REQUIREMENTS FOR APPLICATION.
   Requests for certificates of compliance may be made by any person owning
real property subject to the provisions of this chapter or a vendee of the
person pursuant to a contract of sale of the property. Requests for a
certificate of compliance shall include a site plan, notarized deed and its
title report, and any other maps or documents required by the Planning
Director.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.44.030 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   The Planning Director has the authority to issue a certificate of
compliance.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.44.040 DETERMINATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE.
   The Planning Director shall review the application for a certificate of
compliance and shall make one of the following determinations based on that
review:
   (A)   Issuance. If the parcel is found to comply with all provisions of the
Subdivision Map Act and the town regulations, a certificate of compliance shall
be issued pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.35(a); or
   (B)   Conditional issuance. If the parcel does not comply with the
provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or town subdivision regulations in effect
at the time of its creation or does not comply with current regulations, the
parcel shall be found not to comply with state and town regulations and a
conditional certificate of compliance which states the conditions required to
bring the parcel into compliance shall be issued, pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66499.35(b). Conditions may not exceed the requirements at the time the
parcel was created. However, if an applicant was the owner of record at the
time of the initial violation of the Subdivision Map Act (Act) or of local
regulations enacted pursuant to the Act, conditions may be imposed applicable
to a current division of property. Fulfillment of all conditions shall be
required prior to subsequent issuance of any permit or grant of approval for
development of the property.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.44.050 DOCUMENTS CONSTITUTING CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE.
   A recorded final map, parcel map, official map or an approved certificate of
exception shall constitute a certificate of compliance declaring all parcels
described therein to be in compliance with state and town regulations.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.44.060 REAL PROPERTY APPROVED FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   A certificate of compliance shall be issued for any “real property which has
been approved for development,” as defined in the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66499.34,
upon request by the owner(s) of the real property or vendees of the owner(s)
pursuant to a contract of sale of the property.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.44.070 DATE OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   The town has regulated all subdivisions since its incorporation on March 3,
1931. Prior to the incorporation of Fairfax, Marin County did not regulate the
division of property into three or fewer lots. The above information is
provided pursuant to the Cal. Gov’t Code § 66412.6.
(Prior Code, § 16.12.070) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
CHAPTER 16.48: NOTICE OF VIOLATION
Section
   
16.48.010   Purpose
   
16.48.020   Tentative notice of violation
   
16.48.030   Response by owner
   
16.48.040   Opportunity to present evidence
   
16.48.050   Action by Planning Director
   
16.48.060   Alternative remedies
§ 16.48.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for notice of violation of
provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 16.13.010) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.48.020 TENTATIVE NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Planning Director finds that any real property has been
divided, or any boundary line of any parcel relocated, in violation of this
chapter, the Director shall cause to be mailed, by certified mail to the then
current owner of record of the property, a notice of intent to record a notice
of violation.
   (B)   The tentative notice of violation shall contain the following:
      (1)   Property description. A description of the real property;
      (2)   Record owner. The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of
record;
      (3)   Violation. A description of the violation(s) alleged;
      (4)   Explanation. An explanation as to why the subject parcel is not
lawful under the relevant provisions of this chapter and the Cal. Gov’t Code §§
66410 et seq.; and
      (5)   Notice of meeting. A time, date and place where the Planning
Director will conduct a meeting to consider the violation(s) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 16.13.020) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.48.030 RESPONSE BY OWNER.
   Within 15 mailing days of receipt of the tentative notice of violation
described in §
16.48.020, the property owner of record shall inform the director in writing of
any objection to the recordation of a notice of violation. Failure to so inform
the Planning Director shall result in a notice of violation being recorded with
the County Recorder pursuant to §
16.48.050.
(Prior Code, § 16.13.030) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.48.040 OPPORTUNITY TO PRESENT EVIDENCE.
   (A)   The meeting described in §
16.48.020 shall be conducted no less than 30 days, and no more than 60 days,
after the mailing of the tentative notice of violation.
   (B)   At the meeting the owners of the property shall be given the
opportunity to present any evidence relevant to show why a notice of violation
should not be recorded.
(Prior Code, § 16.13.040) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.48.050 ACTION BY PLANNING DIRECTOR.
   After the owner has had the opportunity to present evidence at the meeting,
the Planning Director shall take either of the following actions:
   (A)   Clearance letter. Determine that there has been no violation and mail
a clearance letter to the then current owner of record; or
   (B)   Notice of violation. Determine that the property has in fact been
illegally divided and record a notice of violation with the County Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 16.13.050) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
§ 16.48.060 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   The provisions of this chapter do not limit the legal remedies available to
the town for violation of this title. Such remedies include, but are not
limited to an action to restrain or enjoin activities inconsistent with this
title or the Subdivision Map Act.
(Prior Code, § 16.13.060) (Ord. 670, passed - -1998)
TITLE 17: ZONING
   Chapter
      
17.004.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
17.008.   DEFINITIONS
      
17.010.   RULES OF MEASUREMENT
      
17.012.   ZONE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
      
17.016.   NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
      
17.020.   DESIGN REVIEW REGULATIONS
      
17.024.   REQUIRED PERMITS
      
17.026. MINISTERIAL APPROVALS FOR QUALIFYING HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
      
17.027. PROCEDURES FOR SB 330 APPLICATIONS FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
      
17.028.   VARIANCES
      
17.032.   USE PERMITS
      
17.036.   APPEALS AND DIRECTED REFERRALS
      
17.040.   GENERAL ZONE REGULATIONS
      
17.044.   EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
      
17.048.   RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING
UNITS
      
17.049.   TWO-UNIT PROJECTS
      
17.050.   AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS
      
17.052.   OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
      
17.056.   TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT
      
17.060.   RIDGELINE DEVELOPMENT
      
17.064.   SIGNS
      
17.068.   FLOODPLAINS
      
17.072.   HILL AREA RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
      
17.076.   RS-7.5 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, MEDIUM DENSITY
      
17.080.   RS-6 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, HIGH DENSITY
      
17.084.   RD 5.5-7 RESIDENTIAL ZONE, HIGH DENSITY
      
17.088.   RM MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
      
17.090.   RM-S MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - SENIOR - RESIDENTIAL ZONE
      
17.092.   CL LIMITED COMMERCIAL ZONE
      
17.096.   CH HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
      
17.100.   CC CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
      
17.104.   CS COMMERCIAL SERVICE ZONE
      
17.108.   CR COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE
      
17.110.   CANNABIS USES
      
17.112.   PDD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ZONE
      
17.116.   SF-RMP SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MASTER PLANNED DISTRICT
      
17.120.   A AGRICULTURAL AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT
      
17.124.   UR UPLAND RESIDENTIAL ZONE
      
17.126.   WORKFORCE HOUSING OVERLAY ZONE
      
17.128.   O-A OPEN AREA ZONE
      
17.130.   PD PUBLIC DOMAIN ZONE
      
17.132.   WATER CONSERVATION
      
17.136.   FLOOR AREA
      
17.138   REGULATIONS APPLYING IN MULTIPLE ZONING DISTRICTS
      
17.140.   AFFORDABLE HOUSING
CHAPTER 17.004: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
17.004.010   Purpose
   
17.004.020   Interpretation
   
17.004.030   Initiation of amendments
   
17.004.040   Amendment; hearing
   
17.004.050   Amendment; application filing fee
   
17.004.060   Amendment; notice of hearing; generally
   
17.004.070   Zone change amendment; notice of hearing
   
17.004.080   General amendment; notice of hearing
   
17.004.090   Contents of notice
   
17.004.100   Amendment; hearing by Planning Commission
   
17.004.110   Amendment; decision of Planning Commission
   
17.004.120   Amendment; hearing by Council
   
17.004.130   Amendment; decision by Council
   
17.004.140   Compliance with regulations
   
17.004.150   Posting of notices
   
17.004.160   Violations deemed nuisance; abatement
   
17.004.170   Remedies cumulative
§ 17.004.010 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Cal. Gov’t Code § 65800, an official land use
zoning ordinance for the Town of Fairfax is adopted and established to serve
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare, and to
provide the economic and social advantages resulting from an orderly planned
use of land resources, and to encourage, guide and provide for the future
growth and development of the town in accord with the Fairfax general plan.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.020 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, the same
shall be construed to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
   (B)   This title shall not be so construed as to interfere with, abrogate or
annul any easement, covenant or other agreement.
   (C)   Where this title imposes more stringent restrictions than may be
imposed or required by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or by any
easement, covenant or agreement, then the provision of this title shall
control.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.030 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
   Amendment to this title may be initiated in one of the following manners:
   (A)   By verified application of any interested person or persons;
   (B)   By resolution of intention adopted by the Planning Commission; or
   (C)   By resolution of intention adopted by the Council, which resolution
shall be referred to the Planning Commission for hearing.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.040 AMENDMENT; HEARING.
   (A)   Upon filing with or adoption by the Planning Commission of any such
application or resolution, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
thereon and such additional public hearings as the Planning Commission deems
necessary.
   (B)   The Planning Commission or its Secretary shall set the time and place
for the hearing, which shall be held within 40 days following the filing with,
or adoption by, the Planning Commission of the application or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.050 AMENDMENT; APPLICATION FILING FEE.
   (A)   At the time of filing of the verified application mentioned in §
17.004.030(A), the applicant shall pay to the Clerk a filing fee in accordance
with the schedule of fees fixed and adopted from time to time by resolution of
the Town Council.
   (B)   No part of any fee paid shall be refunded. The application shall be
accompanied by maps, drawings, plot plans and such other information as may be
required from time to time by resolution of the Planning Commission or the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978)
§ 17.004.060 AMENDMENT; NOTICE OF HEARING; GENERALLY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, any amendment of this title which
affects the permitted uses of real property shall be referred to as a “zone
change amendment” and any other amendment to this title shall be referred to as
a “general amendment.”
   (B)   Any amendment which is a zone change amendment shall be noticed in the
manner provided in §
17.004.070.
   (C)   Any general amendment which does not involve a zone change amendment
shall be noticed in the manner provided in §
17.004.080 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.004.070 ZONE CHANGE AMENDMENT; NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Notice of the time and place of any public hearing on the matter of a zone
change amendment to this title shall be given in all of the following ways.
   (A)   Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days
prior to the hearing to the owner of the subject real property or to the
owner’s duly authorized agent and to the project applicant.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days
prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to provide water, sewage,
streets, roads, schools or other essential facilities or services to the
project, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be
significantly affected.
   (C)   (1)   Notice of the hearing shall be mailed or delivered at least ten
days prior to the hearing to all owners of real property, as shown on the last
equalized assessment roll, and to renters within 300 feet of the real property
that is the subject of the hearing. The subject property shall be posted by the
applicant in a manner described in the Town of Fairfax submittal packet at
least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
      (2)   In lieu of utilizing the assessment roll, the town may utilize
records of the County Assessor or Tax Collector which contain more recent
information than the assessment roll.
   (D)   Notice of the hearing shall be posted at least ten days prior to the
hearing in at least three public places within the Town of Fairfax, including
one public place in the area directly affected by the proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006)
§ 17.004.080 GENERAL AMENDMENT; NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Notice of the time and place of any public hearing on the matter of a
general amendment to this title shall be given by posting the same at least ten
days prior to the hearing in at least three public places within the Town of
Fairfax.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.004.090 CONTENTS OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice shall include the date, time and place of the public
hearing, the identity of the hearing body, or officer, a general explanation of
the matter to be considered and a general description, in text or by diagram,
of the location of the property, if any, that is the subject of the hearing.
   (B)   The notice of hearing shall contain a statement substantially as
follows:
“If you challenge the (nature of the proposed action) in court, you may be
limited to raising only those issues you, or someone else, raised at the public
hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the
(public entity conducting the hearing) at, or prior to, the public hearing.”
(Prior Code, § 17.02.085) (Ord. 628, passed - -1994)
§ 17.004.100 AMENDMENT; HEARING BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The public hearing shall be held at the time and place for which set
and noticed.
   (B)   Any hearing may be continued by the majority of members present at any
hearing, who may fix a time and place to which the hearing may be continued,
even in the absence of a quorum, in which case the presiding officer at the
hearing shall publicly announce, prior to the conclusion of the hearing, the
time and place to which the hearing is to be continued, and no further notice
shall be required.
   (C)   A majority in number of the total voting membership of the Planning
Commission shall constitute a legal quorum for the purpose of conducting the
hearing.
   (D)   The recommendation of any amendment to this title shall be by
resolution of the Planning Commission, carried by the affirmative vote of not
less than two-thirds of its total voting membership.
   (E)   The Planning Commission shall have authority to establish any
reasonable rules of procedure for the conduct of the hearings. The Planning
Commission may require any person who is to testify before it to be placed
under oath, in which case the member presiding at the hearing shall be
empowered to administer the oath.
   (F)   The Planning Commission may cause the investigations to be made as it
deems necessary and in the public interest in any matter to be heard by it. The
investigation may be made by one or more members of the Planning Commission or
by members of its staff or its agents or employees. The facts established by
the investigation may be submitted to the Planning Commission, in writing, to
be filed with the records of the matter, or may be presented in testimony
before the Planning Commission, and may be considered by the Planning
Commission in making its decision.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall cause a written summary of all pertinent
testimony heard at the public hearing, together with a record of the names and
addresses of all persons testifying, to be prepared and filed with the papers
relating to the matter.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.110 AMENDMENT; DECISION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 40 days after conclusion of a public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall, by resolution, make its findings, decision and
recommendations in the matter.
   (B)   In matters initiated by verified application, failure of the Planning
Commission to adopt such a resolution within the 40-day period shall be deemed
to constitute a denial of the application.
   (C)   In matters initiated by resolution of the Council, failure of the
Planning Commission to adopt such a resolution within the 40-day period shall
be deemed to constitute approval of the proposed amendment.
   (D)   In matters initiated by verified application, the Planning Commission
shall cause a copy of its resolution to be mailed to the applicant within ten
days from the date of adoption thereof.
   (E)   In all matters, if the recommendation of the Planning Commission is to
approve the proposed action, it shall cause to be forwarded to the Council
within ten days from the date of its action, a copy of the resolution, a copy
of the written summary of the testimony and a copy of any recommended
amendment.
   (F)   In matters initiated by resolution of the Council, if the
recommendation of the Planning Commission is to disapprove the proposed action,
its resolution and other papers shall be forwarded to the Council, as provided
in division (E) above.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.120 AMENDMENT; HEARING BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the resolution and other papers mentioned in §
17.004.110(F), the Council or the Town Clerk when so authorized by the Council,
shall set a time and place for a hearing on the matter, which shall be held
within 40 days following the receipt; provided that, in matters initiated by
resolution of the Council, upon which the recommendation or report of the
Planning Commission has been unfavorable, the Council may determine to take no
further action.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in the
manner as provided in §§
17.004.070 or
17.004.080, depending upon the nature of the proposed amendment.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.004.130 AMENDMENT; DECISION BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   (1)   Within 40 days after the conclusion of the public hearing
thereon, the Council shall by resolution make its findings and determination
whether or not to adopt the amendment.
      (2)   In matters initiated by verified application, failure of the
Council to adopt such a resolution within the 40-day period shall be deemed to
constitute a denial.
   (B)   The action of the Council on such matters shall be final; provided
that, no change shall be made in any amendment proposed by the Planning
Commission until the proposed change has been referred to the Planning
Commission for a report and a copy of the report has been filed with the
Council; provided that, failure of the Planning Commission to report within 40
days shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.140 COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All real property in the town shall be used only as provided for in
this title and all owners of property shall observe all regulations prescribed
for the zone in which property is located.
   (B)   No building or part thereof or other structure shall be erected and no
existing building shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land, building, structure or premises be used, designated or intended to be
used for any purpose or in a manner, except permitted in the zone in which the
building, land or premises is located.
   (C)   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, and no
existing building or structure shall be moved, altered, reconstructed or
structurally changed, to exceed in height or area the limit permitted for the
zone in which the building or structure is located.
   (D)   No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, nor shall
any existing buildings or structure be moved, altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor
shall any open space be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity to the yard, building site area and building location regulations
designated for the zone in which the building or open space is located.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.150 POSTING OF NOTICES.
   (A)   Where specified in the provisions of this title, notices shall be
posted in three public places in the town, which places are designated as
follows:
      (1)   The bulletin board, Fairfax Post Office;
      (2)   The bulletin board, Council Chambers; and
      (3)   The bulletin board, Town Hall.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, when any notice is required by law to
be posted in the area directly affected by the proceeding, the required notice
shall also be posted in the area.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.140) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.004.160 VIOLATIONS DEEMED NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, enlarged,
converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, and
any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or
maintained contrary to the provisions of this title, is declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance.
   (B)   Any act or condition declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance
pursuant to this section shall, upon order of the Council, by appropriate
proceedings begun by the Town Attorney, be abated, removed or enjoined in the
manner prescribed by law.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.150) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.004.170 REMEDIES CUMULATIVE.
   The remedies mentioned in §
17.004.160 shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(Prior Code, § 17.02.160) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
CHAPTER 17.008: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
17.008.010   Generally
   
17.008.020   Definitions
§ 17.008.010 GENERALLY.
   Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of this title.
   (A)   Words used in the present tense include the future.
   (B)   The singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall
include the singular.
   (C)   The masculine includes the feminine.
   (D)   The word “building” shall include the word “structure.”
   (E)   The word “used” shall include “arranged, designed, constructed,
altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used.”
   (F)   The word “shall” is mandatory and not directory.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.003) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 489, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.008.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES. A subordinate building or a portion of the
main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the dominant use of
the main building or land. An ACCESSORY USE is one which is incidental to the
main use of the premises. Servants quarters shall be permitted as an accessory
use only upon issuance of a conditional use permit under
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.006)
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached, subordinate structure, the use of which is
clearly incidental and related to that of the principal structure or use of the
land, and which is located on the same lot as that of the principal structure
or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as that of the
principal structure or use.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.009)
   ACCESSORY USE. A use customarily incidental to the principal use and so
necessary or commonly to be expected that it cannot be supposed that this title
intended to prevent it.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.012)
   ADJOINING or ADJACENT. Lying near, close or neighboring.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.015)
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. A housing unit that is available for rent or sale to
households with income levels at the extremely low-, very low-, low-, or
moderate-income level as those terms are defined in this chapter. See INCOME
(HOUSEHOLD) definitions.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING AGREEMENT. A legally binding agreement between an
applicant and the Town of Fairfax to ensure that continued affordability of
affordable housing units that may be required by this title persists and the
units are maintained in accordance with this title.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. A development project of two or more
residential units, including mixed-use developments, that includes affordable
housing.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND. The fund established in
Chapter 17.140 to accept affordable housing in-lieu fees.
   AFFORDABLE RENT. The total housing costs paid by a qualifying household,
which shall not exceed a specified fraction of their gross income, adjusted for
family size appropriate for the unit, using the calculation methodology in Cal.
Health and Safety Code § 50053(b).
   AFFORDABLE SALES PRICE. The maximum purchase price that can be charged for
an affordable unit calculated in accordance with of the Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 50052.5. The AFFORDABLE SALES PRICE is equal to the lesser of: 1) the
sum of the assumed mortgage cost plus the benchmark down payment, which is used
solely for calculation of the affordable sales price, or 2) the purchase price
prospective buyers are willing to pay in return for purchasing a home that is
subject to restrictive covenants. The benchmark down payment is set at five
percent of the affordable sales price.
   ALLEY. A public highway which is a narrow way, less in size than a street,
and which is not designed for general travel; which is used primarily as a
means of access to the rear of residences and business establishments and
which, generally, affords only a secondary means of access to the property
abutting along its length.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.018)
   ALL-WEATHER SURFACE. A surface paved with asphaltic or concrete surface not
less than three inches in thickness.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.021)
   ALTERATION. A change or substitution in a substantial particular of any part
of a building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.024)
   AMUSEMENT CENTER. Any indoor place or enclosure in which is maintained or
operated for the amusement, patronage or recreation of the public any coin-
controlled amusement device of any description, commonly known as bagatelle,
baseball, football and pinball amusement games.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.027)
   APARTMENT. A part of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms
intended, designed or used as a residence by an individual or a single family.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.030)
   APARTMENT HOTEL. A building designed for or containing both dwelling units
and individual guest rooms or suites of rooms, which building may include
accessory uses, such as a cigar store or coffee shop, when such uses are
accessible only from the lobby.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.033)
   APPLICANT. A person, persons, or entity that applies to the town for one or
more permits, zoning approvals, or entitlements required for development. This
term also includes the owner or owners of the property if the applicant does
not own the property on which the development is proposed.
   ARBITRARY. Fixed or arrived at through an exercise of will or by caprice,
without consideration or adjustment with reference to principles, circumstances
or significance, or given to making decisions thus; decisive, but unreasoned.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.036)
   ARCADE. A continuous area at ground level open to a street or plaza, which
is open and unobstructed to a height of not less than 12 feet, and which is
accessible to the public at all times. Any portion of an arcade occupied by
building columns, landscaping, statuary or pools shall be considered to be a
part of an arcade for the purpose of computing a floor area premium credit. The
term ARCADE shall not include off-street loading areas, driveways, off-street
parking areas or pedestrianways accessory thereto.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.039)
   AREA. Synonymous with the word TRACT, which is a piece of land capable of
being described with such definiteness that its location may be established and
boundaries definitely ascertained.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.042)
   AREA MEDIAN INCOME. The median family income of a geographic area as
determined annually by the Cal. Dept. of Housing and Community Development.
   AREA OF A BUILDING. The area of a horizontal section of a building taken at
its greatest outside dimensions on the ground floor, including all attached
structures.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.045)
   AUTOMOBILES.
      (1)   AUTO COURT. A building or group of buildings, whether detached or
in connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed
primarily for transient automobile travelers and providing for accessory off-
street parking facilities. The term AUTO COURT includes buildings designated as
tourist courts, motor lodges and motels, and by similar appellations.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.048)
      (2)   AUTO LAUNDRY. A building, or portion thereof, containing facilities
for washing more than two automobiles, using production line methods with a
chain conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.051)
      (3)   AUTOMOBILE SALES LOT. Any place outside a building where two or
more vehicles in operating condition are offered for sale or are displayed for
sale or advertising purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.054)
   AWNING. Any movable rooflike structure cantilevered, or otherwise entirely
supported from a building, so constructed and erected as to permit it to  be
readily and easily moved within a few minutes' time to close an opening, or
rolled and folded back to a position flat against the building or a
cantilevered projection thereof, or which is detachable.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.057)
   BALCONY. A platform that projects from the wall of a building 30 inches or
more above grade that is accessible from the building's interior, is not
accessible from the ground, and is not enclosed by walls on more than two sides
(see also DECK).
   BASEMENT. An area below the first floor with an exterior wall extending no
more than three feet above the adjacent grade of any side wall. An interior
area of any single-family dwelling or duplex that meets this definition shall
not be considered floor area.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.060)
   BEDROOM. A habitable space within a dwelling unit in which people sleep.
   BILLBOARD. A sign advertising products not made, sold, used or served on the
premises displaying such sign, or a sign having a height greater than 12 feet
or a width greater than 18 feet, including supports.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.066)
   BILLBOARD AND POSTER PANEL. Any structure affixed to the surface of the land
or to any building, tower or other structure designed, arranged, used or
intended to be used exclusively for outdoor advertising and which is rented,
leased or otherwise used in outdoor advertising where a consideration is
charged.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.069)
   BLOCK. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets
and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or
shorelines of waterways, or corporate boundary lines of the town.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.072)
   BOARDINGHOUSE. A building, other than a hotel, where lodging and meals for
five or more persons are served for compensation. A BOARDING-HOUSE may also
include the dwelling unit occupied by the owner or operator.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.075)
   BUILDING. A structure which is designated and suitable for the habitation or
shelter of human beings or animals, or the shelter or storage of property, or
for use and occupation for some purpose of trade or manufacture.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.081)
      (1)   DETACHED BUILDING. A building having no party wall in common with
another building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.084)
      (2)   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A legally existing building that does not
comply with the regulations (for height or number of stories, size, floor area,
yards and location) set forth herein as applicable to the district in which the
building is located.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.090)
   BUILDING LINE. A line formed by the outer surface of the closing wall of a
building or portion thereof and surface of the ground.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.087)
   CANOPY TREE. Any tree that when fully grown will provide shade for the land
beneath it while also allowing for passage of people and/or vehicles under its
limbs.
   COMMERCIAL LINKAGE FEE. The fee established by Chapter 17.142 to be paid by
builders of commercial development projects to mitigate the impacts that such
developments have on the demand for affordable housing in the town.
   COMMERCIAL/NONRESIDENTIAL LINKAGE FEE. See COMMERCIAL LINKAGE FEE.
   COMMON OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. Property owned or controlled by the same
person, persons, or entity, or by separate entities in which any shareholder,
partner, member, or family member of an investor of the entity owns ten percent
or more of the interest in the property.
   CONCESSION or INCENTIVE. A reduction in a site development standard, such as
minimum lot size, setbacks, or building height, or a modification of an
objective design standard or an objective subdivision standard to enable
construction of an affordable housing project. Incentives also may include
approval of mixed-use zoning, expedited “fast track” processing, waiver or
filing or processing fees or other modifications that result in identifiable
cost reductions for affordable housing.
   CORNER LOT. A lot in the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.093)
   COURT. An open area other than a front yard, side yard or rear yard on the
same lot with the building, for the admission of light and air and not designed
for ornamental purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.099)
      (1)   INNER COURT. A court which does not extend to a street, alley or
yard.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.102)
      (2)   OUTER COURT. A court extending to a street line or opening upon any
front, side or rear yard.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.105)
   CREMATOR. One who is employed to reduce the body to ashes and turn them over
to the claimant.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.111)
   CURB LEVEL. The level of the established curb in front of the building
measured at the center of the front. Where no curb elevation has been
established, the mean elevation of the finished lot grade immediately adjacent
to a building shall be considered the CURB LEVEL.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.114)
   DAY NURSERY. An agency, organization or individual providing daytime care of
five or more children not related by blood or marriage to, or not the legal
wards or foster children of, the attendant adult.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.117)
   DECK. A platform, either freestanding or attached to a building that is
supported by pillars or posts. See also BALCONY.
   DEFENSIBLE SPACE. Defensible space is used in regulations for fire hazard
management in the Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) to describe the buffer created
between a dwelling unit and the grass, trees, shrubs, and adjacent wildland
area that surrounds it to help slow or stop the spread of wildfire and protect
the dwelling from catching fire pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 51182.
   DEVELOPMENT. The placement or erection of any solid material or structure on
land, in, or under water; discharge or disposal of any materials; grading,
removing, dredging, mining, or extraction of any materials; change in the
density or intensity of use of land, including, without limitation, subdivision
pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, and any other division of land, including
lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with
the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreation use; and
change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction,
reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure,
including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; and the
removal or harvesting of major vegetation.
   DEVELOPMENT COSTS. The aggregate of all costs incurred in connection with a
development which are reasonable and necessary, including, but not limited to,
those costs listed in California Health and Safety Code § 50065.
   DEVELOPMENT STANDARD. A site or construction condition, including, but not
limited to, height limits, required setbacks, maximum floor area ratio, on-site
open-space requirement, or required parking that applies to a development
pursuant to any ordinance, General Plan, planned development, or other local
condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.
   DIRECTLY OPPOSITE. Those tracts of land on opposite sides of the street with
only the street intervening.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.120)
   DISCRETIONARY APPROVAL. Any entitlement or approval, including but not
limited to a use permit, variance, site approval, and subdivision map.
Discretionary review involve judgment and deliberation to determine whether to
grant an approval or establish conditions of approval.
   DOG KENNEL or KENNEL. Any premises, except where accessory to a permitted
agricultural use, where three or more dogs, ten weeks in age or older, are
kept.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.123)
   DOMESTIC SERVANT.
      (1)   A person who lives in the family of another, paying no rent for the
occupancy and paying no part of the cost of utilities therefor, performing
household duties and working solely within the house for the upkeep thereof and
for the care and comfort and convenience of the family and occupants thereof.
      (2)   No person, no member of the family of any person, who pays rent for
himself or herself or his or her family shall be deemed the DOMESTIC SERVANT of
the person to whom the rent is paid.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.126)
   DRIVEWAY. The space specifically designated and reserved on the site for the
movement of vehicles from one site to another or from a site to a public
street.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.129)
   DUMP. A lot of land or part thereof used primarily for the disposal by
abandonment, dumping, burial, burning or any other means and for whatever
purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles
or parts thereof, or waste material of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.132)
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential
occupancy, including single-family dwellings, duplexes and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including hotels, boardinghouses, lodging houses or house
trailers, whether the trailers be mobile or located in a stationary fashion as
on blocks or other foundation.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.135)
      (1)   ATTACHED DWELLING. A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling
at one or more sides by a party wall or walls.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.138)
      (2)   DETACHED DWELLING. A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.141)
      (3)   GROUP DWELLING. A group of two or more one-family, two-family or
multiple dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership and having any yard in
common.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.153)
      (4)   MULTIPLE DWELLING. A building or portion thereof used for occupancy
by three or more families living independently of each other and doing their
own cooking in the building, including apartments, group houses and row houses.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.150)
      (5)   ROW DWELLING. A row of attached or semi-detached one-family
dwellings or two-family dwellings, containing a total of three or more dwelling
units; or a building in such a row.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.156)
      (6)   SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING. A building designed for and occupied by one
family, including supportive and transitional housing subject to the same
restrictions and standards as a single-family dwelling and employee housing
providing accommodations for six or fewer employees pursuant to § 17021.5 of
the Cal. Gov't Code. This classification also includes individual manufactured
housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to § 18551 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.144)
      (7)   TWO-FAMILY DWELLING. A detached or semi-detached building
containing two dwelling units and designed for or occupied by two families.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.147)
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or suite of rooms used as an independent housekeeping
unit.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.159)
   EARTH REMOVAL. The removal or extraction of any stone, sand, gravel, loam,
topsoil or other earth or earth product from a lot or parcel of land, except
where the removal is for the purpose of grading a lot upon which a building is
to be erected, a roadway to be built, or a platting thereof to be made.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.162)
   EATING PLACE. A retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
prepared food and drinks for consumption on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.165)
   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit in a multi-family building with less than
500 square feet of space, meeting all Building Code requirements for such
units.
   EMERGENCY SHELTER. As set forth in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 50801,
EMERGENCY SHELTER means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless
persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless
person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of
an inability to pay. Hereinafter also referred to as emergency homeless
shelters.
   EXTEND. Increase or amplification, as distinguished from inception.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.168)
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. The architectural treatment and general
arrangement of the portion of the exterior of a structure as is designed to be
exposed to public view, including kind, color and texture of the building
material of the portion, and the type of all windows, doors, lights, signs and
any other features appurtenant to the portion.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.171)
   FAIR MARKET VALUE. The real estate market value of an affordable housing
unit at the time of initial purchase of that unit without regard to any
restrictions on sales price, as substantiated by an appraisal in a form and
substance, and by an appraiser, acceptable to the town.
   FAMILY.
      (1)    An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption living together as a single household unit; or
      (2)   One or more individuals living together where the residents are a
close group with social, economic and psychological commitments to each other
and living together as a relatively permanent household.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.174)
   FAMILY DAY CARE, LARGE. A day-care facility licensed by the State of
California that is located in a dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling
provides care and supervision for seven to 14 children under the age of 18 for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, including children who reside at the home
and are under the age of 10.
   FAMILY DAY CARE, SMALL. A day-care facility licensed by the State of
California that is located in a dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling
provides care for up to six children or eight children including children who
reside at the home and are under the age of 10.
   FARM. A parcel of land of 15 or more acres, used principally in the raising
or production of agricultural products and the necessary or usual dwellings,
farm structures, storage and equipment.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.177)
   FARMING. The business of cultivating land, or employing it for the purposes
of husbandry; the cultivation and fertilization of the soil as well as the
caring for and harvesting of crops.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.180)
   FEASIBLE. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a
reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social,
and technological factors.
   FEEDLOT. Any of the following facilities:
      (1)   Any tract of land or structure wherein any type of fowl or the
byproducts thereof are raised for sale, at wholesale or retail;
      (2)   Any structure, pen or corral wherein cattle, horses, sheep, goats
and swine are maintained in close quarters for the purpose of fattening the
livestock for final shipment to market; and
      (3)   The raising of swine under any conditions.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.183)
   FILLING (SERVICE) STATION. A retail business selling gasoline and/or other
motor vehicle fuels derived from fossil fuels (e.g., petroleum, coal, natural
gas) and related products, and which may include facilities for washing,
polishing, greasing, waxing or tire repairing. No vulcanizing or tire recapping
or major mechanical repairs shall, however, be included in the operation of a
filling station.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.186)
   FIFTY PERCENT REMODEL or 50% REMODEL. The renovation of any structure that
affects more than 50% of the existing floor area of the structure, expands that
floor area by more than 50% or results in the addition of a bedroom, as
measured in accordance with §
17.016.040 of this title.
   FLOATING ZONE. A special detailed use district of undetermined location, a
district in which the proposed kind, location, size and form of structures must
be pre-approved, and which, like a special exception use, is legislatively
predeemed compatible with the areas in which it may thereafter be located on a
particular application, provided specified standards are gratified and actual
incompatibility is not revealed.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.189)
   FLOOR AREA. The total area of all floors in all buildings, including
accessory structures, on a lot as measured to the outside surface of exterior
walls or to the centerline of common walls. The FLOOR AREA excludes any crawl
space, basement area, attic without floor, and any open porch, deck, balcony or
terrace. [Refer to
Ch. 17.136 for floor area restrictions pertaining to single family residential
and duplex properties.]
(Prior Code, § 17.04.192)
   FLOOR-AREA RATIO. The floor area, as defined above, of a building or
buildings on a lot divided by the area of the lot. [Refer to
Chapter 17.136 for floor area ratio restrictions pertaining to single family
residential and duplex properties.]
(Prior Code, § 17.04.195)
   FRATERNITY. A body of men associated for their common interest, business or
pleasure.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.198)
   FRONT FRONTAGE. The side of a lot abutting on a street or way and ordinarily
regarded as the front of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.201)
   FRONTAGE. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets (crossing or terminating), measured along the line of the street, or,
if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.204)
   FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A lighting fixture constructed in such a
manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or
a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of
the luminaire, is projected downward below the horizontal.
   FUNERAL HOME. A dwelling or other structure used and occupied by a
professional licensed mortician for burial preparation and funeral services.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.207)
   GARAGE. A building for the storing of motor vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.210)
      (1)   COMMERCIAL GARAGE. A building or premises used for the storage,
repair, rental, sale and/or servicing of motor vehicles and/or for the retail
sale of fuel for the vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.213)
      (2)   PARKING GARAGE. A building or portion thereof designed or used for
storage of motor-driven vehicles, and at which motor fuels and oils may be
sold, and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as
distinguished from automotive repairs.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.216)
      (3)   PRIVATE GARAGE. A detached accessory building or portion of a main
building, used for the storage of self-propelled vehicles where the capacity
does not exceed three vehicles, or not more than one per family housed in the
building to which the garage is accessory, whichever is the greater, and not
more than one-third the total number of vehicles stored in the garage shall be
commercial vehicles. Storage space for not more than three vehicles may be
rented for vehicles of other than occupants of the building to which the garage
is accessory.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.219)
      (4)   PUBLIC GARAGE. A building or portion thereof other than a private
or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing,
hiring, selling or storing motor driven vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.222)
   GARDEN APARTMENTS. A group of buildings not more than two and one-half
stories in height, each building containing not more than eight dwelling units.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.225)
   GAS FILLING STATION.
      (1)   Not only the house or building provided for the storage of supplies
and the use and shelter of the operatives, but also tanks, pumps, structures
and filling stations for business purposes and the supplying of gas and oil for
automobiles of the general public.
      (2)   It also includes, of necessity, suitable exterior stairways and
secondary stairways.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.228)
   GASOLINE STATION. Any building, place or location designed to supply motor
vehicles with gasoline, oils, greases, automobile sundries or for the
inspection, testing and examination of the motor vehicles, or for the repair or
replacement of parts thereof; and shall include gasoline pumps and oil pumps.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.231)
   GOLF COURSE. A comparatively large unobstructed acreage involving enough
room over which to walk or ride, point to point, over a generally prescribed
course, and to strive to send a ball long distances with variable accuracy all
without unreasonably endangering other players or intruding upon them.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.234)
   GRADE.
      (1)   ESTABLISHED GRADE. The elevation of the centerline of the street as
officially established by the town.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.237)
      (2)   FINISHED GRADE. The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and roads
brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating thereto.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.240)
   GUEST ROOM. A room in a hotel, motel or tourist home offered to the public
for compensation in which room no provision is made for cooking and which room
is used only for transient occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.249)
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room in a dwelling unit designed to be used for living,
sleeping, eating or cooking, excluding bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets,
halls, storage and similar space.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.252)
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. The vertical distance measured from a point on the
natural grade to the highest point of the structure directly above. At no point
shall the height of the building exceed the allowable height above natural
grade.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.255)
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. Any area which:
      (1)   Contains improvements which:
         (a)   Have a special character or special historical or aesthetic
interest or value;
         (b)   Represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical
of one or more eras in the history of the town; and
         (c)   Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a
distinct section of the town.
      (2)   Has been designated as a historic district pursuant to the
provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.258)
   HOME FOR THE RETIRED. An establishment operated for the purpose of providing
domiciliary care for a group of persons who by reason of age are unable to
provide the care for themselves and who are not in need of medical or nursing
treatment, except in the case of temporary illness.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.261)
   HOME OCCUPATION OR PROFESSION. Any use customarily conducted entirely within
a dwelling and carried on exclusively by the occupants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof, and in connection with
which there is no display, no stock in trade, no outside storage of equipment,
and no commodity sold upon the premises. Such uses as barbershops, beauty
parlors, tea rooms, tourist homes, animal hospitals and dancing schools shall
not be deemed to be HOME OCCUPATIONS.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.264)
   HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-
patients, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an
integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, out-
patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and staff
offices.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.267)
   HOTEL.
      (1)   A building in which at least 50 percent of the gross habitable
floor area is used for sleeping;
      (2)   A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided
for more than 20 persons and offered to the public for compensation, and in
which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby
or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to
the public in contradiction to a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse or an apartment,
which are separately defined in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.270)
   HOUSING IN-LIEU FEE. A fee established by the town pursuant to Chapter
17.142.
   INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PLAN. A plan containing all the information specified
in and submitted in conformance with §
17.140.080 specifying the manner in which inclusionary units will be provided.
   INCLUSIONARY UNIT. A dwelling unit that is designated to meet the
requirements set forth in Chapter 17.142 and made available, typically through
a recorded deed restriction, at an affordable housing cost or an affordable
rent to eligible moderate-, low- or very low- income households, as applicable
to the unit.
   INCOME (HOUSEHOLD), EXTREMELY LOW. A household whose gross income does not
exceed the qualifying limits for extremely low income families as established
and amended from time to time by the U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban
Development and defined in Section 5.603(b) of Title 24 of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
   INCOME (HOUSEHOLD), LOW. A household whose gross income does not exceed 80
percent of the area median income for Marin County, adjusted for family size,
as published and periodically updated by the U.S. Dept. of Housing and Urban
Development and the Cal. Dept. of Housing and Community Development pursuant to
§ 50079.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   INCOME (HOUSEHOLD), LOWER. A household whose gross income falls under the
categories of very low-, or low-income as those terms are defined in this
glossary.
   INCOME (HOUSEHOLD), MODERATE. A household whose gross income does not exceed
120 percent of the area median income for the Marin County, adjusted for family
size, as published and periodically updated by the State Dept. of Housing and
Community Development pursuant to § 50093 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   INCOME (HOUSEHOLD), VERY LOW. A household whose gross income does not exceed
50 percent of the area median income for Marin County, adjusted for family
size, as published and periodically updated by the U.S. Dept. of Housing and
Urban Development and the Cal. Dept. of Housing and Community Development
pursuant to § 50105 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any building, structure, place, work of art or other object
constituting a physical betterment of real property, or any part of the
betterment.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.273)
   INCOMPATIBLE USE. A use which is incapable of existing in harmony with other
uses situated in its immediate vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.276)
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. The treatment or processing of raw products in
factories.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.279)
   INFILL SITE. A site where at least 75 percent of the perimeter adjoins lots
and parcels that are developed for urban uses. Parcels that are only separated
by a street are considered to be adjoining.
   INSTITUTION. A non-profit corporation or a non-profit establishment for
public use.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.282)
   INTERSECTING STREET. A street or public way or court, 30 feet or more in
width, which joins another at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.285)
   JUNK MERCHANT. Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
buying, selling, exchanging or dealing in old junk, metals, bottles, syphons,
old rope, old iron, brass, copper, tin or lead, secondhand plumbing materials,
secondhand gas and electric fixtures, old rubber tires or other used or old
articles commonly designated as “junk,” and having a store, stand or place of
business.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.288)
   JUNKYARD. A place where junk, waste, discarded or salvaged materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored; baled, packed, disassembled or handled,
including the purchase or storage of used furniture and household equipment,
used cars in operable condition and used or salvaged materials as part of
manufacturing operations.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.291)
   KENNEL. Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where
three or more dogs, ten weeks in age or older, are kept.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.294)
   KITCHEN. Any portion of a structure with any combination of the following:
sink, other than that within a bathroom, food storage and preparation areas,
refrigerator, stove, microwave oven, convection oven, cooking burners or
similar appliances which may reasonably be used for the preparation of food.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.297)
   LABORATORY.
      (1)   A building or part of a building devoted to the testing and
analysis of any product or animal, including humans.
      (2)   No manufacturing is conducted on the premises except for
experimental or testing purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.300)
   LANDMARK. Any improvement, any part of which is 30 years old or older, which
has a special character or special historical or aesthetic interest or value as
part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the town,
state or nation and which has been designated as a landmark pursuant to the
provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.303)
   LANDMARK SITE. An improvement, parcel or part thereof, on which is situated
a landmark, and any abutting improvement, parcel or part thereof, used as and
constituting part of the premises on which the landmark is situated, and which
has been designated as a landmark site pursuant to the provisions of this
title.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.306)
   LAUNDROMAT. A business that provides home-type washing, drying and/or
ironing machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.309)
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space having the dimensions specified in §
17.052.060 of this title and having a minimum clear height of 14 feet,
exclusive of access area, for the parking of a vehicle while loading or
unloading merchandise or materials.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.315)
   LODGINGHOUSE. A building other than a hotel, where lodging, without meals,
for five or more persons is provided for compensation.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.318)
   LOFT. Defined as a floor level located more than 30 inches above the main
floor used as a living or sleeping space. For the purposes of this code, a loft
is considered part of a tiny house.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied by one building and the accessory buildings
or uses customarily incidental to it, including such open spaces as are
arranged and designed to be used in connection with the buildings.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.321)
      (1)   BUILDING LOT. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its
accessory buildings, or by a dwelling group and its accessory buildings,
together with the open spaces as are required under the provisions of this
title, having not less than the minimum area and width required by this title
for a lot in the district in which the land is situated, and having its
principal frontage on a street or on such other means of access as may be
determined in accordance with the provisions of the law to be adequate as a
condition of the issuance of a building permit for a building on the land.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.327)
      (2)   CORNER LOT. A lot which occupies the interior angle at the
intersection of two street lines which make an angle of less than 135 degrees
with each other.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.330)
      (3)   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.339)
      (4)   THROUGH LOT. A lot, other than a corner lot, having frontage on
more than one street.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.348)
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lot lines.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.324)
   LOT COVERAGE. The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by the ground
area of a building, any accessory building(s), as well as any impervious
surface areas such as patios (other than driveways) adjacent to the building or
accessory building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.333)
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the
rear lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.336)
   LOT LINE. The lines bounding a lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.342)
   LOT OF RECORD. A deed which has been recorded.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.345)
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between the side lot lines measured along the
setback line as established by this title, or if no setback line is
established, the distance between the side lot lines measured along the street
line.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.351)
   LOW BARRIER. Under state housing law, LOW BARRIER means best practices to
reduce barriers to entry to temporary living facilities for the homeless and
may include, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The presence of partners if it is not a population-specific site,
such as for survivors of domestic violence or sexual assault, women, or youth;
      (2)   Pets;
      (3)   The storage of possessions; and
      (4)   Privacy, such as partitions around beds in a dormitory setting or
in larger rooms containing more than two beds, or private rooms.
   LOW BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTER. A housing-first, low-barrier, service-
enriched shelter focused on moving people into permanent housing that provides
temporary living facilities while case managers connect individuals
experiencing homelessness to income, public benefits, health services, shelter,
and housing.
   MANEUVERING SPACE. The unobstructed area needed for a truck to back in a
single movement directly from the access street into a loading space, the depth
of which is measured perpendicular to and from the front of the loading space
to the curb side of the most remote traffic lane in the access street.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.354)
   MANUFACTURE. Transformation; the fashioning of raw materials into a change
of form for use.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.357)
   MANUFACTURED HOUSING. A type of single family dwelling that is manufactured
off-site and installed on a foundation on a lot pursuant to § 18551 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code.
   MARIN COUNTY AREA MEDIAN INCOME. The median income for Marin County
published by the Cal. Dept. of Housing and Community Development (“HCD”) each
year as required by Cal. Code of Regulations, Title 25, § 6932 and Health and
Safety Code § 50093.
   MARKET RATE UNIT. A dwelling unit that is not an affordable housing unit or
an inclusionary unit.
   MARQUEE or CANOPY. A rooflike structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building and overhangs the public way.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.360)
   MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE DENSITY. The maximum number of dwelling units per acre as
allowed under the General Plan Land Use Designation. Where an Affordable
Housing Development is permitted by an overlay to a Land Use Designation, the
maximum allowable density shall be calculated in reference to the residential
density allowance designated in the Zoning Code for the overlay zone. In non-
residential zones, the Maximum Allowed Density shall be the maximum number of
dwelling units, without the inclusion of Density Bonus Units or associated
incentives, concessions, waivers, and reductions, that can be developed on the
site in conformance with General Plan policies and applicable development
standards.
   MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE. A machine, including a computer,
which upon insertion of a coin, monetary representation or token operates or
may be operated for use as a game, contest or amusement of any description, or
which may be used for any such game, contest or payoff device for the return of
monetary representation, money, tokens or merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.363)
   MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADE. Three or more mechanical
or electronic amusement devices installed on a side either inside or outside of
the structures or any such devices located within 300 feet of a public or
private grammar, middle or high school. Computer centers are included within
this definition.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.366)
   MEZZANINE. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of
any story (distinguished from a “loft” which is a term reserved for “tiny
houses”.
   MINISTERIAL APPROVAL. An administrative approval of an entitlement or permit
application that involves little or no discretion to determine whether
development standards and other applicable requirements are met based on the
facts presented in an application. Ministerial approvals may include use of a
checklist or similar compliance procedure.
   MOBILE HOME.
      (1)   Any portable structure or vehicle, titled or registered as a
vehicle, so constructed and designed as to permit occupancy thereof for
dwelling or sleeping purposes.
      (2)   Any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted or designed for
mounting on wheels, used or intended for use for dwelling purposes, including
structural additions, except parked and unoccupied camping-type trailers. Any
such vehicle or structure shall be deemed to be a mobile home whether the
wheels have been removed therefrom and whether resting upon a temporary or
permanent foundation.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.372)
   MOBILE HOME LOT. A designated site within a mobile home court for the
exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.375)
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land in single ownership, which has been
developed with all necessary facilities and services in accordance with a site
development plan meeting all the requirements of this title and which is
intended for the express purpose of providing a satisfying living environment
for mobile home residents on a long-term occupancy basis.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.378)
   MOBILE HOME STAND. The part of an individual mobile home lot which has been
reserved for the placement of the mobile home.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.381)
   MORGUE. A place where the unidentified and derelict dead are at all times
received and kept and exposed to public view for the purposes of
identification.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.384)
   MOTEL or TOURIST CABIN. A building or group of buildings which:
      (1)   Contains living or sleeping accommodations used primarily for
transient occupancy; and
      (2)   Has individual entrances from outside the building to serve each
such living or sleeping unit.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.387)
   MUSEUM. A non-profit, non-commercial establishment operated as a repository
or a collection of nature, scientific or literary curiosities or objects of
interests or works of art, not including the regular sale or distribution of
the objects collected.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.390)
   NAMEPLATE. A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name
of an occupant thereof and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.393)
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARKING AREA. An area on one or more building lots devoted to
car parking
for occupants of adjoining or nearby dwellings and their guests.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.396)
   NON-CONFORMING USE. Any building or land lawfully occupied by a use at the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or amendment thereto,
which does not conform after the passage of the ordinance or amendment with the
use requirements of the district in which it is situated.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.399)
   NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. A project that includes new construction
or alterations and additions of nonresidential space or the conversion of a
residential use or residential structure to a nonresidential use.
   NOXIOUS MATTER. Material which is capable of causing injury to living
organisms by chemical reaction or is capable of causing detrimental effects
upon the physical or economic well-being of the individuals.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.402)
   NURSERY. Any land used to raise trees, shrubs, flowers and other plants for
sale or for transplanting.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.405)
   NURSERY SCHOOL. A school designed to provide daytime care or instruction for
two or more children from two to five years of age inclusive, and operated on a
regular basis.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.408)
   NURSING HOME. A home for aged, chronically ill or incurable persons, in
which three or more persons not of the immediate family are received, kept or
provided with food and shelter or care for compensation; but not including
hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis
and treatment of the sick or injured.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.411)
   OBJECTIVE DESIGN STANDARDS. See OBJECTIVE STANDARD.
   OBJECTIVE STANDARD. A standard that involves no personal or subjective
judgement by a public official or decision-making authority and are uniformly
verifiable by reference to an external and uniform benchmark or criterion
available and knowable by both the applicant or development proponent and the
public official or decision-maker prior to submittal of an application. This
term includes “objective zoning standards,” “objective design standards”, and
“objective subdivision standards.”
   OBJECTIVE SUBDIVISION STANDARDS. See OBJECTIVE STANDARD.
   OBJECTIVE ZONING STANDARDS. See OBJECTIVE STANDARD.
   OCCUPANCY.
      (1)   Pertains to and is the purpose for which a building is used or
intended to be used.
      (2)   A CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY is not intended to include a change of
tenants or proprietors.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.414)
   OCCUPY. To take or enter upon possession of.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.417)
   OFFICE. A room or building in which a person transacts his or her business
or carries on his or her stated occupation.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.420)
   OPEN PORCH. A roofed open structure projecting from the outside wall of a
building without window sash or any other form of permanent enclosure.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.444)
   OPEN SPACE. An unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with the
building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.423)
   OPEN SPACE, COMMON. Areas for outdoor living and recreation that are
intended for the use of residents and guests of more than one dwelling unit.
Common areas typically consist of landscaped areas, walks, patios, swimming
pools, playgrounds, turf, or other such improvements as are appropriate to
enhance the outdoor environment of the development. They also may include gyms
and fitness facilities, recreation rooms, and indoor space for yoga, dance, and
instruction.
   OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE. Open areas for outdoor living and recreation that are
adjacent and directly accessible to a single dwelling unit, reserved for the
exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests. Private areas
typically consist of courtyards, balconies, decks, patios, fenced yards, and
other similar areas.
   PARK. A pleasure ground set apart for recreation of the public, to promote
its health and enjoyment.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.426)
   PATIO. An outdoor seating area adjoining and directly accessible from a
dwelling unit.
   PERMANENT GUEST. A person who occupies, or has the right to occupy, a hotel
or apartment hotel accommodation as his or her domicile and place of permanent
residence.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.246)
   PUBLIC PARKING AREA. An open area, other than a street, used for the
temporary parking of more than four automobiles and available for public use
whether free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for clients or
customers.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.429)
   PARKING LOT. An area or plot of ground used for the storage or parking of
motor vehicles either for compensation or to provide an accessory service to a
business, industrial or residential use.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.432)
   PARKING SPACE. A surfaced area, enclosed in the main building or in an
accessory building, or unenclosed, having an area of not less than 200 square
feet, exclusive of driveways, permanently reserved for the temporary storage of
one automobile and connected with a street or alley by a surfaced driveway
which affords satisfactory ingress and egress for automobiles.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.435)
   PERFORMANCE STANDARD. A criterion established to control noise, odor, smoke,
toxic or noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards and glare or
heat generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.438)
   PERMANENT OCCUPANCY. The rental of housing accommodations or rooms on a
week-to-week, month-to-month or year-to-year basis with a fixed rent for each
period of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.441)
   PREMISES. Land and all buildings and structures thereon.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.447)
   PRESCHOOL. Day care and education of five or more children aged five years
and under.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.450)
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary purpose or function that a lot serves or is
intended to serve.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.453)
   PRIVATE PARKING AREA. An area devoted to car parking by the occupants of the
dwelling located on the same building lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.456)
   PROFESSIONAL OFFICE. The office of a person engaged in any occupation,
vocation or calling, not purely commercial, mechanical or agricultural, in
which a professed knowledge or skill in some department of science or learning
is used by its practical application to the affairs of others, either advising
or guiding them in serving their interest or welfare through the practice of an
act founded thereon.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.459)
   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building held, used or controlled exclusively for
public purposes by any department or branch of government, state, county or
municipal, without reference to the ownership of the building or of the realty
upon which it is situated.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.462)
   QUARRY. A place, cavern or pit where stone is taken from the rock or ledge
or dug from the earth, for building or other purposes; a stone pit.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.465)
   QUARRYING. The digging out of stone or slate from an open excavation.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.468)
   RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities
for track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car yards.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.471)
   RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit that is intended to be offered for rent or
lease and that cannot be sold individually.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The land fronting on both sides of any public street or
court where less than 25 percent of the frontage is now used or designed for
business or industrial purposes within a distance of 300 feet of the center of
the place where any building for business or industrial purposes is sought to
be used, erected, located, constructed or altered.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.477)
   RESIDENTIAL CARE, GENERAL. Facilities that are licensed by the State of
California to provide living accommodations and 24-hour, primarily non-medical
care and supervision for more than six persons in need of personal services,
supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily
living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without
separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This use type
includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by
public or non-profit institutions, including hospices, nursing homes,
convalescent facilities and group homes for minors, persons with disabilities,
and people in recovery from alcohol or drug abuse.
   RESIDENTIAL CARE, LIMITED. Small-scale facilities that are licensed by the
State of California to provide living accommodations and 24-hour, primarily
non-medical care and supervision six or fewer persons in need of personal
services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities
of daily living.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. A project to create one or more additional
dwelling units, convert nonresidential space to dwelling units, or subdivide a
parcel to create one or more separately transferrable parcels intended for
residential development, including development constructed at one time and in
phases.
   RESTAURANT WITH DRIVE-IN SERVICE. An establishment designed, in whole or
part, to cater to or accommodate the consumption of food and/or beverage in
automobiles on the premises of such establishment.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.480)
   RIDING STABLE. Any place at which horses or ponies are kept for hire either
with or without instruction in riding.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.483)
   ROADSIDE STAND. An area and/or structure, with no space for customers within
the structure itself, for the display and sale of agricultural products.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.486)
   ROOM. Any enclosed division of a building containing over 70 square feet of
floor space and commonly used for living purposes, not including lobbies,
halls, closets, storage, space, bathrooms, utility rooms and unfinished attics,
cellars or basements. An ENCLOSED DIVISION is an area in a structure bounded
along more than 75 percent of its perimeter by vertical walls or partitions, or
by other types of dividers which serve to define the boundaries of the
division.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.489)
   ROOMINGHOUSE. A dwelling or other residential structure in which lodging
facilities are supplied for pay over an extended period of time and
distinguished from a tourist home.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.492)
   SANITARIUM. A health station or retreat or an institution for the
recuperation and treatment of persons suffering from physical or mental
disorders.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.495)
   SCHOOL. A place for systematic instruction in any branch or branches of
knowledge.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.498)
   SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRY. A business rendering a retail service by renting to
the individual customer equipment for the washing, drying and otherwise
processing of laundry, with the equipment to be serviced and its use and
operation supervised by the management.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.312)
   SETBACK. The distance between a street line and the front building line of a
principal building or structure, projected to the side lines of the lot, and
including driveways and parking area, except where otherwise restricted by this
title.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.501)
   SHOP. A use devoted primarily to the sale of a service or a product or
products, but the service is performed or the product to be sold is prepared in
its finished form on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.504)
   SHOPPING CENTER. A group of not less than 15 contiguous retail stores,
originally planned and developed as a single unit, having a total ground floor
building area of not less than 60,000 square feet, with immediate adjoining
off-street parking facilities for not less than 350 automobiles.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.507)
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. An existing residence, portion of an existing  residence,
or an accessory dwelling unit (ADU) or junior accessory dwelling unit (JADU)
established prior to January 1, 2020, (limited to ADUs/JADUs created prior to
January 1, 2020) in which overnight accommodations are provided to guests for
compensation that is rented for 30 consecutive days or less. All short-term
rentals must comply with the short-term rental requirements contained in Town
Code, Title 5, Division II ('Specific Business Regulations'),
Chapter 5.57 ('Short-Term Rental Regulations').
   SIGN. Any advertisement, announcement, direction or communication produced
in whole or in part by the construction, erection, affixing or placing of a
structure on any land or on any other structure, or produced by painting on or
posting or placing any printed, lettered, pictured, figured or colored material
on any building, structure or surface. SIGNS placed or erected by governmental
agencies or non-profit civic associations for a public purpose in the public
interest shall not be included herein, nor shall this include signs which are a
part of the architectural design of a building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.513)
      (1)   ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business,
profession, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the same zoning lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.516)
      (2)   BUSINESS SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business or
profession conducted or to a commodity, service or entertainment sold or
offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or to which it is
affixed.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.519)
      (3)   FLASHING SIGN. Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light
is not maintained stationary, or constant in intensity and color at all times
when the sign is in use. For the purpose of this comprehensive amendment, any
revolving, illuminated sign shall be considered a FLASHING SIGN.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.522)
   SLEEPING ROOM.
      (1)   A room rented for sleeping and living quarters, but without cooking
facilities and with or without an individual bathroom.
      (2)   In a suite of rooms without cooking facilities, each room which
provides sleeping accommodations shall be counted as one sleeping room for the
purposes of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.525)
   STABLES.
      (1)   PRIVATE STABLE. A stable for housing domestic animals when not
conducted as a business.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.528)
      (2)   PUBLIC STABLE. A building in which any horses are kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.531)
   START or COMMENCEMENT. The point of some act upon the ground on which the
building is to be erected, and in pursuance of a design to erect, the result of
which act would make known to a person viewing the premises, from observation
alone, that the erection of a building on that land had been commenced.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.534)
   STORAGE. Holding or safekeeping goods in a warehouse or other depository to
await the happening of some future event or contingency which will call for the
removal of the goods.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.537)
   STORE. A use devoted exclusively to the retail sale of a commodity or
commodities.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.540)
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there be no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement
shall be counted as a STORY for the purpose of height measurement if subdivided
and used for dwelling or business purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.543)
   STREET. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.546)
   STREET LINE. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a
contiguous street.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.549)
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change in either the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders or in the roof and
exterior walls.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.552)
   STRUCTURALLY ALTERED. The making of such a substantial change in the
construction, identity and use of the present building, as is described in the
definition for “structural alterations.”
(Prior Code, § 17.04.555)
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which required a
location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the
ground, including, but without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, fences, pergolas,
radio and television towers, masts and aerials.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.558)
   SUPPORTIVE HOUSING. Dwelling units with no limit on length of stay that are
occupied by the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section
50675.14(b) of the Cal. Health and Safety Code or individuals eligible for
services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Development Disabilities Act
(Division 45 of the Welfare and Institutions Code), and that are linked to
onsite or offsite services that assist supportive housing residents in
retaining the housing, improving their health status, and maximizing their
ability to live and, where possible, work in the community and where no onsite
medical care is provided.
   SWIMMING POOL. Any body of water or receptacle for water having a depth at
any point greater than two feet, used or intended to be used for swimming or
bathing, and constructed, installed or maintained in or above the ground
outside any building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.561)
   SWIM CLUB or TENNIS CLUB. A voluntary or corporate association owned solely
by its members, the objectives, pursuits and purposes of which are social or
recreational, operating or formed for the purposes of operating a club on a
membership basis and not operated for profit, the principal facilities of which
shall be a swimming pool or pools and/or tennis courts owned by it and
maintained on land owned or leased by it, and which may maintain and operate,
on the same premises, the accessory facilities owned by it as are usually
provided by a SWIM OR TENNIS CLUB. Accessory facilities shall not include
bowling alleys.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.564)
   TERRACE. An open porch without a permanent roof.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.567)
   THEATER. A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures or other
performances, for admission to which entrance money is received and no audience
participation or meal service is allowed.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.570)
   OUTDOOR DRIVE-IN THEATER. An open lot or part thereof, with its appurtenant
facilities, devoted primarily to the showing of moving pictures or theatrical
productions, on a paid admission basis, to patrons seated in automobiles or on
outdoor seats.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.573)
   TINY HOUSE. A dwelling that is 400 square feet or less in area (excluding
loft space) and meets the standards of the California Building Standards Code,
as adopted by the town, and Appendix Q, Tiny Houses, of the International
Residential Code.
   TOWN HOUSE. A single-family dwelling constructed as part of a series of
dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or
dwellings by party walls or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no
visible separation between walls or roofs.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.579)
   TRAILER. A vehicle standing on wheels or rigid supports which is used for
living or sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.582)
   TRAILER CAMP. Any place or premises adapted for parking or used for parking
two or more motor trailers or house cars for living or sleeping purposes, or
any place or premises used or held out to the public for the purpose of
supplying motor trailers or house cars for living or sleeping purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.585)
   TRANSITIONAL HOUSING. Dwelling units configured as rental housing but
operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance
and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at
a predetermined future point in time, that shall be not less than six months
from the beginning of assistance. Transitional housing may be designated for
homeless or recently homeless individuals or families transitioning to
permanent housing as defined in subdivision (h) of Section 50675.2 of the Cal.
Health and Safety Code. Facilities may be linked to onsite or offsite
supportive services designed to help residents gain skills needed to live
independently. This classification includes domestic violence shelters.
   TURF. A ground cover surface of mowed grass.
   UNOBSTRUCTED OPEN SPACE. Land not covered by buildings or structures.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.588)
   URBAN USES. Any current or former residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, or retail use or any combination of these uses. Vacant lots in a
subdivision that have been approved residential or non-residential use are
considered urban uses.
   USE.
      (1)   (a)   Any purpose for which a building or other structure or tract
of land may be designed, arranged, intended, maintained or occupied; or
         (b)   Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on, or
intended to be carried on, in a building or other structure or on a tract of
land.
      (2)   To USE means to convert to one’s service.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.591)
   USED CAR LOT. A lot or group of contiguous lots, used for the display and
sale of used automobiles and where no repair work is done, except the necessary
reconditioning of the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.594)
   USED CAR JUNKYARDS. A lot or group of contiguous lots used for the
dismantling or wrecking of used automobiles or the storage, sale or dumping of
dismantled or wrecked cars or their parts.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.597)
   VACATION CABIN. A structure consisting of not more than four sleeping rooms,
kitchen and living area containing not more than 800 square feet of gross floor
area and used as a temporary residence for recreational purposes.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.600)
   WAREHOUSE. A structure or part of a structure, for storing goods, wares and
merchandise, whether for the owner or for others, and whether it is a public or
private warehouse.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.603)
   WAY. A street or alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently
established for passage of persons or vehicles.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.606)
   WIDTH. A dimension measured from side to side at right angles to length.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.609)
   YARD. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided in this title. In measuring a yard for the
purpose of determining the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or
the depth of the rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot
line and the main building shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.612)
      (1)   FRONT YARD. A yard extending along the full-length of the front lot
line between the side lot lines.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.615)
      (2)   REAR YARD. A yard extending across the full-width of the lot and
measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main
building.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.618)
      (3)   SIDE YARD. A yard between the building or attached structure and
the adjacent side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.621)
   ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE. A vehicle that does not emit exhaust gas or other
pollutants from the onboard source of power under any and all possible
operational modes and conditions.
     ZERO EMISSION VEHICLE - CHARGING STATION. An accessory use consisting of
one or more electric vehicle charging spaces served by an electric vehicle
charger or other charging equipment. This includes any level of electric
vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built-in compliance with
Article 625 of the California Electrical Code and delivers electricity from a
source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.
   ZONE. An area which certain uses of land and buildings are permitted and
certain others are prohibited, yards and other open spaces are required, lot
areas, building height limits and other requirements are established, all of
the foregoing being identical for the zone in which they apply.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.624)
   ZONING LOT.
      (1)    A lot of record existing on the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this title or any applicable subsequent amendment thereto;
      (2)   A tract of land, either unsubdivided or consisting of two or more
contiguous lots or record, located within a single block, which, on the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or any applicable
subsequent amendment thereto, was in single ownership; or
      (3)   A tract of land, located within a single building block, which at
the time of filing for a building permit (or, if no building permit is
required, at the time of filing for a certificate of occupancy), is designated
by its owner or developer as a tract all of which is to be used, developed or
built upon as a unit under single ownership.
(Prior Code, § 17.04.627)
(Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 489, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 491, passed -
-1982; Am. Ord. 525, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord.
651, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 696, passed 9-3- 2002; Am. Ord. 742, passed 9-2-
2009; Am. Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015; Am. Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019; Am. Ord.
865, passed 7-6-2022; Am. Ord. 883, passed 11-1-2023; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-
1-2023; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
CHAPTER 17.010: RULES OF MEASUREMENT
Section
   
17.010.010   Purpose
   
17.010.020   General provisions
   
17.010.030   Measuring distances
   
17.010.040   Measuring height
   
17.010.050   Determining grade
   
17.010.060   Measuring lot width and depth
   
17.010.070   Determining average slope
   
17.010.080   Determining floor area
   
17.010.090   Determining floor area ratio
   
17.010.100   Determining lot coverage
   
17.010.110   Determining lot frontage
   
17.010.120   Determining setbacks
   
17.010.130   Measuring parking lot landscaping
   
17.010.140   Measuring pedestrian clearance
§ 17.010.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to explain how various measurements referred
to in this title and needed to determine compliance with objective standards
and related requirements are to be calculated.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   For all calculations, the applicant is responsible for supplying
drawings illustrating the measurements that apply to a project. These drawings
shall be drawn to scale and of sufficient detail to allow easy verification
upon inspection by the Planning Director and the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Whenever this title requires consideration of distances, parking
spaces, dwelling units or other aspects of development or the physical
environment expressed in numerical quantities, and the result of a calculation
contains a fraction of a whole number, the results will be rounded as follows:
      (1)   Fractions of one-half (0.5) or greater shall be rounded up to the
nearest whole number, and fractions of less than one-half (0.5) shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number, except as otherwise provided.
      (2)   Exception for State Affordable Housing Density Bonus: the
calculation of fractions related to permitted bonus density units for projects
eligible for bonus density pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 65915 or any successor
statute shall be done as provided by state law.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.030 MEASURING DISTANCES.
   (A)   When measuring a required distance, such as the minimum distance
between a structure and a lot line, the measurement is made at the closest or
shortest distance between the two objects.
   (B)   When determining distances for setbacks and structure dimensions, all
distances are measured along a horizontal plane from the appropriate line, edge
of building, structure, storage area, parking area, or other object. These
distances are not measured by following the topography or slope of the land.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified, measurements involving a structure are
made to the closest support element of the structure.
   (D)   Measurement of a minimum travel distance for vehicles, such as garage
entrance setbacks and stacking lane distances, are measured down the center of
the vehicle travel area. For example, curving driveways and travel lanes are
measured along the center arc of the driveway or traffic lane.
   (E)   When a specified land use is required to be located a minimum distance
from another land use, the minimum distance is measured in a straight line from
all points along the lot line of the subject project, in all directions.
   FIGURE 17.010(A) MEASURING DISTANCES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4581.png]
 
(Or. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.040 MEASURING HEIGHT.
   (A)   Building height shall be defined as the distance from finished grade
to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a
mansard roof or to the height of the highest peak or gable of a pitched or
hipped roof. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height
of any segment of the building along the finished grade directly below. On lots
with a grade change of 10% or more between the front and rear property lines,
building height is measured from the “grade plane” as determined in the
following subsection, and height shall be measured from the measure point at
the top of the building, as determined above, to the grade plane.
   FIGURE 17.010 (B): MEASURING BUILDING HEIGHT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4583.png]
 
 
FIGURE 17.010 (C): MEASURING BUILDING HEIGHT OF A TERRACED OR STEPPED BUILDING 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4585.png]
 
      (1)   On lots with a grade change of 10% or more between the front and
rear lot lines, or between the front lot line and its most distant point when
there is no rear lot line, building height is measured from the adjacent
natural or finished grade, whichever is lower, to the coping of a flat roof or
to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest
gable of a pitched or hipped roof.
      (2)   Exceptions. Certain building features may exceed the height limits
pursuant §
17.044.050.
   (B)   In measuring the height of a building in stories, the following
measurement rules apply:
      (1)   A mezzanine shall be counted as a full story if its floor area
exceeds one-third of the total area of the nearest full floor directly below it
or if it is enclosed on more than three sides.
      (2)   A basement shall be counted as a full story if the finished surface
of the floor above the basement is:
         (a)   More than three feet above the reference plane established
according to §
17.010.050 (A)(1); or
         (b)   More than eight feet above the basement floor at any point.
   FIGURE 17.0410 (D): DETERMINING IF A BASEMENT IS A STORY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4587.png] 
 
      (3)   A story may not exceed 18 feet in height from the upper surface of
the floor to the ceiling above.
   (C)   The height of any fence or wall shall be determined from the downslope
side of the wall by measuring the vertical distance from the highest finished
grade adjacent to the fence or wall to the highest point of any portion of the
fence or wall. In the case of fences or walls between the setback line and lot
line, height shall be measured from highest finished grade on the downslope
side adjacent to the fence or wall to the top of the fence or wall.
      (1)   The height of a fence that is on top of a retaining wall is
measured from the highest finished grade point on the downslope of any point on
such fence to the highest point of the fence on the highest side of the wall.
      (2)   Any fence or railing required to comply with minimum height in
applicable Building Code requirement is permitted.
   (D)   Deck height is the vertical distance from finished grade directly
below the deck to the top of the floor of the deck.
FIGURE 17.010 (E): MEASURING HEIGHT OF FENCES AND WALLS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4589.png]
 
   (D)   Deck height is measured from ground to top of the floor of the deck.
FIGURE 17.010 (F): MEASURING HEIGHT OF DECKS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4591.png]
 
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.050 DETERMINING GRADE.
   (A)   Grade is the location of the ground surface. For purposes of this
chapter, the grade of a building used to determine building height shall be
determined by one or more of the following:
      (1)   Existing grade. The existing elevation of the ground at any point
on a lot. Existing grade also may be referred to as natural grade.
      (2)   Finished grade. The lowest point of elevation of the finished
surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk within the area between the building
and the lot line, or when the lot line is more than five feet from the
building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.
      (3)   Reference grade plane. A reference grade plane representing the
average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls.
Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the
reference grade plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area
between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than five
feet from the building, between the building and a point five feet from the
building.
   FIGURE 17.010 (G): REFERENCE GRADE PLANE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4593.png]
   
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.060 MEASURING LOT WIDTH AND DEPTH.
   (A)   Lot width is the horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front
and rear lot lines.
   (B)   Lot depth is measured along a straight line drawn from the midpoint of
the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line or to the most distant
point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.070 DETERMINING AVERAGE SLOPE.
   The average slope of a parcel is calculated using the following formula: S =
100(I)(L)/A, where:
      S = Average slope (in percent)
      I = Contour interval (in feet)
      L = Total length of all contour lines on the parcel measured from where
the contour lines intersect with the property lines of the parcel (in feet)
      A = Area of subject parcel (in square feet)
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.080 DETERMINING FLOOR AREA.
   The floor area of a building is the sum of the gross horizontal areas of all
floors of a building or other enclosed structure, measured from the outside
perimeter of the exterior walls and/or the centerline of interior walls.
   (A)   Floor area includes, but is not limited to, all habitable space (as
defined in the town's construction codes) that is below the roof and within the
outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings, the
centerlines of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof, or
lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roof line of any building
without walls. In the case of a multi-story building that has covered or
enclosed stairways, stairwells, or elevator shafts, the horizontal area of such
features shall be counted only once at the floor level of their greatest area
of horizontal extent.
   (B)   Floor area does not include the following: mechanical, electrical, and
communication equipment rooms that do not exceed two percent of the building's
gross floor area; bay windows, decks, or other architectural projections where
the vertical distance between the lowest surface of the projection and the
finished floor is 30 inches or greater; areas that qualify as usable open
space; and, in non-residential buildings, areas used for off-street parking
spaces or loading spaces, driveways, ramps between floors of a multi-level
parking garage, and maneuvering aisles that are located below the finish grade
of the property.
   (C)   For non-residential uses, gross floor area includes interior walkways
interior courtyards, walkways, paseos, and corridors covered by a roof or
skylight. Non-residential gross floor area does not include arcades, porticoes,
and similar open areas that are located at or near street level and are
accessible to the general public but are not designed or used as sales,
display, storage, service, or production areas.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.090 DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   The floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of the floor area, excluding the
areas described below, of all principal and accessory buildings on a site to
the site area. To calculate the FAR, floor area is divided by site area, and
typically expressed as a decimal. For example, if the floor area of all
buildings on a site totals 20,000 square feet, and the site area is 10,000
square feet, the FAR is expressed as 2.0. See
Chapter 17.136 for additional regulations that apply to existing structures.
The following are excluded from the floor area when calculating FAR.
      (1)   Garages and carports. 500 square feet for a single-family
residence; 800 square feet for garage space for a duplex; and 400 square feet
for a townhouse constructed as a series of single-family dwellings.
      (2)   Parking for multi-family structures. Parking areas located below
finished grade or finished floor of habitable space where the vertical distance
between finished grade and finished floor of the parking level is five feet or
more. Structured parking areas located above finished grade where the vertical
distance between finished grade and the floor of the parking level is five feet
or less.
   FIGURE 17.010 (H): DETERMINING FLOOR AREA RATIO
 [https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4597.png]
 
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.010.100 DETERMINING LOT COVERAGE.
   Lot coverage is the ratio of the total footprint area of all impervious
surfaces on a lot to the net lot area, typically expressed as a percentage. The
footprints of all principal and accessory structures, including garages,
carports, covered patios, and roofed porches, combined with all impervious
driveways, walkway and other surfaces shall be summed in order to calculate lot
coverage. The following shall be excluded from the calculation:
   (A)   Eaves and roof overhangs projecting up to two feet from a wall;
   (B)   Trellises and similar structures that have roofs that are at least 50
percent open to the sky with uniformly distributed openings;
   (C)   Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures
or decks; and
   (D)   Driveway, walkways, patios, decks and other flat surfaces built with
pervious materials.
   FIGURE 17.010(I): DETERMINING LOT COVERAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4599.png]
 
(Ord. 885, passe d 11- 1- 2023)
§ 17.010.110 DETERMINING LOT FRONTAGE.
   (A)   The front of a lot that is not a corner lot or through lot is the lot
line along the street frontage.
   (B)   The front of a corner lot is the narrowest dimension of the lot with
street frontage.
   (C)   Except in the case of a panhandle lot, the front yard of a through lot
is the one that abuts the street that adjoining lots use to provide primary
access into the dwellings on these lots. The opposite yard is considered a rear
yard.
   (D)   In the case of a through lot, the narrowest dimension is the front
yard (that is not a panhandle). If same dimension, staff shall determine the
front yard.
   (E)   If a panhandle lot, then the front yard is the one adjoining the
widest portion of the lot that faces the street. (see graphic 17.010 (J).
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
   FIGURE 17.010 (J): MEASURING LOT WIDTH AND DEPTH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4601.png]
 
 § 17.010.120 DETERMININ G SETBACKS.
   A setback line defining a required yard is parallel to and at the specified
distance from the corresponding front, side, or rear lot line. The following
regulations for determining yards apply when a lot abuts a proposed street or
alley.
   (A)   If a property abuts an existing or proposed street for which the
existing right-of-way is narrower than the right-of-way ultimately required for
the street, the required setback shall be established from the future right-of-
way rather than the property line.
   (B)   If a side lot line abuts an alley, the yard shall be considered an
interior side yard rather than a corner side yard. In computing the minimum
yard for any lot where such yard abuts an alley, no part of the width of the
alley may be considered as part of the required yard.
   (C)   Setbacks shall be measured as the distance between the nearest lot
line and the closest point on the exterior of a building or structure along a
line at right angles to the lot line. Setbacks shall be unobstructed from the
ground to the sky except where projections into yards are allowed by §
17.044.070.
   FIGURE 171.010 (K): DETERMINING SETBACKS (YARDS)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4603.png]
 
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.010.130 MEASURING PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
   For the purp ose of calculating required parking lot landscaping, parking
lot areas are deemed to include parking and loading spaces as well as aisles,
vehicle entry and exit areas, and any adjacent paved areas. Parking lot area
does not include enclosed vehicle storage areas.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.010.140 MEASURING PEDESTRIAN CLEARANCE.
   The minimum distance shall be measured from the edge of any table, chair,
bench, planter, or other appurtenance used as part of an outdoor dining area to
any obstruction within the sidewalk area. The distance from the back of a chair
shall account for a seated person.
   FIGURE 17.010(L): MEASURING PEDESTRIAN CLEARANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/10e8f8c2776919f95bbfae7110d94c14504d2ca0/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4605.png]
 
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.012: ZONE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
Section
   
17.012.010   Established
   
17.012.020   Zoning map
   
17.012.030   Discrepancies
   
17.012.040   Boundaries; generally
   
17.012.050   Boundaries; RS-7.5 zone
   
17.012.060   Boundaries; RS-6 zone
   
17.012.070   Boundaries; RD 5.5-7 zone
   
17.012.080   Boundaries; RM zone
   
17.012.090   Boundaries; CL zone
   
17.012.100   Boundaries; CH zone
   
17.012.110   Boundaries; CC zone
   
17.012.120   Boundaries; CS zone
   
17.012.130   Boundaries; CR zone
   
17.012.140   Boundaries; PDD zone
   
17.012.150   Boundaries; O-A zone
   
17.012.160   Boundaries; UR zone
   
17.012.165   Boundaries; WHO zones (WHO-A and WHO-B)
   
17.012.170   Boundaries; PD zone
   
17.012.180   Boundaries; RM-S zone
§ 17.012.010 ESTABLISHED.
   In order to classify, regulate, restrict and segregate the uses of land and
building; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to
regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; to regulate
the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building or structure, and
to otherwise regulate the use or development of land and premises, the
following land use zones are established to be known and designated as:
   (A)   RS-7.5 single-family residential zone;
   (B)   RS-6 single-family residential zone;
   (C)   RD 5.5-7 residential zone;
   (D)   RM multiple-family residential zone;
   (E)   RM-S multiple-family residential - senior zone;
   (F)   CL limited commercial zone;
   (G)   CH highway commercial zone;
   (H)   CC central commercial district zone;
   (I)   CS commercial service zone;
   (J)   CR commercial recreation zone;
   (K)   PDD planned development district;
   (L)   SF-RMP single-family residential master plan zone;
   (M)   O-A open area zone;
   (N)   UR upland residential zone;
   (O)   WHO Workforce housing overlay zones (WHO-A and WHO-B); and
   (P)   PD public domain.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 482, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015; Am. Ord.
808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.012.020 ZONING MAP.
   The zones aforesaid and the boundaries of the zones shall be shown and
designated upon a certain map to be known as the “zoning map,” which zoning map
shall be kept and maintained to currently show the zone classifications of all
property in the town, and during all business hours shall be available to the
general public in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.030 DISCREPANCIES.
   (A)   In case of any discrepancy between the designation of land on the
“zoning map” as lying within a particular zone and the designation of land in
§§
17.012.040 through
17.012.160 as being within the same zone, §§
17.012.040 through
17.012.160 shall control.
   (B)   In case an Assessor’s parcel is listed in §§
17.012.040 through
17.012.160 as lying within the boundaries of two or more zones, the Planning
Commission shall determine which zone will in fact include the Assessor’s
parcel within its boundaries, and the regulations of the zone so designated
shall apply to the assessor’s parcel.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.040 BOUNDARIES; GENERALLY.
   Each of the zones designated in §§
17.012.050 through
17.012.180 shall have included within it the land area specified.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 788, passed 5-6-
2015; Am. Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 17.012.050 BOUNDARIES; RS-7.5 ZONE.
   There is included within the RS-7.5 zone the following real property shown
and designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    15, 0
1    16, 0
1    17, 1       All parcels
1    17, 2       All parcels
1    17, 3       All parcels
1    24, 1       All parcels
1    25, 1       All parcels
1    26, 1       All parcels, except 01 and 02
1    26, 2       All parcels
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.060 BOUNDARIES; RS-6 ZONE.
   There is included within the RS-6 zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
   (A)   All property in the Town of Fairfax not included within the boundaries
of any other zone or district;
   (B)   All hill areas;
   (C)   Fairfax Manor;
   (D)   Bothin Park;
   (E)   Fairfax Park;
   (F)   Cascades;
   (G)   Westbrae, except 1-127-14 and 16;
   (H)   Deer Park;
   (I)   Wood Lane; and
   (J)   Fairfax Heights, except 1-224-01.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.070 BOUNDARIES; RD 5.5-7 ZONE.
   There is included within the RD  5.5-7  zone the following real property
shown and designated uponthe Assessor’s books on file in the office of the
County Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and
more specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    07, 3       01, 02, 03, 04, 07, 23, 24, 25, 26
1    09, 2       17, 18, 19
1    09, 3       10, 14, 15
1    10, 2       All parcels except 01, 02, 03, 06, 11, and 12
1    10, 3       All parcels except 01, 02, and 03
1    10, 4       All parcels, expt 12
1    11, 3       All parcels
1    12, 2       All parcels
1    13, 1       All parcels, except 09 and 47
1    13, 2       All parcels
1    13, 3       All parcels
1    14, 1       All parcels
1    14, 3       All parcels
1    14, 6       All parcels
1    14, 9       All parcels
1    19, 1       All parcels
1    19, 2       All parcels
1    19, 3       All parcels
1    20, 1       All parcels
1    20, 2       All parcels
1    20, 3       All parcels
1    20, 4       All parcels
1    20, 5       All parcels
1    23, 1       All parcels, except 16
1    23, 2       All parcels
1    23,4        All parcels
1    23, 5       All parcels, except 08, 10, 11
1    23, 6       All parcels, except 53, 54, 55, 56
2    01, 3       05, 06
2    02, 3       01, 04, 05, 06, 07, 08, 09, 10, 11, 20
2    02, 4       All parcels
2    02, 5       01 through 07, inclusive, and 15 through 21, inclusive
2    03, 3       All parcels
2    03, 4       All parcels
2    03, 5       All parcels
2    03, 6       All parcels
2    03, 7       All parcels
2    04, 1       01 through 05, inclusive, and 07, 08, 09, 22, 23, 27
2    04, 2       All parcels
22   07, 2       All parcels
2    08, 2       All parcels
2    09, 1       All parcels
2    10, 4       11, 12, 13, 15, 20, 22, 23
2    10, 5       01 through 13, inclusive
2    12, 2       03, 04, 05, 07 through 24, inclusive, and 38, 39
2    12, 3       All parcels, except 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 33
2    12, 5       All parcels
2    12, 6       All parcels
2    20, 1       All parcels
2    21, 1       08 through 14, inclusive
2    21, 2       All parcels
2    21, 3       12 through 22, inclusive
2    21, 4       All parcels
2    21, 5       All parcels
 
0) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.012.080 BOUNDARIES; RM ZONE.
   There is included within the RM zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    13, 1       09, 47
1    14, 4       02, 03, 04, 11, 12
1    14, 8       01, 02, 03, 04, 10
1    15, 0       19 through 27 inclusive, and 28, 29, 30, 31
1    25, 1       01, 02
2    01, 2       03 through 06 inclusive, and 10, 11, 13
2    02, 3       14, 15, 16, 22, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31
2    10, 1       03 through 09 inclusive, and 15, 19
2    10, 4       16
2    11, 1       04, 05, 08, 09
2    11, 2       02, 03, 08, 09, 10, 12
174  05, 0       20, 30, 31, 36, 57
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.090 BOUNDARIES; CL ZONE.
   There is included within the CL zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
 
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    10, 4       12
2    04, 1       34, 36
2    11, 2       13
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.100 BOUNDARIES; CH ZONE.
   There is included within the CH zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    18, 1       01
1    18, 3       04, 08, 10, 12 through 17, inclusive
1    22,1        12
1    23, 5       08, 10, 11
1    23, 6       53 through 56, inclusive
2    10, 1       13
2    11, 6       04, 06, 07
2    12, 7       01, 02
2    13, 1       07, 09, 12, 13, 14, 15
2    21, 1       01 through 07, inclusive
2    21, 3       03 through 11, inclusive and 15
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.110 BOUNDARIES; CC ZONE.
   There is included within the CC zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the Office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and
designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    22, 3       09 through 12, inclusive, and 19
1    22, 6       29, 32, 34, 35, 40, 41, 48, 49
1    22, 7       01, 02
2    10, 4       03 through 08, inclusive, and 18, 19
2    11, 3       08
2    11, 5       01 through 07, inclusive, and 09, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20
2    11, 7       01
2    12, 1       03 through 07, inclusive, and 10, 11, 18 through 21, inclusive
2    12, 2       01, 02, 25 through 34, inclusive, and 37
2    12, 3       66 through 75, inclusive
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.120 BOUNDARIES; CS ZONE.
   There is included within the CS zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
 
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    14, 8       05, 06, 11
1    18, 2       01, 02
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.130 BOUNDARIES; CR ZONE.
   There is included within the CR zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
 
Book Page, Block Parcels
2    13, 1       10, 11
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.012.140 BOUNDARIES; PDD ZONE.
   There is included within the PDD zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    16, 0       01, 02, 03
1    18, 3       09
1    22, 1       06
1    27, 1       14, 16
174  05, 0       60
174  06, 0       21, 25
174  11, 1       All parcels
174  11, 2       All parcels
174  06, 0       15, 23, 24
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.140) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 632, passed - -
1994; Am. Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 17.012.150 BOUNDARIES; O-A ZONE.
   There is included within the O-A zone the following real property shown and
designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on July 1, 1989, and more
specifically designated as follows:
 
Book Page, Block Parcels
197  12, 0       03
197  12, 0       22
 
(Prior Code, § 17.08.150) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.012.160 BOUNDARIES; UR ZONE.
   (A)   There is included within the UR zone the following real property shown
and designated upon the Assessor’s books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on July 1, 1991, and more
specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels Zone
Book Page, Block Parcels Zone
174  07, 0       50      UR 7
1    15, 0       12      UR 10
1    16, 0       09      UR 10
1    25, 1       31      UR 10
2    18, 1       03      UR 10
2    18, 1       04      UR 10
2    18, 1       05      UR 10
2    18, 1       06      UR 10
2    18, 1       12      UR 10
2    18, 1       15      UR 10
2    18, 1       17      UR 10
2    18, 1       20      UR 10
2    18, 1       21      UR 10
2    07, 1       01      UR 7
2    07, 1       03      UR 7
2    07, 1       04      UR 7
 
   (B)   In addition to the parcels identified in subsection (A) above, there
is also included within the UR zone all that real property shown and designated
UR upon the official Zoning Map of the Town of Fairfax. Notwithstanding any
other provision to the contrary within this title, in case of any discrepancy
between the designation of land on the official Town Zoning Map as lying within
the UR zone and the designation of land as set forth in this section, the
Zoning Map shall control.
(Prior Code, § 17.08.160) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 808, passed 6-7-
2017)
§ 17.012.165 BOUNDARIES: WHO ZONE (WHO-A AND WHO-B).
   The boundaries of the WHO zones are shown on the Town of Fairfax Zoning
Overlay Map.
(Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.012.170 BOUNDARIES; PD ZONE.
   (A)   There is included within the PD zone the following real property shown
and designated upon the Assessor's books on file in the office of the County
Assessor, County of Marin, State of California, on August 1, 1969, and more
specifically designated as follows:
Book Page, Block Parcels
Book Page, Block Parcels
1    13, 1       09, 47
2    11, 2       07
2    11, 4       01 through 05, inclusive
2    11, 3       04, 05, 06
2    11, 5       11, 12, 18, 19
2    10, 2       01, 02, 03, 06, 11, 12
2    10, 3       01, 02, 03
 
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary within this title,
in case of any discrepancy between the designation of land on the official Town
Zoning Map as lying within the PD zone and the designation of land as set forth
in this section, the Zoning Map shall control.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.012.180 BOUNDARIES; RM-S ZONE.
   There is included within the RM-S zone all that real property shown and
designated RM-S upon the official Zoning Map of the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
CHAPTER 17.016: NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Section
   
17.016.010   Definitions; purpose
   
17.016.020   Continuation and maintenance
   
17.016.030   Alterations and additions to non-conforming uses
   
17.016.040   Alterations and additions to non-conforming structures
   
17.016.050   Changes of use
   
17.016.060   Abandonment of a non-conforming use
   
17.016.070   Restoration of a damaged structure
   
17.016.080   Regulation of filling (service) station uses and structures
§ 17.016.010 DEFINITIONS; PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USE.
      (1)   A use of a structure or land which was lawfully established and
maintained prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, but
which, under this title, does not conform with the use regulations of the
district in which it is located. This chapter is intended to limit the number
and extent of non-conforming uses by prohibiting their enlargement and their
reestablishment after abandonment and by prohibiting the alteration of the
structures they occupy and their restoration after destruction. Eventually
certain classes of non-conforming uses are to be eliminated.
      (2)   A structure which was lawfully erected prior to the adoption of the
ordinance codified in thistitle, but which, under this title, does not conform
with the standards of coverage, maximum floor area, yard spaces, height of
structures or distances between structures prescribed in the regulations for
the district in which the structure is located. While permitting the use and
maintenance of non-conforming structures, this chapter is intended to limit the
number and extent of non-conforming structures by prohibiting their being
moved, altered or enlarged so as to increase the discrepancy between existing
conditions and the standards prescribed in this title, and by prohibiting their
restoration after destruction. Eventually all non-conforming structures of
nominal value are to be eliminated or altered to conform.
(Prior Code, § 17.10.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002)
§ 17.016.020 CONTINUATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site on the effective date
of the ordinance codified in this title or of amendments thereto which does not
conform with the use regulations for the district in which the use is located
shall be deemed to be a non- conforming use and may be continued, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   A structure lawfully occupying a site on the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this title or of amendments thereto which does not
conform to the standards of coverage, maximum floor area, front yard, side
yards, rear yard, height of structure or distances between structures
prescribed in theregulations for the district in which the structure is located
shall be deemed to be a non-conforming structure and may be used and
maintained, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (C)   Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a structure or
site, the use of which is non-conforming and on a non-conforming structure.
(Prior Code, § 17.10.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002)
§ 17.016.030 ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO NON-CONFORMING USES.
   (A)   No structure, the use of which is non-conforming, shall be moved,
altered or enlarged unless required by law or unless the moving, alteration or
enlargement will result in the elimination of the non-conforming use.
   (B)   No structure partially occupied by a non-conforming use shall be
moved, altered or enlarged in such a way as to permit the enlargement of the
space occupied by the non-conforming use.
   (C)   No non-conforming use shall be enlarged or extended in such a way as
to occupy any part of the structure or site or another structure or site which
it did not occupy on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title
or of the amendment thereto which caused it to become a non-conforming use, or
in a way as to displace any conforming use occupying a structure or site.
(Prior Code, § 17.10.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.016.040 ALTERATIONS AND ADDITIONS TO NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   No non-conforming structure shall be moved, altered, enlarged or
reconstructed so as to increase the discrepancy between existing conditions and
the standards of coverage, floor area, front yard, side yards, rear yard or
height of structures prescribed in the regulations for the district in which
the structure is located without a variance issued under
Chapter 17.028.
   (B)   The aggregate amount of construction, alteration, enlargement or
reconstruction on any nonconforming building or structure, or on any building
or structure located on a nonconforming property during the life of the
building or structure subsequent to October 2, 2009 shall not:
      (1)    Affect more than 50% of the floor area of the building or
structure or expand that floor area by more than 50%; or
      (2)   Result in the addition of a bedroom to such residential building or
structure. For the purposes of this paragraph, when any changes are made in the
building, such as walls, columns, beams or girders, floor or ceiling joists,
roof rafters, roof diaphragms, foundations, piles or retaining walls or similar
components, the floor area of all rooms affected by such changes shall be
included in determining affected floor area.
   (C)   The restriction in this division shall not apply:
      (1)   To projects that are limited to replacing windows and/or doors,
installation of insulation to achieve greater energy efficiency, cosmetic floor
or wall coverings, roof repairs that do not change the configuration of the
existing roof, earthquake preparedness improvements or projects to generate
alternative energy; or
      (2)   When all of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The off-street parking requirements of Title 17 are met or a
variance for an exception has been granted;
         (b) The work does not increase an existing or create any new
nonconformity; and
         (c)   The structure or building is not located in an area that is
subject to the provisions of either
Chapter 17.060 (Ridgeline Development) or
Chapter 17.068 (Flood Zones).
(Prior Code, § 17.10.040) (Ord. 352, passed --1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed --
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed --1991; Am. Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 742,
passed 9-2-2009)
§ 17.016.050 CHANGE OF USE.
   A non-conforming use of a structure or site shall not be changed to another
non-conforming use, except under terms of use permit issued by Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.10.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.016.060 ABANDONMENT OF A NON- CONFORMING USE.
   (A)   No building or structure which was originally designed for a use which
is non-conforming under this title, where the use has ceased 12 months or more,
shall again be put to a non-conforming use.
   (B)   No building or structure which was not originally designed for a non-
conforming use, but used for same, which the non-conforming use has ceased for
six months or more, shall again be put to a non-conforming use.
(Prior Code, § 17.10.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.016.070 RESTORATION OF A DAMAGED STRUCTURE.
   (A)    Whenever a structure, the use of which does not conform with the
regulations for the district in which it is located, or a structure which does
not comply with the standards of coverage, floor area, front yard, side yards,
rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in
the regulations for the district in which the structure is located, is
destroyed by fire or other calamity, or by act of God or by the public enemy,
to the extent of 50 percent or less, as defined in §
17.016.040(B), the structure may be restored and the non-conforming use may be
resumed, provided that restoration is started within one year, or other time
period required by law, and diligently pursued to completion.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever a structure, the use of which does not conform with the
regulations for the district in which it is located, or structure which does
not comply with the standards of coverage, floor area, front yard, side yards,
rear yard, height of structures or distances between structures prescribed in
the regulations for the district in which the structure is located, is
destroyed by fire or other calamity, or by act of God or by the public enemy,
to a greater extent than 50 percent as defined in §
17.016.040(B), or is voluntarily razed or required by law to be razed, the
structure shall not be restored in a manner that would increase the non-
conformity relative to the previously existing structure and the restoration
must be in conformity with the requirements of Title 17, the Zoning Ordinance,
to the greatest extent possible.
      (2)   Any discrepancy relative to conformity requires the approval by the
Planning Commission.
      (3)   Evidence of the status of the previously existing structure shall
be based on floor plans of record retained at the Fairfax Department of
Planning and Building Services or other evidence reviewed and approved by the
Director of the Department of Planning and Building Services.
(Prior Code, § 17.10.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019)
§ 17.016.080 REGULATION OF FILLING (SERVICE) STATION USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the continued operation
of existing filling (service) station uses, and to describe when they may be
deemed abandoned; allow for alterations or enlargement of such uses when the
alteration would provide greater protection for the environment, safeguard
public health and safety, or facilitate the increased use of zero emission
vehicles; and prohibit filling (service) station operators from increasing the
storage and dispensing capacity of gasoline and other fossil fuels.
    (B)   This section applies to:
       (1)   All lawfully developed and operating filling (service) station
uses in existence prior to January 1, 2023; and
       (2)   All filling (service) station uses not yet developed and/or
operating but subject to an approved and unexpired land use permit.
    (C)   Except as provided below, filling (service) station uses and
structures related thereto shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or
moved to a different portion of the lot or parcel of land occupied by such use.
As determined by the Planning and Building Services Director, examples of
features subject to this provision include, but are not limited to, those
related to the sale, storage, conveyance, and dispensing of gasoline and any
other fossil fuel (e.g., storage tanks, pumps, dispensers).
      (1)   Filling (service) station uses shall be modified to conform to
current stormwater quality control regulations, or remediate or mitigate
contamination of the soil, air, or groundwater, or to conform to current
regulations, including amended regulations, of a regulatory agency with
jurisdiction over soil, air, groundwater, or stormwater, provided the owner or
operator complies with all applicable procedures and permit requirements of the
Town Code.
       (2)   As determined by the Public Works Director or designee, the
pedestrian and vehicular circulation features (e.g., curbing, sidewalks,
traffic control devices) of a filling (service) station use may be modified to
improve public safety.
      (3)   Filling (service) station uses may be modified to accommodate
battery charging station(s) for zero emission vehicles, subject to compliance
with §
15.04.065 of this Code.
      (4)   Filling (service) station uses may be modified to accommodate
commercial uses that are not related to fossil fuel sales and that are
otherwise provided for in the regulations applicable to the Highway Commercial
zoning district and provided the owner or operator complies with all applicable
procedures and permit requirements of the Town Code.
       (5)   A filling (service) station use shall not be re-established if
such use has been discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days or more, or
has been changed to, or replaced by, a conforming use. If the use has
discontinued for reasons of construction under a valid building permit, the
Public Works Director may extend the 180-day timeframe when presented with
documentation demonstrating construction has been pursued diligently and
timely.
       (6)   A filling (service) station may conduct building and site design
modifications or renovations intended to improve or maintain the appearance of
the station or the parcel on which it is constructed. Such modifications may
include, but not be limited to, modifications or renovations of building
façade, signs, landscaping and hardscape, provided the owner or operator
complies with all applicable procedures and permit requirements of the Town
Code.
       (7)   A filling (service) station shall be modified as required by law
to comply with building safety requirements such as seismic retrofitting,
access for persons with disabilities, and similar modifications protecting
public health, safety or welfare, provided the owner or operator complies with
all applicable procedures and permit requirements of the Town Code.
       (8)   A filling (service) station may undergo normal maintenance,
replacement and repairs, including, but not limited to, painting, re-roofing,
sign replacement, fossil fuel dispensing equipment upgrades and similar
modifications, provided the owner or operator complies with all applicable
procedures and permit requirements of the Town Code.
       (9)   A filling (service) station that is damaged or destroyed by any
means may be restored or reconstructed as it existed immediately prior to the
damage or destruction, provided the owner or operator complies with all
applicable procedures and permit requirements of the Town Code and such
restoration or reconstruction is completed, as confirmed with a final building
inspection, within two years of the date of damage or destruction. Failure to
complete such restoration or reconstruction within the two-year timeframe shall
constitute abandonment of the use.
(Ord. 883, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.020: DESIGN REVIEW REGULATIONS
Section
   
17.020.010   Title
   
17.020.020   Purpose
   
17.020.030   Applicability
   
17.020.040   Design review criteria
   
17.020.050   Application
   
17.020.060   Preliminary plans
   
17.020.070   Application; filing fee
   
17.020.080   Procedure for consideration
   
17.020.090   Period of consideration
   
17.020.100   Public hearing; notice
   
17.020.110   Appeal to process
   
17.020.120   Enforcement
   
17.020.130   Time limits; extensions.
§ 17.020.010 TITLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be known as “Design Review
Regulations.”
(Prior Code, § 17.12.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.020 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of these regulations is to effect design review of all
developments, buildings, structures, signs and other facilities constructed or
modified in the Town of Fairfax, except as herein provided.
   (B)    The purpose of this procedure is to foster a good design character
through consideration of objective design standards for aesthetic and
functional relationships to surrounding development and in order to further
enhance the town’s appearance and the livability and usefulness of properties.
   (C)   These review procedures are intended to ensure that new development
supports the General Plan and more specifically to:
      (1)   Promote high quality, pedestrian-friendly, and sustainable design;
      (2)   Ensure that new development and uses will be compatible with the
existing and potential development of the surrounding area; and
      (3)   Supplement other town regulations and standards in order to ensure
control of aspects of exterior design that are not otherwise addressed and have
a bearing on land use compatibility and neighborhood fit.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)v
§ 17.020.030 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   New residences and alterations or additions constituting 50 percent
remodels, as set forth in Town Code §
17.016.040(B), in all zones including Residential RD 5.5-7 Zones, Residential
RS 6 Zones, Residential RS 7.5 Zones and Upland Residential UP Zones; and
   (B)    New construction in Central Commercial, Limited Commercial, Highway
Commercial, Service Commercial, Multiple Residential, Planned Development
District, Single Family-Residential Master Plan zones, Workforce Housing
Overlay zones (if adopted), duplexes in RD 5.5-7 zones and structures in the
Ridgeline Scenic Corridor, as required in
Chapter 17.060, and residences which have a distance of more than ten feet from
the ground to the lowest point of complete enclosure.
   (C)   Changes in the exterior color of a nonresidential structure or the
alteration of a significant design element which is a part of the design of the
building in Limited Commercial CL, Highway Commercial CH, Central Commercial
CC, Service Commercial CS, Commercial Recreation CR, Planned Development
District PDD, Workforce Housing Overlays WHO-A and WHO-B (if adopted), Multiple
Family Residential RM and Multiple Family Residential Senior-Residential RM-
S Zones and for which an objective design standard has been established. A
significant design element alteration is anything that changes the shape,
line,, pattern, or texture of the exterior of a building, including, but not
limited to, changes in any exterior building materials, roofline, window or
door shape, size or location, and changes to awnings, excluding ordinary
maintenance and repair.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 482, passed - -1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 515,
passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 688, passed 3-6-2002; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012;
Am. Ord. 854, passed 7-7-2021; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.040 DESIGN REVIEW CRITERIA.
   The following criteria shall be applied in considering an application for
design review approval.
   (A)   Only elements of design which have significant relationship to
exterior appearance of structures and facilities shall be considered; these
elements include only height, building mass, building setbacks and arrangement
on the site, exterior building material, signs, landscaping, pedestrian access,
and appurtenances for which objective design standards have been established in
this title.
   (B)   The proposed development shall conform with all objective zoning
standards for landscaping, screening, usable open space, and the design of
parking and off-street loading areas set forth in this title.
   (C)   Where the proposed development is located in an area where a
neighborhood plan or precise plan has been adopted by the town, the design of
the development shall conform in all significant respects with the standards
and design criteria in these plans.
   (D)   Conformance to standards for the size and design of the structure
shall be considered for the purpose of determining that the structure is in
proportion to its building site and that it has a balance and unity among its
external features so as to present a harmonious appearance.
   (E)   The extent to which the structure conforms to the standards governing
the general physical character of other structures in the vicinity, including
their height, building mass, and relationship to the street and adjacent
structures.
   (F)   For nonresidential development projects, the extent to which
ornamentation is to be used and the extent to which temporary and second-hand
materials, or materials which are imitative of other materials, are to be used.
   (G)   The extent to which natural features, including trees, shrubs, creeks
and rocks and the natural grade of the site are to be retained based on the
standards for protecting these features established in this title.
   (H)   Conformance to the standards for accessibility of off-street parking
areas and the relation of parking areas with respect to traffic on adjacent
streets.
   (I)   Conformance to the standards for reservation of landscaping areas for
the purpose of separating or screening service and storage areas from the
street and adjoining building sites, breaking up large expanses of paved areas,
separating or screening parking lots from the street and adjoining building
sites and separating building areas from paved areas to provide access from
buildings to open space areas.
   (J)   In the case of any commercial or industrial structure or mixed-use
development, the Planning Commission shall consider its proximity to any
residential district, conformance to standards for buffering and reduced height
in transitional areas adjacent to this district and standards intended to
mitigate the effect of the proposed structure, including building mass and
window location, upon the privacy and sunlight access provided to the adjacent
residential district area.
   (K)   The Planning Commission and Town Council may adopt supplemental design
standards and guidelines in order to further the objectives of this section and
to illustrate design criteria.
   (L)   The Planning Director shall create checklists for use for design
review for projects that qualify for streamlined ministerial review under state
law and Chapter 17.026, Ministerial Approvals for Qualifying Housing
Developments, to determine compliance with objective development standards.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.050 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for consideration shall be made at a meeting of the
Planning Commission by the owner of the affected property, or his or her
authorized agent, on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission, and shall be
filed with the Planning Department no later than 30 days prior to the next
Planning Commission meeting.
   (B)   The application shall be accompanied by the information as may be
required to allow applicable design review criteria and objective design
standards to be applied to the proposed action. This information may include
site and building plans, drawings and elevations, landscaping plans and
operational data.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.060 PRELIMINARY PLANS.
   (A)   Applicants are encouraged to submit preliminary plans prior to filing
an application for approval so that preliminary agreement between the Planning
Commission and the applicant may be achieved based on compliance with the
town's objective zoning standards and objective design standards, unless an
exception or waiver has been granted under
Chapter 17.040, Exceptions, Modifications, and Waivers.
   (B)   Approval by the Planning Commission shall be certified to the
appropriate town officials prior to the issuance of a building permit, or
business license if necessary, as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.070 APPLICATION; FILING FEE.
   At the time of filing, the applicant shall pay a filing fee set in
accordance with a schedule set by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.020.080 PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   An application for design review shall be considered by the Planning
Commission, which shall determine whether the proposed design conforms to the
design review criteria set forth in §
17.020.040 and to any other applicable specific design review criteria.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may approve or disapprove the design or
require the changes as are, in its judgment, necessary to accomplish the
general purposes of this title and ensure conformance with the objective zoning
standards and objective design standards that apply to the type of development
proposed and to the zone where the project will be built.
   (C)   The determination of the Planning Commission shall become effective
ten days after the date of decision unless appealed to the Town Council.
   (D)   Any project requiring both design review and other permits or
entitlements from the Town of Fairfax shall be considered by the Planning
Commission at the same time it considers the other permits or entitlements.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 693, passed 7-16-
2002; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.020.090 PERIOD OF CONSIDERATION.
   (A)   A decision shall be rendered by the Planning Commission within six
months after the application is deemed complete, unless a shorter time period
is established in state law for a specific type of permit application.
   (B)   This time limit may be extended by agreement between the Planning
Commission and the applicant.
   (C)   If no agreement is in effect and a decision is not rendered within six
months after the application is deemed complete, the application shall be
deemed approved.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.100 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)    Applications for design review shall not be acted upon until a public
hearing thereon is held, except for design review of sign permit exception
applications and projects that qualify for streamlined ministerial review and
for which no public hearing can be held, as required by Cal. Gov't Code §
65913.4 (“State Streamlined Ministerial Approval Process”). Notice of the time
and place of the public hearing, together with a brief statement of the nature
of the application, shall be given in the same manner as provided in §
17.004.070.
   (B)   Additional notice of the public hearing may be given to owners and
renters of other property within 500 feet of applicant’s parcel when, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, the properties would be affected by the
proceedings so noticed. The subject property shall be posted by the applicant
in a manner described in the Town of Fairfax submittal packet at least ten days
prior to the public hearing.
   (C)   Any error, irregularity, informality or omission as to noticing shall
not void or invalidate the proceedings, considerations or disposition of a
design review application, except as may be otherwise provided under Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65010.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006; Am. Ord.
674, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.020.110 APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   Within ten days following the date of a decision, an appeal from the
decision may be filed with the Town Clerk. Decisions shall be appealed to the
Town Council.
   (B)   Appeal shall be made on a form prescribed by the Town Clerk.
   (C)   The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there
was an error or abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission, or wherein the
decision is not supported by the evidence in the record.
   (D)   In considering the appeal, the Town Council shall determine whether
the proposed design conforms to the applicable design review criteria and may
approve or disapprove the proposed design or require the changes therein or
impose reasonable conditions of approval as are, in its reasonable judgment,
necessary to ensure conformity to the criteria.
   (E)   The decision of the Town Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 693, passed 7-16-
2002; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.020.120 ENFORCEMENT.
   In any zone, or in any instance, in which design review is required, no
building permit or business license, if necessary, shall be issued unless
approval of the proposed development has been granted pursuant to this
procedure.
(Prior Code, § 17.12.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.020.130 TIME LIMITS; EXTENSIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any design review
permit shall comply with §
17.040.110 (“Permit Time Limits and Extensions”) of
Chapter 17.040 (“General Zone Regulations”).
(Ord. 837, passed 10-2-2019)
CHAPTER 17.024: REQUIRED PERMITS
Section
   
17.024.010   Zoning permit; purpose
   
17.024.020   Zoning permit; restrictions; display
   
17.024.030   Zoning permit; issuance
   
17.024.040   Zoning permit; expiration for non-use
   
17.024.050   Use permit; required
   
17.024.060   Building permit; required
   
17.024.070   Moving permit; required
   
17.024.080   Authority to revoke or modify
   
17.024.090   Grounds for revocation
   
17.024.100   Grounds for modification
   
17.024.110   Initiation of proceedings and hearings
   
17.024.120   Appeals
§ 17.024.010 ZONING PERMIT; PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of a zoning permit is to determine compliance with the
provisions of this title.
   (B)   No owner shall use or permit the use of any land, structure or
building, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, moved, changed,
converted or enlarged wholly or partly, until a zoning permit has been issued
by the planning staff; provided, however, that, no zoning permit shall be
required for the growing of field, garden or tree crops, except when a use
permit is also required.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.024.020 ZONING PERMIT;RESTRICTIONS; DISPLAY.
   (A)   Land or buildings may be occupied and used only for the use for which
the zoning permit is issued.
   (B)   The zoning permit shall be displayed on site.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.024.030 ZONING PERMIT; ISSUANCE.
    It is the duty of the planning staff to issue a zoning permit after
discretionary or ministerial review, provided the staff is satisfied that the
structure, building or premises and proposed use thereof conform with all the
requirements of this title, including compliance with all objective standards
that apply, and that all other reviews and actions, if any, called for in this
title have been complied with and all necessary approvals secured. The planning
staff may impose reasonable conditions of approval, provided those conditions
of approval are objective and broadly applicable to development and land uses
within the town.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.024.040 ZONING PERMIT; EXPIRATION FOR NON-USE.
   In any case where a zoning permit has not been used within six months after
the date of granting thereof, then without further action the permit granted
shall be null and void.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.024.050 USE PERMIT; REQUIRED.
   In addition to the zoning permit required by §
17.024.010 of this chapter, a conditional use permit shall be required for all
uses listed as conditional uses in the individual zone regulations and for any
other use or purpose set forth herein.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.024.060 BUILDING PERMIT; REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish any building or structure in
the town, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate
building permit for each such building or structure from the building official.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.024.070 MOVING PERMIT; REQUIRED.
   In addition to a building permit, a moving permit shall be required whenever
any structure is to be transported on the streets of Fairfax.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.024.080 AUTHORITY TO REVOKE OR MODIFY.
    The Planning Commission may revoke or modify any zoning permit, conditional
use permit or other permit, approval, or entitlement on any one or more of the
grounds named in this section, after a hearing held and conducted as provided
in
Chapter 17.032.
   (A)   The Planning Director has the authority to approve minor modifications
to approved plans without notice or a public hearing if they are consistent
with the original findings and conditions of approval and do not involve an
increase in the number of dwelling units or the floor area for a non-
residential use, a change that would affect compliance with an objective zoning
standard or objective design standard, or a change that would negatively impact
infrastructure or utilities or burden circulation adjacent to the project site.
   (B)   The Planning Director, at his or her discretion, may refer a request
for approval of a minor modification that may generate substantial public
interest to the Planning Commission rather than acting on it himself or
herself.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.024.090 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.
   The grounds for revocation shall be any of the following:
   (A)   Approval was obtained by means of fraud or misrepresentation of a
material fact;
   (B)   The permittee or holder of the permit has failed to undertake the use
in question for an unreasonable period of time;
   (C)   The use in question has ceased to exist or has been suspended for six
months or more;
   (D)    The use, building, or structure has been substantially expanded
beyond what was set forth in the original permit, thereby causing substantial
adverse impacts on the surrounding neighborhood;
   (E)   There is or has been a violation of, or failure to observe or comply
with, any applicable objective zoning standards or objective design standards,
the terms or conditions of the permit, the terms or conditions of any
applicable density bonus agreement or agreement for continued affordability for
affordable housing, or the use has been conducted in violation of the
provisions of this title, law or regulation; and
   (F)   The use to which the permit applies has been conducted in a manner
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or so as to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.024.100 GROUNDS FOR MODIFICATION.
   The grounds for modification shall be any of the following:
   (A)   The grounds which would otherwise justify a revocation of the permit
can be corrected or cured by a modification imposing new or additional
conditions;
   (B)   Improvement of methods or technological advances permit conduct of the
use with adequate safeguards under the proposed modification; and/or
   (C)    One or more of the original conditions of the permit or variance is
unworkable, impractical or otherwise fails to accomplish the original aims and
ensure compliance with the standards and regulations of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.024.110 INITIATION OF PROCEEDINGS AND HEARINGS.
    Proceedings for the revocation or modification may be initiated, and shall
be set for hearing, noticed, heard and determined in substantially the same
manner as provided in
Chapter 17.032 of this title. A request for a minor modification may be acted
on by the Planning Director without notice or a public hearing.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.024.120 APPEALS.
   All decisions of the Planning Commission in proceedings for the revocation
or modification may be appealed and reviewed in substantially the same manner
as provided for in Chapter 17.036 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.14.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
CHAPTER 17.026: MINISTERIAL APPROVALS FOR QUALIFYING HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
17.026.010   Title
   
17.026.020   Purpose
   
17.026.030   Definitions
   
17.026.040   Applicability
   
17.026.050   Eligible projects
   
17.026.060   Application requirements; review and approval
§ 17.026.010 TITLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Streamlined
Ministerial Approval Regulations”.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.026.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to specify how the Town will implement
ministerial review procedures required for qualifying housing projects,
including mixed-use projects, that comply with Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4
(“State Streamlined Ministerial Approval Process”). These procedures are
intended to facilitate the development of affordable housing consistent with
the goals, policies, and programs of the General Plan.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.026.030 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms defined in Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4 shall apply to this chapter and
shall control in the event of a conflict between definitions in this title and
definitions in Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.026.040 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter applies to housing development projects, including mixed use
projects, applying for approval under Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4 and replaces
the town's procedures for reviewing discretionary applications, including
design review regulations.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.026.050 ELIGIBLE PROJECTS.
   A housing development, including a mixed-use project, is eligible for
streamlined ministerial review if it:
   (A)   Qualifies for streamlined ministerial approval under Cal. Gov't Code §
65913.4; and
   (B)   Is a multi-family housing development that contains two or more units
on an infill site that is zoned for residential use or residential mixed use;
   (C)   Is not located on a site with wetlands or a site that contains habitat
for protected species or land that has been identified for conservation in a
natural community conservation plan or habitat conservation plan adopted by the
town;
   (D)   Is not located on a site with areas of special flood hazards which are
established by
Chapter 17.068, Floodplains unless the development has received a no-rise
certification in accord with § 60.3(d)(3) of Title 44 or the Code of Federal
Regulations and all requirements of
Chapter 17.068 have been met;
   (E)   Is not located within a delineated earthquake fault zone shown on maps
published by the State Geologist, unless the development complies with
applicable seismic protection building code standards adopted by the California
Building Standards Commission as modified by the town's building code.
   (F)   Is not located within a high or very high fire hazard severity zone,
as determined by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection
unless the site has been excluded from the specified hazard zones by the town
and will be subject to fire mitigation measures to protect the development.
   (G)   Is not on land subject to a conservation easement;
   (H)   Is not located on a site that would require the demolition of the
following types of housing:
      (1)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law
that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of moderate,
low, or very low income.
      (2)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of its police power.
      (3)   Housing that has been occupied by tenants within the past ten
years.
      (4)   Housing that is occupied by tenants and units at the property are,
or were, subsequently offered for sale to the general public by the subdivider
or subsequent owner of the property.
   (I)   Is on a site previously used for housing that was occupied by tenants
that was demolished within the preceding ten years;
   (J)   Does not require the demolition of a historic structure that was
placed on a national, state, or local historic register;
   (K)   Does not require an exception, modification or any other discretionary
entitlement;
   (L)   Complies with the town's objective zoning standards, objective
subdivision standards, and objective design standards, excluding any additional
density or other concessions, incentives, or waivers of standards requested
under
Chapter 17.050, Affordable Housing Density Bonus.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.026.060 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   An applicant shall file a notice of intent to submit an application in
the form of a Preliminary Application that includes all of the information
required by Cal. Gov't Code § 65941.1 as that section read on January 1, 2020.
Complete building permit applications for the project shall be submitted
concurrently with the preliminary application. Planning staff shall provide
templates for preliminary applications to applicants on request and shall be
available on the town's website. The preliminary application shall be
accompanied by the required fee as established by the town.
   (B)   Within 180 calendar days after filing a preliminary application, an
applicant shall submit a formal application for ministerial review, provided
scoping consultation has concluded consistent with division (C), below.
   (C)   Scoping consultation.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the preliminary application, the town shall contact
the Native American Heritage Commission for assistance in identifying any
California Native American tribe that should be notified. The Planning Director
shall provide a formal notice of the applicant's intent to submit a formal
application to each required California Native American tribe within 30 days of
preliminary application submittal. The formal notice shall be consistent with
Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4(b).
      (2)   If within 30 days of receipt of the formal notice, any California
Native American tribe that was formally noticed accepts the invitation to
engage in scoping consultation, the Planning Director shall commence scoping
consultation within 30 days of receiving that response.
      (3)   The scoping consultation shall be conducted consistent with Cal.
Gov't Code § 65913.4(b). If, after scoping consultation is concluded, a
development is not eligible for a streamlined ministerial approval, the
Planning Director shall provide written documentation as required by Cal. Gov't
Code § 65913.4(b) to the applicant and any California Native American tribe
that is a party to that scoping consultation.
      (4)   Tribal consultation concludes either 1) upon documentation of an
enforceable agreement regarding the treatment of tribal resources at the
project site or 2) one or more parties to the consultation, acting in good
faith and after a reasonable effort, conclude that a mutual agreement cannot be
achieved.
   (D)   If the development remains eligible to apply streamlined ministerial
approval after scoping consultation has concluded, an applicant may file a
formal application. Only the items necessary to determine compliance with the
provisions contained in Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4(a) and with any applicable
objective standards shall be required.
   (E)   The review of a formal application shall be done by the Planning
Director to determine if the application complies with all of the provisions
contained in this chapter, Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4(a), and applicable
objective standards and shall occur within the following timeframes:
      (1)   Within 90 calendar days of formal application submittal for
applications that include 150 or fewer housing units.
      (2)   Within 180 calendar days of formal application submittal for
applications that include 151 or more housing units.
   (F)   If the formal application does not demonstrate compliance with all of
the provisions contained in Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4(a) and all applicable
objective standards, the Planning Director shall provide the applicant with
written documentation of which standards the development conflicts with and an
explanation of the reasons the development conflicts with each standard. If the
application can be brought into compliance with minor changes to the proposal
(e.g., changes in building dimensions that are less than ten percent), the
Planning Director may allow the development proponent to correct any
deficiencies within the timeframes for determining project consistency
specified in division (E)(2) above. For major changes, a new application will
be required.
   (G)   The Planning Director is the review authority for ministerial
approvals for qualifying housing developments. The Planning Director shall
approve a formal application upon finding that all of the requirements of Cal.
Gov't Code § 65913.4 and this chapter have been met. The Planning Director may
impose reasonable conditions of approval, provided those conditions of approval
are objective and broadly applicable to development within the town.
   (H)   Any necessary subsequent permits shall be issued on a ministerial
basis subject to applicable objective standards. If a public improvement is
necessary to implement a development subject to this chapter, and that public
improvement is located on land owned by the town, the town shall process any
approvals needed as required by Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4(h).
   (I)   Post-Approval Modifications.
      (1)   An applicant or the Planning Director may request a modification to
an approved development if that request is made prior to the issuance of the
final building permit.
      (2)   The town shall only apply objective standards in effect when the
original application was submitted, except that objective standards adopted
after the date of original submittal may be applied in any of the following
instances:
         (a)   The total number of residential units or total square footage of
construction changes by 15 percent or more; or
         (b)   The total number of residential units or total square footage of
construction changes by five percent or more, and it is necessary to subject
the development to an objective standard beyond those in effect when the
application was submitted in order to mitigate or avoid a specific adverse
impact upon public health of safety, for which there is no feasible alternative
method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid; or
         (c)   Objective building standards contained in the California
Building Code, as adopted by the town, may be applied to all modifications.
      (3)   The Planning Director shall determine if the modification is
consistent with applicable objective standards and issue a decision on the
applicant's modification request within 60 days after submittal.
      (4)   An application approved consistent with this chapter shall remain
valid for three years; however, an application approval shall not expire if the
development includes public investment in housing affordability, beyond tax
credits, where 50 percent of the units are affordable to households making at
or below 80 percent of the area median income consistent with Cal. Gov't Code §
65913.4(e).
      (5)   At the discretion of the Director, a one-year extension may be
granted consistent with Cal. Gov't Code § 65913.4(e)
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.027: PROCEDURES FOR SB 330
APPLICATIONS FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
17.027.010   Title
   
17.027.020   Purpose
   
17.027.030   Applicability
   
17.027.040   Definitions
   
17.027.050   Application filing
   
17.027.060   Review timeframes
   
17.027.070   Compliance determination
   
17.027.080   Findings and decision
   
17.027.090   Post-decision procedures
§ 17.027.010 TITLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Procedures for SB 330
Applications for Housing Developments.”
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to specify how the town will implement
streamlined review procedures and establish vested rights for qualifying
housing developments, including mixed-use projects, pursuant to Senate Bill 330
(SB 330), the Housing Crisis Act of 2019.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.030 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This section applies to qualifying housing development projects as
defined by Cal. Gov't Code § 65589.5(h)(2), including multi-family development,
mixed use projects with at least two-thirds of the building area devoted to
residential uses, and/or transitional and supportive housing.
   (B)   This section shall remain in effect for the same time period as
provisions contained in the Cal. Gov't Code § 65589.5 (Housing Accountability
Act). Any provisions that are not extended by the State Legislature shall be
repealed as of the date those provisions in the Housing Accountability Act are
deemed null and void.
   (C)   This section provides additional procedures that shall be followed for
qualifying housing development projects. If conflicts occur between other
permitting and approval procedures in this title and the procedures of this
section, this section shall control.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.040 DEFINITIONS.
   Terms defined in Cal. Gov't. Code § 65589.5 shall apply to this section and
shall control in the event of a conflict between definitions in this title and
definitions in Cal. Gov't. Code § 65589.5.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.050 APPLICATION FILING.
   (A)   To receive the vested rights and benefit from the streamlining
established for SB 330 applications, the applicant may initiate the process by
filing a preliminary application consistent with Government Code § 65941.1.
      (1)   A preliminary application shall be filed on the standardized form
adopted by the California Department of Housing and Community Development
unless the Planning Commission has adopted a form for use for SB330
applications.
      (2)   Within 180 calendar days after submitting a preliminary
application, an applicant shall submit a full application for the housing
development.
   (B)   An applicant may file a full application for a zoning permit for a
qualifying housing development without filing a preliminary application. The
full application shall be filed on a form provided by the Town of Fairfax
accompanied by the required fee. Complete building permit applications for a
qualifying housing project shall be submitted concurrently with the full
application.
   (C)   Compliance review.
      (1)   Scope of review. housing development for which a preliminary
application was submitted shall only be subject to the ordinances, policies,
and objective standards adopted and in effect when the preliminary application
is submitted, except in the following circumstances:
         (a)   A fee, charge, or other monetary exaction increase resulting
from an automatic annual adjustment based on an independently published cost
index that is referenced in the ordinance or resolution establishing the fee or
monetary exaction.
         (b)   A preponderance of the evidence in the record establishes that
subjecting the housing development to an ordinance, policy, or standard beyond
those in effect when the preliminary application was submitted is necessary to
mitigate or avoid a specific, adverse impact upon the public health or safety,
and there is no feasible alternative method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid
the adverse impact.
         (c)   Subjecting the housing development to an ordinance, policy,
standard, or any other measure, beyond those in effect when the preliminary
application was submitted is necessary to avoid or substantially lessen an
impact consistent with the California Environmental Quality Act.
         (d)   The housing development has not commenced construction within
2.5 years following the date of the housing development's final approval (as
defined in Cal. Gov't. Code § 65589.5(o)(1)(D)).
         (e)   The number of residential units or square footage of
construction proposed changes by 20 percent or more, exclusive of any increase
resulting from a density bonus, incentive, concession, waiver, or similar
provision.
      (2)   When no preliminary application was submitted, a housing
development shall be subject to objective standards in effect when the full
application was deemed complete.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.060 REVIEW TIMEFRAMES.
   (A)   Full applications for housing development containing 150 or fewer
units shall be reviewed for compliance with applicable objective standards
within 30 calendar days of being deemed complete.
   (B)   Full applications for housing development containing more than 150
units shall be reviewed for compliance with applicable objective standards
within 60 calendar days of being deemed complete.
   (C)   The Planning Director shall be the Review Authority consistent with
the Town of Fairfax's permitting procedures for the full application.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.070 COMPLIANCE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The Review Authority shall identify the specific objective standard(s)
that the project does not comply with and provide an explanation of the reason
(s) why the housing development is considered to be inconsistent or non-
compliant with identified provisions and shall provide the written
determination to the applicant.
   (B)   A housing development is considered in compliance with this title, and
shall not require a zoning map amendment, if the housing development complies
with objective general plan standards and land use designations, but the zoning
for the housing development site is inconsistent with the general plan.
   (C)   If a housing development complies with all of the applicable objective
zoning, design, and subdivision standards, the town shall not conduct more than
five public hearings (including continuances), workshops, study sessions, or
similar meetings after the full application is deemed complete in connection
with the approval of the housing development. This limitation is established by
Cal. Gov't. Code § 65905.5. Meetings required by CEQA are exempt from the
limit.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.080 FINDINGS AND DECISION.
   (A)   If the proposed housing development complies with applicable objective
general plan, zoning, design and subdivision standards, the Planning Commission
may only deny the housing development or conditionally approve the housing
development at a lower density if it makes written findings supported by a
preponderance of the evidence in the record that:
      (1)   The housing development would have a specific, adverse impact upon
the public health or safety unless the housing development is denied or
conditionally approved at a lower density. A “specific, adverse impact” means a
“significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on identified
written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they
existed on the date that the project was deemed complete”; and
      (2)   There is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
adverse impact other than the denial of the housing development or conditional
approval of the housing development at a lower density.
   (B)   If the housing development includes 20 percent of units affordable to
very low or low-income households, 100 percent of units affordable or
moderate- or middle-income households, or an emergency shelter, the Planning
Commission shall approve the housing development unless the Commission makes
written findings supported by a preponderance of the evidence in the record, as
to at least one of the findings in Cal. Gov't. Code § 65589.5(d).
   (C)   The Planning Director shall approve or deny the housing development
within the applicable time periods established in Cal. Gov't. Code § 65950 and
related sections.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.027.090 POST-DECISION PROCEDURES.
   The town's post-decision procedures for the required permit based on the
full application shall be followed provided those procedures do not conflict
with Cal. Gov't. Code §65589.5.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.028: VARIANCES
Section
   
17.028.010   Purpose
   
17.028.020   Granting authority; considerations
   
17.028.030   Grant or denial; imposition of conditions
   
17.028.040   Application
   
17.028.050   Action by Planning Commission
   
17.028.060   Public hearing; notice
   
17.028.070   Required findings
   
17.028.080   Zoning permit issuance
   
17.028.090   Time limits; extensions
   
17.028.100   Revocation
   
17.028.110   Appeals
   
17.028.120   New application
   
17.028.130   Exemptions
§ 17.028.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to allow variation from the strict
application of the terms of this title where, by reason of exceptional
narrowness, shallowness or unusual shape of a specific piece of property on the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, or by reason of
exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary situations or
conditions of the piece of property, or of the use or development of the
property immediately adjoining the piece of property in question, the literal
enforcement of the requirements of this title would involve practical
difficulties or would cause undue hardship unnecessary to carry out the spirit
and purpose of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979)
§ 17.028.020 GRANTING AUTHORITY; CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)    The Planning Commission may grant a variance for structures, as
defined in this title, which do not meet the height, number of stories, yard or
lot coverage requirements, and for projects which do not meet off-street
parking and loading requirements, except as otherwise required.
   (B)   In considering an application for a variance, the Planning Commission
shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent uses and
structures, to the physical environs of the proposed use and to all pertinent
aspects of the public health safety and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -1981)
§ 17.028.030 GRANT OR DENIAL; IMPOSITION OF CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period,
may be granted subject to the conditions as the Planning Commission may
prescribe, or may be denied.
   (B)   In authorizing or approving a variance, the Planning Commission may
impose such requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction,
appearance, maintenance or operation, in addition to those aspects expressly
stipulated in the ordinance for the particular use, as the Planning Commission
maydeem necessary for the protection of adjacent property and the public
interest.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may further require the bonds, sureties or
other guarantees as it deems necessary in each case, that the conditions will
be complied with.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -1981)
§ 17.028.040 APPLICATION.
   A verified application for a variance shall be made by the property owner or
his or her agent, on a form prescribed by the Planning Commission, and be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees fixed and adopted
by the Town Council. The application shall be accompanied by drawings required
by the Building Code, and, in addition, by a plot plan showing the lot lines
and dimensions and location of the improvements with dimensions and other data
necessary to show that all other provisions of this title are fulfilled.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979)
§ 17.028.050 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall act on an application for a variance
within 45 days after the date on which the application is filed, unless
additional time is allowed by the applicant or his or her authorized agent or
representative within the time limits prescribed by State of California
planning law.
   (B)   (1)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within the time
specified or otherwise established shall constitute denial of the variance.
      (2)   Denial of the variance by the Planning Commission, including denial
by reason of failure ofthe Planning Commission to act, is appealable in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.036.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979)
§ 17.028.060 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   No variance shall be approved or issued unless and until a public
hearing thereon is held.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, together with a
brief statement of the nature of the application shall be given in the same
manner as provided for in §
17.004.070.
   (C)    Additional notice of the public hearing, as provided in division (B)
above, may be given to owners and renters of other property within 500 feet of
applicant’s parcel when, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the
properties would be affected by the proceedings so noticed. The subject
property shall be posted by the applicant in a manner described in the Town of
Fairfax submittal packet at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
   (D)   Any error, irregularity, informality or omission as to noticing shall
not void or invalidate the proceedings, considerations or disposition of a
variance application, except as may be otherwise provided under Cal. Gov’t Code
§ 65010.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -1994 ; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006 )
§ 17.028.070 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   The final disposition of each variance shall be in accordance with the facts
of the particular case and the facts must support the following determinations
and findings before a variance may be approved:
   (A)   All of the following findings must be made in order to grant a
variance:
      (1)   Because of special circumstances applicable to the property,
including size, shape,topography, location of surroundings, the strict
application of this title will deprive the applicant of privileges enjoyed by
other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zone classification;
      (2)   The variance or adjustment will not constitute a grant of special
privilege, is consistent with the limitations upon other properties in the
vicinity and under identical zone classification, and is consistent with the
objectives of this title;
      (3)   The strict application of this title would result in excessive or
unreasonable hardship;
      (4)   The granting of the variance or adjustment will not be detrimental
to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity in which
the property is situated.
   (B)   Findings for variances of off-street parking or off-street loading
regulations.
      (1)   Neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by
the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity reasonably require
strict or literal interpretation and enforcement of the specified regulation.
      (2)   Granting of the variance will not result in the parking or loading
of vehicles on public streets in a manner as to interfere with the free flow of
traffic on the streets.
      (3)   Granting of the variance will not create a safety hazard or any
other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.070)  (Ord. 352, passed --1973; Am. Ord. 461, passed --
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed --1981)
§ 17.028.080 ZONING PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   Following the issuance of a variance by the Planning Commission and in the
absence of any appeal thereunder, the Planning Director shall issue a zoning
permit and shall determine that development is undertaken in compliance with
the permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -1981)
§ 17.028.090 TIME LIMITS; EXTENSIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any permit granted for
a variance shall comply with §
17.040.110 (“Permit Time Limits and Extensions”) of
Chapter 17.040 (“General Zone Regulations”).
(Ord. 837, passed 10-2-2019)
§ 17.028.100 REVOCATION.
   A variance granted subject to a condition or conditions shall be revoked by
the Planning Commission if the condition or conditions are not complied with;
provided that, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -1981)
§ 17.028.110 APPEALS.
   Appeals may be made as provided herein under Chapter 17.032 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979)
§ 17.028.120 NEW APPLICATION.
   Following the denial or revocation of a variance application, no application
for the same or substantially the same variance on the same or substantially
the same site shall be filed within six months of the date of denial or
revocation of the variance, unless the denial or revocation is made without
prejudice.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -1981)
§ 17.028.130 EXEMPTIONS.
   The granting of a variance shall not be required for any of the following:
   (A)   Variations of site standards approved by the Town Council in
connection with approval of a preliminary development plan or master
development plan in accord with the provisions of
Chapters 17.112 and
17.120 of this title; or
   (B)   The alteration of an existing structure which does not increase the
discrepancy between existing conditions and any site standard even though
present conditions on the site do not conform with the regulations for the
district in which the site is located; provided that, the alteration is in
compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 17.016 of this title; and provided that, the alteration is not a second
story addition, or does not involve a new window or door opening in a wall
facing a substandard side or rear yard; and provided that, the property does
not have non-conforming parking.
(Prior Code, § 17.16.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -197 3 ; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -1981)
CHAPTER 17.032: USE PERMITS
Section
   
17.032.010   Purpose
   
17.032.020   Granting authority; consideration; conditions
   
17.032.030   Application
   
17.032.040   Action by Planning Commission
   
17.032.050   Public hearing; notice
   
17.032.060   Required findings
   
17.032.065   Conditions of approval
   
17.032.070   Permit issuance
   
17.032.080   Zoning permit issuance
   
17.032.090   Appeals
   
17.032.100   Time limits; extensions
§ 17.032.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the conditional use permit is to allow the proper
integration into Fairfax of uses which may be suitable only in certain
locations in the town or in a zone or only if the uses are designed or laid out
on the site in a particular manner.
   (B)   In consideration of an application for a conditional use, the Planning
Commission shall give due regard to the nature and condition of all adjacent
uses and structures, to the physical environs of the proposed use and to all
pertinent aspects of the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.032.020 GRANTING AUTHORITY; CONSIDERATION; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A permit for a conditional use, revocable, conditional or valid for a
term, may be issued or granted by the Planning Commission for any of theuses or
purposes for which the permits are required or permitted by the terms of this
title.
   (B)   The Town Council may deny, approve, approve with amendments, deletions
or other modifications, in whole or in part, an application for a use permit.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may deny an application for a use permit. The
Planning Commission’s denial of a use permit is appealable in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 17.036.
   (D)   In authorizing or approving a conditional use permit, the Council may
impose the requirements and conditions with respect to location, construction,
appearance, maintenance or operation, in addition to those aspects expressly
stipulated in the ordinance for the particular use, as the Council may deem
necessary for the protection of adjacent property and the public interest.
   (E)   The Council may further require such bonds, sureties or other
guarantees as it deems necessary in each case, that the conditions may be
complied with.
   (F)   Granting of a conditional use permit does not exempt the applicant
from complying with the requirements of the Building Code or other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.032.030 APPLICATION.
   A verified application for a use permit shall be made by the property owner
or his or her agent on aform prescribed by the Planning Commission, and be
accompanied by a fee in accordance with the schedule of fees fixed and adopted
by the Town Council. The application shall be accompanied by drawings required
by the Building Code, and, in addition, by a plot plan showing the lot lines
and dimensions and location of the improvements with dimensions and other data
necessary to show that yard requirements and all other provisions of this title
are fulfilled.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978)
§ 17.032.040 ACTION BY PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall act on an application for a use permit
within 45 days after the date on which the application is filed unless
additional time is allowed by applicant or his or her authorized agent or
representative.
   (B)   (1)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within the time
specified or otherwise established, shall constitute denial of the use permit.
      (2)   Denial of the use permit by the Planning Commission, including
denial by reason of failure of the Planning Commission to act, is appealable in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.036 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.032.050 PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   (A)   No use permit shall be approved or issued and no conditional use shall
be authorized unless and until a public hearing thereon is held.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, together with a
brief statement of the nature of the application, shall be given in the same
manner as provided in §
17.004.070.
   (C)    Additional notice of the public hearing, as provided in division (B)
of this section, may be given to owners and renters of other property within
500 feet of the applicant’s parcel, when, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, the properties would be affected by the proceedings so noticed. The
subject property shall be posted by the applicant in a manner described in the
Town of Fairfax submittal packet at least 10 days prior to the public hearing.
   (D)   Any error, irregularity, informality or omission as to noticing shall
not void or invalidate the proceedings, considerations or disposition of a use
permit application, except as may be otherwise provided under Cal. Gov’t Code §
65010.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994 ; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006 )
§ 17.032.060 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
    The final disposition of each use permit shall be in accord with the facts
of the particular case and the facts shall support the following determinations
and findings before a use permit may be approved. They may refer to a town
resolution, ordinance, or record of the action on the application.
   (A)   The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the use
conform to the General Plan and the land use designations for the project site
and to the objective zoning standards and objective design standards that apply
to the proposed use at the proposed location;
   (B)   The approval of the use permit shall not constitute a grant of special
privilege and shall not contravene the doctrines of equity and equal treatment;
   (C)   The development and use of property, as approved under the use permit,
shall not create a public nuisance arising from the emission of odor, dust,
gas, noise, vibration, smoke, heat, or glare at a level exceeding ambient
conditions or applicable performance standards, or cause significant adverse
physical or environmental effects to abutting or adjoining properties and the
surrounding neighborhood, or create undue or excessive burdens in the use and
enjoyment thereof, any or all of which effects are substantially beyond that
which might occur without approval or issuance of the use permit;
   (D)   Approval of the use permit is not contrary to those objectives, goals
or objective standards pertinent to the particular use and location and
contained or set forth in the General Plan, this title, any master plan,
development plan or other plan or policy, officially adopted by the town; and
   (E)   Approval of the use permit will result in equal or better development
of the premises than would otherwise be the case, and that the approval is in
the public interest and for the protection or enhancement of the community.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.032.065 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL.
   The Planning Commission has the authority to impose reasonable conditions
that are related and proportionate to what is being requested by the applicant,
as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure that the provisions of the
General Plan, any applicable master plan or precise development plan adopted by
the Town Council, and this title are met. The Commission may require reasonable
guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied
with.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.032.070 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   Should the Planning Commission be satisfied that the proposed structure or
use conforms to the requirements of the terms of this title, that any
additional conditions stipulated by the Planning Commission, deemed necessary
to the public interest have been or will be met, that the use will not under
the circumstances of the particular case constitute a nuisance or be
detrimental to the public welfare of the community and otherwise conforms to
the findings of fact hereinabove set forth, the Planning Commission may grant a
conditional use permit subject to the rights of appeal or directed referral set
forth in this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991)
§ 17.032.080 ZONING PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   Following the issuance of any use permit by the Planning Commission and in
the absence of any appeal or directed referral, the town shall issue a zoning
permit and shall determine that development and use of the property is
undertaken in compliance with the permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984)
§ 17.032.090 APPEALS.
   Appeals may be made as provided herein under Chapter 17.036 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.18.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.032.100 TIME LIMITS; EXTENSIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any conditional use
permit shall comply with § 17.04.110 (“Permit Time Limits and Extensions”) of
Chapter 17.040 (“General Zone Regulations”).
(Ord. 837, passed 10-2-2019)
CHAPTER 17.036: APPEALS AND DIRECTED REFERRALS
Section
   
17.036.010   Appeals; purpose
   
17.036.020   Appeals; by whom made
   
17.036.030   Appeals; stay of proceedings
   
17.036.040   Appeals; notice of hearing
   
17.036.050   Appeals; submission of record
   
17.036.060   Appeals; action by Council
   
17.036.070   Appeals; review of Council action by courts
   
17.036.080   Appeals; filing fees
   
17.036.090   Directed referrals; purpose
   
17.036.100   Directed referrals; procedure
   
17.036.110   Directed referrals; time limit
   
17.036.120   Directed referrals; basis
   
17.036.130   Directed referrals; action by Council
   
17.036.140   Directed referral to take precedence over appeal
§ 17.036.010 APPEALS; PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the appeal procedure is to provide recourse in case it is
alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or
determination made by an administrative official, advisory body or Planning
Commission in the administration or enforcement of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.036.020 APPEALS; BY WHOM MADE.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of an administrative official, advisory
body or the Planning Commission, in the administration or enforcement ofthis
title, may make verified application to the Town Clerk in the manner prescribed
by the Town Council within ten days of any action that is appealed to the Town
Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.036.030 APPEALS; STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.
   Application shall stay all proceedings and furtherance the action appealed
from unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies that a stay
would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.036.040 APPEALS; NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing shall be given in the
same manner required for the hearing conducted by the body whose decision is
the subject of the appeal.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.036.050 APPEALS; SUBMISSION OF RECORD.
   A full record, in writing, shall be submitted by the officer or body whose
action is appealed, setting forth the reasons for action taken.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.036.060 APPEALS; ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   The Council may, within the terms of this title, affirm, reverse or modify
the action appealed as it deems just and equitable and the Council may exercise
all rights of any other officer or Planning Commission in acting upon the
matter appealed. The Council may conduct a de novo hearing on the entire
pending application and shall not be limited to a consideration of the grounds
set forth in the appeal application. Except as otherwise provided by law, a
tie-vote of the Town Council, which is not followed by a continuance of the
matter for further consideration, shall be deemed a denial of the pending
application.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 563, passed - -
1987; Am. Ord. 650, passed - -1996)
§ 17.036.070 APPEALS; REVIEW OF COUNCIL ACTION BY COURTS.
   Action of the Town Council may be reviewed by courts having jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.036.080 APPEALS; FILING FEES.
   The filing fee for any planning action provided by ordinance, for which no
fee is currently established, shall be paid according to a schedule adopted by
resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978)
§ 17.036.090 DIRECTED REFERRALS; PURPOSE.
   (A)   Sections
17.036.090 through
17.036.130 are established to permit the Town Council to assume jurisdiction on
applications where action has been taken and is normally final at a lesser
level of authority.
   (B)   The sections are intended to be used as an additional safeguard to
avoid results inconsistent with the purposes of Title 17.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 793, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 17.036.100 DIRECTED REFERRALS; PROCEDURE.
   In exercising the authority granted by §§
17.036.090 through
17.036.130, a written directive, signed by at least one Council member, must be
submitted to the Town Manager. The form shall be prescribed by the Town Clerk.
No fee shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 793, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 17.036.110 DIRECTED REFERRALS; TIME LIMIT.
   Directed referral action must be exercised within the established time
limits for appeals for a particular action or, in the case where no time limit
for appeal is specified, within ten working days of the action being referred.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984)
§ 17.036.120 DIRECTED REFERRALS; BASIS.
   In directing that an action be referred to the Town Council, there shall be
a presumption applied that the reason for the directive is that the action has
significant and material effects on the quality of life within the town. No
inference of bias shall be presumed due to such a request for review being made
by one or more Council members.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 793, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 17.036.130 DIRECTED REFERRALS; ACTION BY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Any action brought before the Town Council by the directed referral
process is before the Council in a state of full review. The Council may
conduct a de novo hearing on the pending application. All alternatives
available to the primary authority are also available to the Council such that
approval, approval with conditions or denial action may be taken by the
Council.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a tie-vote of the Town
Councilshall be deemed a denial of the pending application.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 650, passed - -1996; Am. Ord. 793, passed 6-3-2015)
§ 17.036.140 DIRECTED REFERRAL TO TAKE PRECEDENCE OVER APPEAL.
   Where an action is appealed and a directed review is called, the directed
review procedure shall take precedence and the appeal shall be void; i.e.,
where a plan review action is appealed and a directed review is called the
directed review shall be heard by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.20.140) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 513, passed - -
1984)
CHAPTER 17.040: GENERAL ZONE REGULATIONS
Section
Article I: Generally
   
17.040.010   Lot coverage
   
17.040.020   Setbacks; generally
   
17.040.030   Setbacks for sidewalks; commercial and industrial zones
   
17.040.040   Setbacks; structures adjacent to Fairfax and San Anselmo Creeks
   
17.040.050   Outdoor advertising
   
17.040.060   Businesses to be conducted from buildings
   
17.040.070   Fire protection
   
17.040.080   Commercial air-sea-rail shipping containers prohibited in
residential zones
   
17.040.090   Condominium conversion prohibited
   
17.040.100   Incomplete discretionary permit applications
   
17.040.110   Permit time limits and extensions
Article II: Formula Businesses and Restaurants  in Zones Allowing Commercial
Uses
   
17.040.200      Purpose
   
17.040.210      Definitions
   
17.040.220   Conditional use of formula businesses and restaurants in zones
allowing commercial uses
ARTICLE I: GENERALLY
§ 17.040.010 LOT COVERAGE.
    In all residential zones, no permit shall be granted for the erection or
construction of any building or structure where the total area of all existing
and/or proposed buildings, structures or accessory structures exceeds 35
percent of the total lot area, save and except that a swimming pool shall not
be computed as a part of the percentage, or unless additional coverage is
allowed by variance variance or by a waiver granted under
Chapter 17.044 or a concession or incentive granted for a density bonus for an
affordable housing project under
Chapter 17.050.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.040.020 SETBACKS; GENERALLY.
   Save and except as otherwise specifically provided in this title or by
variance, no accessory structure or building, including a swimming pool,
anypart of which is more than two feet above finished grade, shall be placed in
any yard between the lot and setback line herein established as follows:
   (A)   Front yard setback: ten feet.
   (B)   Rear yard setback: ten feet.
   (C)   Side yard setback: five feet; provided, however, that, if a lot shall
be of an average width less than 50 feet, then the setback line shall be ten
percent of the average width, but in no event less than three feet.
   (D)   All corner lots: all street frontage of any corner lot shall have a
yard setback of ten feet.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979; Am. Ord. 575, passed - -1988)
§ 17.040.030 SETBACKS FOR SIDEWALKS; COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES.
   In any commercial or industrial zone, there shall be a minimum front yard
setback of seven feet for sidewalks, if no sidewalk is provided for in public
right-of-way, except as otherwise provided by use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.040.040 SETBACKS; STRUCTURES ADJACENT TO FAIRFAX AND SAN ANSELMO CREEKS.
   (A)   No building, accessory building, structure or swimming pool shall be
constructed closer to the topof the stream bank of the Fairfax and San Anselmo
creeks than 20 feet or two times the average depth of the bank, whichever is
greater, without authorization by variance, except for retaining walls and
bulkheads which replace failing structures and which do not increase the
height, width, length or configuration of the original structure.
   (B)    All structures approved under this section must comply with the
requirements in Chapter 8.28, Watercourses, of this code.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 495, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 498, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991)
§ 17.040.050 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING.
   No outdoor advertising signs or structures, commonly referred to as “signs,”
shall be permitted in the town save and except as permitted by the provisions
of
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.040.060 BUSINESSES TO BE CONDUCTED FROM BUILDINGS.
   (A)   No business shall be conducted upon any premises in the town, save and
except from a building with four walls and roof constructed under the
provisions of the building code of the town.
   (B)   The businesses conducted outside may be operated after first obtaining
a conditional use permit from the Planning Commission, as provided in
Chapter 17.032 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.040.070 FIRE PROTECTION.
   (A)   No building or structure shall be erected in any zone and no permit
thereafter shall be issued, until the owner of the property has provided for
adequate water supply for fire protection.
   (B)   The plans for the fire protection must be approved by the Chief of the
Fire Department of the town.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
Cross-reference:
   Fire Code, see Title 7
§ 17.040.080 COMMERCIAL AIR-SEA-RAIL SHIPPING CONTAINERS PROHIBITED
INRESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   No commercial air-sea-rail shipping container shall be permitted upon any
premises in any residential zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 567, passed - -
1988)
§ 17.040.090 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION PROHIBITED.
   No house, apartment or other building shall be converted either to
condominium ownership or stock cooperative ownership in the town.
(Prior Code, § 17.22.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 487, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.040.100 INCOMPLETE DISCRETIONARY PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Review for completeness. Within 30 days of receiving a discretionary
permit application, the town shall review the application for completeness and
accuracy of required information before it is accepted and acknowledged as
being complete and officially filed. When the town informs the applicant in
writing within 30 days following the submission of the application(s) that an
application is incomplete and specifies additional information required for
completeness review but applicant fails to submit such information within the
time limits listed in §
17.040.100(A)(1) or (A)(2) below, as applicable, the discretionary permit
application shall expire unless the applicant obtains from the Planning
Director an approved request for extension.
      (1)   General time limit. An incomplete discretionary permit application
shall expire 180 days following the date the town provides written notice that
the application is incomplete, unless the Director grants an extension not to
exceed one additional year. This time limit shall not apply to §
17.040.100(A) (Initial Application Review for Discretionary Permits —
Enforcement cases) below.
      (2)   Enforcement cases. An incomplete discretionary permit application,
submitted to resolve a code enforcement matter, shall expire 60 days following
the date the agency provides written notice that the application is incomplete,
unless the Director grants extensions not to exceed a total of an additional 90
days.
   (B)   Resubmittal. In the event that a discretionary permit application
expires the applicant may submit a new application, subject to all payment of
all applicable fees, in accordance with this Code, and the application review
process will commence again.
   (C)   After a discretionary permit application has been determined to be
complete, the town may require the applicant to submit additional information
necessary to conduct environmental review or otherwise evaluate the application
consistent with applicable requirements.
(Ord. 837, passed 10-2-2019)
§ 17.040.110 PERMIT TIME LIMITS AND EXTENSIONS.
   (a)   Time limits, vesting. Unless conditions of approval or other
applicable law establish a different time limit, any permit or entitlement not
vested within one year of the date of approval shall expire and become void.
Vesting of the permit shall be as provided under state and federal law, which
currently provides that the permit shall not be considered vested until, at a
minimum, the permit holder has performed the following:
      (1)   Obtained a building permit or other similar construction permit,
and
      (2)   Has made substantial progress in reliance thereupon towards
completing the improvements in accordance with the approved permits, or has
actually commenced the allowed use on the subject property, in compliance with
the conditions of approval, or
      (3)   Has recorded a parcel or final map.
   (B)   Extensions of time. Upon request by the applicant, the Planning
Director may extend the time for an approved permit to become vested.
      (1)   Filing. The applicant shall file a written request for an extension
of time with the Planning Department, at least ten days prior to the expiration
of the permit, together with the filing fee in accordance with the schedule of
fees fixed and adopted by the Town Council. The burden of proof is on the
permittee to establish, with substantial evidence, that the permit should not
expire.
      (2)   Review of extension request. The Planning Director shall determine
whether the permit holder has attempted in good faith to comply with the
conditions of the permit. The Director may instead refer the extension request
to the Planning Commission for review.
      (3)   Action on extension. If the Planning Director determines that the
permittee has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in
complying with the conditions in a timely manner, the Planning Director may
extend the permit for a maximum period of one additional year following the
original expiration date. When granting an extension, the Planning Director may
approve or make minor modifications to the approved project based upon a
finding or a change in the laws, codes, or other circumstances surrounding the
original approval so warrant.
      (4)   Hearing on extension. If the Planning Director finds that
significant policy questions are at issue, the Planning Director may refer the
application to the Planning Commission for a public hearing. The expiration
period for the application(s) and/or approval(s) shall be stayed until such
time the Planning Commission rendered a decision on the policy questions and
extension.
      (5)   Coordination of expiration date among multiple permits. If a
building permit, or other permits, are issued during the effective life of the
entitlement or development application approval, the expiration date of the
entitlement or development application approval shall be automatically extended
to coincide with the expiration date of the building permit or other permit.
(Ord. 837, passed 10-2-2019)
ARTICLE II: FORMULA BUSINESSES AND RESTAURANTS
IN ZONES ALLOWING COMMERCIAL USES
§ 17.040.200 PURPOSE.
   The vitality and character of the town’s economy is dependent upon its
small-town, village character and pedestrian scale. It is the purpose of this
article to regulate formula businesses and formula restaurants in the zones
permitting commercial uses in town to ensure the service of local demand for
goods and services, provide a diverse mix of businesses that are compatible
with the needs of area residents, preserve opportunities for owner-operator
businesses, maintain the town’s unique village character, and promote the
pedestrian-orientation of the Town Center Planning Area and pedestrian usage of
the town’s commercial zones.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.040.210 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FORMULA BUSINESS. Any business that is required by a corporate headquarters
or franchise or other arrangement to maintain any of the following:
standardized services, decor, uniforms, architecture, signs or other similar
features. This shall include but not be limited to any retail sales, service,
visitor accommodation, wholesale or industrial operations that was not in
business within the Town of Fairfax prior to April 1, 2000.
   FORMULA RESTAURANT. Any restaurant that is required by a corporate
headquarters or franchise or other arrangement devoted to the preparation and
offering of food and beverage for sale to the public for consumption either on
or off premises and which is required by contractual or other arrangement to
offer any of the following: standardized menus, ingredients, food preparation,
decor, uniforms, architecture or similar standardized features that was not in
business within the Town of Fairfax prior to April 1, 2000.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.040.220 CONDITIONAL USE OF FORMULA BUSINESSES AND RESTAURANTS IN ZONES
ALLOWING COMMERCIAL USES.
   A formula business or formula restaurant may only be established on a site
in a zone allowing commercial uses after obtaining a conditional use permit for
the operation of that use on such site, subject to the limitations of this
article. In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.032 as prerequisite
to the issuance of a conditional use permit, no conditional use permit shall be
issued for a proposed formula business or restaurant unless the Planning
Commission can make all of the following findings:
   (A)   The proposed formula business or restaurant will promote diversity and
variety to assure a balanced mix of commercial uses available to serve both
resident and visitor populations.
   (B)   The proposed formula business or restaurant, together with its design
and improvements, will be consistent with the unique and historic village-like
character of the town, and preserve the unique visual appearance and shopping
and dining experience of the town for its residents and visitors.
   (C)   The proposed formula business or restaurant will provide services or
products which complement existing businesses in the zoning district in which
it is proposed to operate, considering the existence of and proximity to the
same or similar businesses within that zone, and will not have significant
adverse financial impacts to same or similar businesses within that zone.
   (D)   If located within the Town Center Planning Area, the proposed formula
business or restaurant will be consistent with the pedestrian orientation of
the Town Center Planning Area.
   (E)   The proposed formula business or restaurant will help residents avoid
the need to drive out of town for their shopping needs.
   (F)   The proposed formula business or restaurant will be consistent with
all applicable general plan goals, objectives, policies, and programs.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
CHAPTER 17.044: EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
Section
   
17.044.010   Purpose
   
17.044.020   Public utility lines
   
17.044.030   Single-family dwellings on irregular lots
   
17.044.040   Transfer of portion of lot
   
17.044.050   Height limits
   
17.044.060   Yards and open space
   
17.044.070   Projections into required yards
   
17.044.080   Fences, walls, hedges and bulkheads
   
17.044.090   Authority to grant waivers
   
17.044.100   Application requirements and review procedures for waivers
§ 17.044.010 PURPOSE.
   The general requirements and regulations set forth in this title shall be
subject to the specific modifications, allowable waivers, and interpretation
set forth in this chapter. This chapter is intended to provide an alternate
means of granting relief from the requirements of this title for minor
deviations from dimensional and objective zoning and design standards when so
doing would be consistent with the purposes of this title and it is not
possible to grant a variance. Further to this end, it is the policy of the town
to comply with the federal Fair Housing Act, the Americans with Disabilities
Act, the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, and the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act to provide reasonable accommodation
for protected uses and for persons with disabilities seeking fair access to
housing through a waiver of the application of the town's zoning regulations.
This chapter authorizes the Planning Director to grant administrative relief
from the dimensional requirements in this title to achieve these objectives.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.044.020 PUBLIC UTILITY LINES.
   Public utility distribution and transmission lines, both overhead and
underground, shall be permitted in all districts without limitation as to
height and without the necessity of first obtaining a conditional use permit or
building permit; provided, however, that, the routes of proposed electric
transmission lines shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for
recommendation prior to acquisition of rights-of-way therefor.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.044.030 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS ON IRREGULAR LOTS.
   In any residential district where single-family dwellings are a permitted
use, a one-family detached building may be erected on any lot irrespective of
its area or width where each and all of the following circumstances are
present:
   (A)   The lot was of official record in the office of the county recorder of
the County of Marin at the effective date of Fairfax Ord. 102;
   (B)   The owner of the lot does not own any contiguous property; and/or
   (C)   The building conforms with respect to location, lot coverage, height,
floor area and setbacks to the regulations of the zone in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002)
§ 17.044.040 TRANSFER OF PORTION OF LOT.
   While any owner may transfer any lot which meets all of the foregoing
conditions and circumstances at the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this title, it shall be unlawful for any person to transfer a portion of his or
her property where the grantee, in the transfer, receives a lot of less size
than provided for in this title.
(Prior Code, §  17.24.050)  (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.044.050 HEIGHT LIMITS.
   Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this title shall not apply to the
following: church spires; chimneys; belfries; cupolas; domes; monuments; water
towers; fire and hose towers; observation towers; distribution and transmission
towers, lines and poles; windmills; smokestacks; flagpoles.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.044.060 YARDS AND OPEN SPACE.
   No yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of
complying with the provisions of this title or any permit issued thereunder
shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building,
and no yard or other open space on one building site shall be considered as
providing a yard or open space for a building on any other building site.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.044.070 PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED YARDS.
   (A)   Certain architectural features may project into required yards or
courts as follows.
      (1)   Cornices, canopies or eaves may project a distance not exceeding
two feet.
      (2)   Bay windows, balconies, decks and chimneys may project a distance
not exceeding two feet.
      (3)   Bay windows, balconies, decks and chimneys may project a distance
not exceeding two feet unless greater projection is required by the building
code of the town.
   (B)   Projection allowed in this section shall not come closer than three
feet to a property line unless otherwise allowed by variance.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979)
§ 17.044.080 FENCES, WALLS, HEDGES AND BULKHEADS.
   (A)   A fence, wall, hedge or bulkhead, maintained so as not to exceed six
feet in height, may be located along side and rear lot lines; provided that,
fences, walls, hedges or bulkheads may be maintained at higher heights only
after obtaining a variance from the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Fences, walls and hedges may be located in required yards as follows.
      (1)   If not exceeding at any point four feet in height above the
elevation of the surface of the ground at such point, they may be located in
any yard or court.
      (2)   If not exceeding at any point six feet in height above the
elevation of the surface of the ground at such point, they may be located at
any point to the rear of the front setback line.
(Prior Code, § 17.24.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 461, passed - -
1979)
§ 17.044.090 AUTHORITY TO GRANT WAIVERS.
   The Planning Director may grant relief from certain dimensional requirements
specified in this title if the required findings are made. The Planning
Director also may grant a waiver that would exceed 10 percent where such a
waiver is necessary to comply with the reasonable accommodation provisions of
State and/or federal law, based on a determination that the specific
circumstances of the application warrant such an accommodation. More
specifically, waivers may be granted for:
   (A)   Setbacks. Up to ten percent of front, side, and rear yard setback
standards.
   (B)   Build-to Lines. Up to ten percent of any standard for building facade
location.
   (C)   Parking. Up to ten percent of the dimensional standards for parking
spaces, aisles, driveways, landscaping, garages on sloping lots, and parking
facility design.
   (D)   Fences. Up to ten percent of the standards for the maximum height and
location of fences.
   (E)   Lot coverage. Up to ten percent of the maximum amount of lot coverage.
A waiver of up to 20 percent of the maximum amount of lot coverage may be
granted for multiple family housing developments to accommodate driveways and
walkways, impervious surface for common open space, decks, patios, and surface
parking.
   (F)   Height. Up to ten percent or two feet of the maximum building height
or other height limitations, whichever is less, excluding height limits for
accessory dwelling units.
   (G)   Landscaping. Up to ten percent of the required landscaping and up to
ten percent of the performance standard for water use.
   (H)   Transparency. Up to ten percent of the minimum ground-floor building
transparency requiring views into buildings.
   (I)   Other standards. Up to ten percent of any other objective development
standard not listed in division (J) below.
   (J)   Exclusions. Waivers cannot be granted for any of the following
standards:
      (1)   Lot area, width, or depth;
      (2)   Maximum number of stories;
      (3)   Minimum number of required parking spaces (except in the case of a
short-term rental);
      (4)   Minimum or maximum residential density; or
      (5)   Maximum floor area ratio (FAR).
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 17.044.100 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR WAIVERS.
   The Planning Director shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny
applications for waivers based on the standards and limitations of the
requirements of this chapter and the following procedures.
   (A)   An application for a waiver shall be filed and processed on a form
provided by planning staff accompanied by the required fee. In addition to any
other application requirements, the application for a waiver shall include data
or other evidence explaining why the findings necessary to grant the waiver,
set forth below, are satisfied.
   (B)   An application for a waiver based on a request for a reasonable
accommodation to ensure access to housing may include a request to exceed the
limits in §
17.044.090. The Planning Director shall issue a written decision within 45 days
of the date the application for a reasonable accommodation is deemed complete,
and may grant the reasonable accommodation request, grant with modifications,
or deny the request. All written decisions shall give notice of the right to
appeal and to request reasonable accommodation in the appeals process.
   (C)   If a request for waiver is being submitted in conjunction with an
application for another approval, permit, or entitlement under this title, it
shall be heard and acted upon at the same time and in the same manner as that
application.
   (D)   A decision to grant a waiver shall be based on the following findings:
      (1)   The waiver is necessary due to the physical characteristics of the
property and the proposed use or structure or other circumstances, including,
but not limited to, topography, noise exposure, irregular property boundaries,
or other unusual circumstance;
      (2)   There are no alternatives to the requested waiver that could
provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant with less potential
detriment to surrounding owners and occupants or to the general public;
      (3)   The granting of the requested waiver will not be detrimental to the
health or safety of the public or the occupants of the property or result in a
change in land use or density that would be inconsistent with the requirements
of this title; and
      (4)   If the waiver requested is to provide reasonable accommodation
pursuant to state or federal law, the Planning Director shall also make one or
more of the following findings in addition to any other findings that this
title requires:
         (a)   That the housing or other property that is the subject of the
request for reasonable accommodation will be used by an individual or
organization entitled to protection;
         (b)   If the request for accommodation is to provide fair access to
housing, that the request for accommodation is necessary to make specific
housing available to an individual protected under State or federal law;
         (c)   That the conditions imposed, if any, are necessary to further a
compelling public interest and represent the least restrictive means of
furthering that interest; and
         (d)   That denial of the requested waiver would impose a substantial
burden on religious exercise or would conflict with any State or federal
statute requiring reasonable accommodation to provide access to housing.
   (E)   The Planning Director has the authority to impose reasonable
conditions that are related and proportionate to what is being requested by the
applicant, as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure that the provisions of
the General Plan, any applicable master plan or precise plan, and this title
are met. The Planning Director may require reasonable guarantees and evidence
that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with. Waivers approved
based on state or federal requirements for reasonable accommodation may be
conditioned to provide for rescission or automatic expiration based on a change
of occupancy or other relevant change in circumstance.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.048: RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND JUNIOR ACCESSORY
DWELLING UNITS
Section
   
17.048.010   Accessory dwelling units
§ 17.048.010 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow and regulate
accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) in
compliance with Cal. Gov’t Code Chapter 13 of Division 1.
   (B)   Effect of conforming. An ADU or JADU that conforms to the standards in
this section will not be:
      (1)   Deemed to be inconsistent with the town's general plan and zoning
designation for the lot on which the ADU or JADU is located.
      (2)   Deemed to exceed the allowable density for the lot on which the ADU
or JADU is located.
      (3)   Considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy, or
program to limit residential growth.
      (4)   Required to correct a nonconforming zoning condition, as defined in
division (C) below. This does not prevent the town from enforcing compliance
with applicable building standards in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 17980.12.
   (C)   Definitions. As used in this section, terms are defined as follows.
Other definitions are included in §
17.008.020:
      ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT or ADU. An attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or
more persons and is located on a lot zoned for residential or mixed uses with a
proposed or existing dwelling. An ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT also includes the
following:
         (a)   An efficiency unit, as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code §
17958.1; and
         (b)   A manufactured home, as defined by Cal. Health and Safety Code §
18007.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure that is accessory and incidental to a
dwelling located on the same lot.
      COMPLETE INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITIES. Permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-
family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated.
      EFFICIENCY KITCHEN. A kitchen that includes all of the following:
         (a)   A cooking facility with appliances.
         (b)   A food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of a
reasonable size in relation to the size of the JADU.
      JUNIOR ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT or JADU. A residential unit that satisfies
all of the following:
         (a)   It is no more than 500 square feet in size.
         (b)   It is contained entirely within an existing or proposed single-
family structure. An enclosed use within the residence, such as an attached
garage, is considered to be a part of and contained within the single-family
structure;
         (c)   It includes its own separate sanitation facilities or shares
sanitation facilities with the existing or proposed single-family structure;
         (d)   If the unit does not include its own separate bathroom, then it
contains an interior entrance to the main living area of the existing or
proposed single-family structure in addition to an exterior entrance that is
separate from the main entrance to the primary dwelling; and
         (e)   Includes an efficiency kitchen, as defined above.
      LIVABLE SPACE. A space in a dwelling intended for human habitation,
including living, sleeping, eating, cooking, or sanitation.
      LIVING AREA. The interior habitable area of a dwelling unit, including
basements and attics, but does not include a garage or any accessory structure.
      MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A structure with two or more attached dwellings on
a single lot (e.g., apartments, attached townhomes, and row houses).
      MULTI-FAMILY LOT. A property with one or more multi-family dwellings.
      NATURAL PERSON. A living human being.
      NONCONFORMING ZONING CONDITION. A physical improvement on a property that
does not conform with current zoning standards.
      PASSAGEWAY. A pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends
from a street to one entrance of the ADU or JADU.
      PROPOSED DWELLING. A dwelling that is the subject of a permit application
and that meets the requirements for permitting.
      PUBLIC TRANSIT. A location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or
train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other
forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are
available to the public.
      TANDEM PARKING. Two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in
any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.
   (D)   Approvals. The following approvals apply to ADUs and JADUs under this
section:
      (1)   Building-permit only. If an ADU or JADU complies with each of the
general requirements below, it is allowed with only a building permit in the
following scenarios:
         (a)   Converted on single-family or mixed-use lot. One ADU as
described in this division (D)(1)(a) and one JADU on a lot zoned for
residential or mixed uses with a proposed or existing dwelling, where the ADU
or JADU:
            1.   Is either: within the space of a proposed single-family
dwelling; within the existing space of an existing single-family dwelling; or
(in the case of an ADU only) within the existing space of an accessory
structure, plus up to 150 additional square feet if the expansion is limited to
accommodating ingress and egress; and
            2.   Has exterior access that is independent of that for the
single-family dwelling; and
            3.   Has side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire and safety, as
dictated by applicable building and fire codes; and
            4.   The JADU complies with the requirements of Cal Gov’t Code §§
66333 through 66339.
         (b)   Limited detached on single-family lot. One detached, new-
construction ADU on a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling
(in addition to any JADU that might otherwise be established on the lot under
division (D)(1) above), if the detached ADU satisfies each of the following
limitations:
            1.   The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four feet.
            2.   The total floor area is 1,200 square feet or smaller.
            3.   The peak height above grade does not exceed the applicable
height limit in division (E)(2)(a) through (c) below.
            4.   Lots that are larger than 10,000 square feet may have a second
detached ADU, subject to the approval of an ADU Permit.
         (c)   Converted on multi-family lot. One or more ADUs within portions
of existing multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space,
including but not limited to storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics,
basements, or garages, if each converted ADU complies with state building
standards for dwellings. Under this division, at least one converted ADU is
allowed within an existing multifamily dwelling, up to a quantity equal to 25%
of the existing multifamily dwelling units.
         (d)   Limited detached on multi-family lot. No more than two detached
ADUs on a lot with a proposed multifamily dwelling, or up to eight detached
ADUs on a lot with an existing multifamily dwelling, if each detached ADU
satisfies all of the following :
            1.   The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four feet. If
the existing multifamily dwelling has a rear or side yard setback of less than
four feet, the town will not require any modification to the multifamily
dwelling as a condition of approving the ADU.
            2.   The peak height above grade does not exceed the applicable
height limit provided in division (E)(2)(a) through (c) below.
            3.   If the lot has an existing multifamily dwelling, the quantity
of detached ADUs does not exceed the number of primary dwelling units on the
lot.
      (2)   ADU permit.
         (a)   Except as allowed under subsection (D)(1) above, no ADU may be
created without a building permit and an ADU permit in compliance with the
standards set forth in divisions (E) and (F) below.
         (b)   An ADU permit is required for:
            1.   Additions to existing structures (e.g. attached ADUs) not
specified under (D)(1) above.
            2.   A second detached or attached ADU on lots larger than 10,000
square feet.
            3.   All qualifying ADUs not specified under (D)(1) above.
         (c)   The ADU-permit processing fee is established by Town Ordinance
No. 844. Any building permit fees shall be in addition to the ADU-permit
processing fee. Application processing fees and building permit fees for ADUs
and JADUs, as applicable, will be reduced by 50% as part of an incentive
program to encourage residents to legalize or create accessory dwelling units.
In addition to the foregoing, while the incentive program remains in effect,
any property with a non-permitted ADU or JADU that is legalized pursuant to
this section will not be assessed a financial penalty for failing to obtain a
permit required by this section. This incentive program expires on January 1,
2032.
      (3)   Process and timing.
         (a)   An ADU permit is considered and approved ministerially, without
discretionary review or hearing.
         (b)   The town must approve or deny an application to create an ADU or
JADU within 60 days from the date that the town receives a completed
application. If the town has not approved or denied the completed application
within 60 days, the application is deemed approved unless either:
            1.   The applicant requests a delay, in which case the 60-day time
period is tolled for the period of the requested delay, or
            2.   When an application to create an ADU or JADU is submitted with
a permit application to create a new single-family or multifamily dwelling on
the lot, the town may delay acting on the permit application for the ADU or
JADU until the town acts on the permit application to create the new single-
family or multifamily dwelling, but the application to create the ADU or JADU
will still be considered ministerially without discretionary review or a
hearing.
         (c)   If the town denies an application to create an ADU or JADU, the
town must provide the applicant with comments that include, among other things,
a list of all the defective or deficient items and a description of how the
application may be remedied by the applicant. Notice of the denial and
corresponding comments must be provided to the applicant within the 60-day time
period established by division (D)(3)(a) above.
         (d)   A demolition permit for a detached garage that is to be replaced
with an ADU is reviewed with the application for the ADU and issued at the same
time.
   (E)   General ADU and JADU requirements. The following requirements apply to
all ADUs and JADUs that are approved under divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) above:
      (1)   Zoning.
         (a)   ADUs are permitted in the zoning districts and overlay zones
listed below that allow residential use, and must be accessory to a permitted
residential use.
            1.   RS-7.5 Single-family Residential Zone, Medium Density.
            2.   RS-6 Single-family Residential Zone, High Density.
            3.   RD 5.5-7 Residential Zone, High Density.
            4.   RM Multiple-family Residential Zone.
            5.   RM-S Multiple-family Residential Senior Residential Zone.
            6.   CL Limited Commercial Zone.
            7.   CH Highway Commercial Zone.
            8.   CC Central Commercial Zone.
            9.   POD Planned Development District Zone.
            10.   SF-RMP Single-family Residential Master Planned District.
            11.   A-A Agricultural and Conservation District.
            12.   UR Upland Residential Zone.
            13.   WHO Workforce Housing Overlay Zone.
         (b)   In accordance with Gov’t Code § 66333(a), a JADU may only be
created on a lot zoned for single-family residences.
      (2)   Height.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided by division (E)(2)(b) and (E)(2)(c)
below, a detached ADU created on a lot with an existing or proposed single
family or multifamily dwelling unit may not exceed 16 feet in height.
         (b)   A detached ADU may be up to 18 feet in height if it is created
on a lot with an existing or proposed single family or multifamily dwelling
unit that is located within one-half mile walking distance of a major transit
stop or high quality transit corridor, as those terms are defined in § 21155 of
the Cal. Public Resources Code, and the ADU may be up to two additional feet in
height (for a maximum of 20 feet) if necessary to accommodate a roof pitch on
the ADU that is aligned with the roof pitch of the primary dwelling unit.
         (c)   A detached ADU created on a lot with an existing or proposed
multifamily dwelling that has more than one story above grade may not exceed 18
feet in height.
         (d)   An ADU that is attached to the primary dwelling may not exceed
25 feet in height or the height limitation imposed by the underlying zone that
applies to the primary dwelling, whichever is lower.
         (e)   Notwithstanding divisions(E)(2)(a) though (d) above, ADUs may
not exceed two stories.
         (f)   For purposes of this division (E)(2), height is measured from
existing legal grade or the level of the lowest floor, whichever is lower, to
the peak of the structure.
      (3)   Fire sprinklers.
         (a)   Fire sprinklers are required in an ADU if sprinklers are
required in the primary residence and may be required by the Fire Department.
         (b)   The construction of an ADU does not trigger a requirement for
fire sprinklers to be installed in the existing primary dwelling.
      (4)   Rental term. No ADU or JADU may be rented for a term that is
shorter than 31 days. An ADU/JADU constructed prior to January 1, 2020 with a
building permit issued for the construction of the ADU/JADU is not subject to
this rental term.
      (5)   No separate conveyance. An ADU or JADU may be rented, but, except
as otherwise provided in Gov’t Code § 66341, no ADU or JADU may be sold or
otherwise conveyed separately from the lot and the primary dwelling (in the
case of a single-family lot) or from the lot and all of the dwellings (in the
case of a multifamily lot).
      (6)   Septic system. If the ADU or JADU will connect to an onsite
wastewater- treatment system, the owner must include with the application
demonstration of compliance with applicable County of Marin Environmental
Health Services requirements for onsite wastewater treatment.
      (7)   Owner occupancy.
         (a)   ADUs created under this section on or after January 1, 2020 are
not subject to an owner-occupancy requirement.
         (b)   As required by state law, all JADUs are subject to an owner-
occupancy requirement. A natural person with legal or equitable title to the
property must reside on the property, in either the primary dwelling or JADU,
as the person's legal domicile and permanent residence. However, the owner-
occupancy requirement in this division (E)(7)(a) does not apply if the property
is entirely owned by another governmental agency, land trust, or housing
organization.
      (8)   Deed restriction. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
for a JADU, a deed restriction must be recorded against the title of the
property in the County Recorder's office and a copy filed with the Director.
The deed restriction must run with the land and bind all future owners. The
form of the deed restriction will be provided by the town and must provide
that:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in Gov’t Code § 66341, the JADU may
not be sold separately from the primary dwelling.
         (b)   The JADU is restricted to the approved size and to other
attributes allowed by this section.
         (c)   The deed restriction runs with the land and may be enforced
against future property owners.
         (d)   The deed restriction may be removed if the owner eliminates
JADU, as evidenced by, for example, removal of the kitchen facilities. To
remove the deed restriction, an owner may make a written request of the
Director, providing evidence that the JADU has in fact been eliminated. The
Director may then determine whether the evidence supports the claim that the
JADU has been eliminated. Appeal may be taken from the Director's determination
consistent with other provisions of this code. If the JADU is not entirely
physically removed, but is only eliminated by virtue of having a necessary
component of a JADU removed, the remaining structure and improvements must
otherwise comply with applicable provisions of this code.
         (e)   The deed restriction is enforceable by the director or his or
her designee for the benefit of the town. Failure of the property owner to
comply with the deed restriction may result in legal action against the
property owner, and the town is authorized to obtain any remedy available to it
at law or equity, including, but not limited to, obtaining an injunction
enjoining the use of the JADU in violation of the recorded restrictions or
abatement of the illegal unit.
      (9)   Rent reporting. In order to facilitate the city's obligation to
identify adequate sites for housing in accordance with Gov’t Code §§ 65583.1
and 66330, the following requirements must be satisfied:
         (a)   With the building- permit application, the applicant must
provide the town with an estimate of the projected annualized rent that will be
charged for the ADU or JADU.
         (b)   Within 90 days after each January 1 following issuance of the
building permit, the owner must report the actual rent charged for the ADU or
JADU during the prior year. If the town does not receive the report within the
90-day period, the owner is in violation of this code, and the town may send
the owner a notice of violation and allow the owner another 30 days to submit
the report. If the owner fails to submit the report within the 30-day period,
the town may enforce this provision in accordance with the provisions in
Chapter 1.10.
         (c)   The rent reporting data will not be connected to the street
address and will be reported anonymously to protect confidentiality.
      (10)   Building and safety.
         (a)   Must comply with building code. All ADUs and JADUs must comply
with all local building code requirements.
         (b)   No change of occupancy. Construction of an ADU does not
constitute a Group R occupancy change under the local building code, as
described in § 310 of the Cal. Building Code, unless the building official or
code enforcement officer makes a written finding based on substantial evidence
in the record that the construction of the ADU could have a specific, adverse
impact on public health and safety. Nothing in division (E)(10(a) prevents the
town from changing the occupancy code of a space that was uninhabitable space
or that was only permitted for nonresidential use and was subsequently
converted for residential use in accordance with this section.
      (11)   Setbacks. No setback is required for an ADU that is constructed in
the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing structure.
   (F)   Specific ADU requirements. The following requirements apply only to
ADUs that require an ADU permit underdivision (D)(2) above.
      (1)   Maximum size.
         (a)   The maximum size of a detached or attached ADU subject to this
division (F) is 850 square feet for a studio or one-bedroom unit and 1,200
square feet for a unit with two or more bedrooms.
         (b)   An attached ADU that is created on a lot with an existing
primary dwelling is further limited to 50% of the floor area of the existing
primary dwelling.
         (c)   Application of other development standards in this division (F),
such as FAR or lot coverage, might further limit the size of the ADU, but no
application of the percent-based size limit, FAR, front setback, lot coverage
limit, or open-space requirement may require the ADU to be less than 850 square
feet for a one-bedroom unit or 1,200 square feet for a two- bedroom unit.
      (2)   Floor area ratio (FAR). No ADU subject to this division (F) may
cause the total FAR of the lot to exceed 40 percent, subject to divisions (F)
(1)(b) and (F)(1)(c) above.
      (3)   Setbacks. ADUs that are subject to this division (F) must conform
to four-foot side and rear setbacks. AD Us that are subject to this division
(F) must conform to ten-foot front setbacks, subject to divisions (F)(1)(b) and
(F)(1)(c) above.
      (4)   Lot coverage. No ADU subject to this division (F) may cause the
total lot coverage of the lot to exceed 35%, subject to division (F)(1)(b).
      (5)   Minimum open space. No ADU subject to division (F) may cause the
total percentage of open space of the lot to fall below 50%, subject to
division (F)(1)(b) above.
      (6)   Minimum open space (usable). No ADU on a lot subject to this
division (F) may cause the open space area to fall below 300 square feet per
unit. Open space area shall not include any required yard or setback, required
building separation, access area, or area with dimensions of less than ten feet
or slope of greater than 10%, subject to division (F)(1)(c) above.
      (7)   Passageway. No passageway, as defined by division (C) above is
required for an ADU.
      (8)   Parking.
         (a)   Generally.One off-street parking space is required for each ADU.
The parking space may be provided in setback areas or as tandem parking, as
defined by division (C) above.
         (b)   Exceptions. No parking under division (F) is required in the
following situations:
            1.   The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of
public transit, as defined in division (C) above.
            2.   The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically
significant historic district.
            3.   The ADU is part of the proposed or existing primary residence
or an accessory structure under division (F)(1) above.
            4.   When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to
the occupant of the ADU.
            5.   When there is an established car share vehicle stop located
within one block of the ADU.
            6.   When the permit application to create an ADU is submitted with
an application to create a new single-family or new multifamily dwelling on the
same lot, provided that the ADU or the lot satisfies any other criteria listed
in division (F)(8)(b)1. through 5. above.
         (c)   No replacement. When a garage, carport, covered parking
structure, or uncovered parking space is demolished in conjunction with the
construction of an ADU or converted to an ADU, those off-street parking spaces
are not required to be replaced.
      (9)   Stream buffer. No ADU shall be constructed closer to the top of the
stream bank of the Fairfax and San Anselmo Creeks than 20 feet or two times the
average depth of the creek bank, whichever is greater.
      (9)   Architectural requirements.
         (a)   The materials and colors of the exterior walls, roof, windows
and doors of an ADU addition to a primary dwelling must appear similar to those
of the primary dwelling.
         (b)   The materials and colors of the exterior walls, roof, windows
and doors of a second detached ADU must appear similar to either those of the
primary dwelling or those of the other detached ADU on the property.
         (c)   The roof slope must appear similar to that of the dominant roof
slope of the primary dwelling. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by
the largest portion of the roof.
         (d)   The exterior lighting must be dark sky compliant (fully shielded
and emit no light above the horizontal plane with no sag or drop lenses, side
light panels or uplight panels) as well as compliant with color temperature to
minimize blue rich lighting. The lighting shall not emit direct offsite
illumination and shall be the minimum necessary for safety.
         (e)   The ADU must have an independent exterior entrance, apart from
that of the primary dwelling.
         (f)   The interior horizontal dimensions of an ADU must be at least
ten feet wide in every direction, with a minimum interior wall height of seven
feet.
      (11)   Historical protections. An ADU that is on or within 600 feet of
real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources
is subject to objective development requirements of the State Historical
Building Code.
      (12)   Allowed stories. No ADU subject to this division (F) may have more
than one story, except that an ADU that is attached to the primary dwelling may
have the stories allowed under division (E)(2)(d).   (G)   Fees. The following
requirements apply to all ADUs that are approved under divisions (D)(1) or (D)
(2) above.
      (1)   Impact fees.
         (a)   No impact fee is required for an ADU that is less than 750
square feet in size. For purposes of this division, “impact fee” means a “fee”
under the Mitigation Fee Act (Gov’t Code § 66000(b)) and a fee under the Quimby
Act (Gov’t Code § 66477). “Impact fee” here does not include any connection fee
or capacity charge for water or sewer service.
         (b)   Any impact fee that is required for an ADU that is 750 square
feet or larger in size must be charged proportionately in relation to the
square footage of the primary dwelling unit. (e.g., the floor area of the ADU,
divided by the floor area of the primary dwelling, times the typical fee amount
charged for a new dwelling.)
      (2)   Utility fees.
         (a)   If an ADU is constructed with a new single-family home, a
separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility and
payment of the normal connection fee and capacity charge for a new dwelling are
required.
         (b)   Converted ADUs on a single-family lot that are created under
division (D)(1) above are not required to have a new or separate utility
connection directly between the ADU and the utility. Nor is a connection fee or
capacity charge required.
         (c)   All ADUs that are not covered by division (G)(2)(a) require a
new, separate utility connection directly between the ADU and the utility for
any utility. All utilities are subject to the connection and fee requirements
of the utility provider.
            1.   The connection is subject to a connection fee or capacity
charge that is proportionate to the burden created by the ADU based on either
the floor area or the number of drainage-fixture units (DFU) values, as defined
by the Uniform Plumbing Code, upon the water or sewer system.
            2.   The portion of the fee or charge that is charged by the town
may not exceed the reasonable cost of providing this service.
   (H)   Nonconforming Zoning Code Conditions, Building Code Violations, and
Unpermitted Structures.
      (1)   Generally. The town will not deny an ADU or JADU application due to
a nonconforming zoning condition, building code violation, or unpermitted
structure on the lot that does not present a threat to the public health and
safety and that is not affected by the construction of the ADU or JADU.
      (2)   Unpermitted ADUs constructed before 2020.
         (a)   Permit to legalize. As required by state law, the town may not
deny a permit to legalize an existing but unpermitted ADU or JADU that was
constructed before January 1, 2020, if denial is based on either of the
following grounds:
            1.   The ADU violates applicable building standards; or
            2.   The ADU or JADU does not comply with state ADU or JADU law or
this
ADU chapter.
         (b)   Exceptions.
            1.    Notwithstanding division (H)(2) above, the town may deny a
permit to legalize an existing but unpermitted ADU or JADU that was constructed
before January 1, 2020, if the town makes a finding that correcting a violation
is necessary to comply with the standards specified in Cal. Health and Safety
Code § 17920.3.
            2.   Division (H)(2) above does not apply to a building that is
deemed to be substandard in accordance with Cal. Health and Safety Code §
17920.3.
   (I)   Nonconforming ADUs and discretionary approval.Any proposed ADU or JADU
that would otherwise be allowed under this section but that does not conform to
the objective design or development standards set forth in divisions (A)
through (G)(2)(c)2. of this section may be allowed by the town with a variance
and/or conditional use permit or waiver, as applicable in accordance with the
other provisions of this title.
(Ord. 810, passed 11-1-2017; Am. Ord. 844, passed 1-15-2020; Am. Ord. 861,
passed 1-19-2022; Am. Ord. 876, passed 12-7-2022; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023; Am. Ord. 897, passed 5-7-2025)
CHAPTER 17.049: TWO-UNIT PROJECTS
Section
   
17.049.010   Two-unit projects
§ 17.049.010 TWO-UNIT PROJECTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to allow and appropriately
regulate two-unit projects in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65852.21.
   (B)   Definition. A "two-unit project" means the development of two primary
dwelling units or, if there is already a primary dwelling unit on the lot, the
development of a second primary dwelling unit on a legally subdivided lot in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
   (C)   Application.
      (1)   Only individual property owners may apply for a two-unit project.
"Individual property owner" means a natural person holding fee title
individually or jointly in the person's own name or a beneficiary of a trust
that holds fee title. "Individual property owner" does not include any
corporation or corporate person of any kind (partnership, LP, LLC, C corp, S
corp, etc.) except for a community land trust (as defined by Cal. Rev. & Tax
Code § 402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii)) or a qualified nonprofit corporation (as defined by
Cal. Rev. & Tax Code § 214.15).
      (2)   An application for a two-unit project shall be submitted on the
town's approved form.
      (3)   The applicant shall obtain a certificate of compliance with the
Subdivision Map Act for the lot and provide the certificate with the
application.
      (4)   Only a complete application will be considered. The town will
inform the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within 30 days after the
application is submitted.
      (5)   The town may establish a fee to recover its costs for adopting,
implementing, and enforcing this section of the code, in accordance with
applicable law. The Town Council may establish and change the fee by
resolution. The fee shall be paid with the application.
   (D)   Approval.
      (1)   An application for a two-unit project is approved or denied
ministerially, by the Director of Planning and Building Services, without
discretionary review.
      (2)   The ministerial approval of a two-unit project does not take effect
until the town has confirmed that the required documents have been recorded,
such as the deed restriction and easements.
      (3)   The approval shall require the owner and applicant to hold the town
harmless from all claims and damages related to the approval and its subject
matter.
      (4)   The approval shall require the owner and applicant to reimburse the
town for all costs of enforcement, including attorneys' fees and costs
associated with enforcing the requirements of this code.
   (E)   Requirements. A two-unit project shall satisfy each of the following
requirements:
      (1)   Map Act compliance. The lot shall have been legally subdivided.
      (2)   Zone. The lot is in a single-family residential zone. For purposes
of this section, a single-family residential zone is a zone where the only
residential use that is allowed as a primary use is a single residential
dwelling on a lot.
      (3)   Lot location.
         (a)   The lot is not located on a site that is any of the following:
            1.   Prime farmland, farmland of statewide importance, or land that
is zoned or designated for agricultural protection or preservation by the
voters.
            2.   A wetland.
            3.   Within a very high fire hazard severity zone, unless the site
complies with all fire-hazard mitigation measures required by existing building
standards.
            4.   A hazardous waste site that has not been cleared for
residential use.
            5.   Within a delineated earthquake fault zone, unless all
development on the site complies with applicable seismic protection building
code standards.
            6.   Within a 100-year flood hazard area, unless the site has
either:
               a.   been subject to a Letter of Map Revision prepared by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and issued to the local jurisdiction, or
               b.   meets Federal Emergency Management Agency requirements
necessary to meet minimum flood plain management criteria of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
            7.   Within a regulatory floodway, unless all development on the
site has received a no-rise certification.
            8.   Land identified for conservation in an adopted natural
community conservation plan, habitat conservation plan, or other adopted
natural resource protection plan.
            9.   Habitat for protected species.
            10.   Land under conservation easement.
         (b)   The purpose of division (E)(3)(a) above is merely to summarize
the requirements of Cal. Gov’t Code § 65913.4(a)(6)(B)-(K). (See Cal. Gov’t
Code § 66411.7(a)(3)(C).)
      (4)   Not historic. The lot shall not be a historic property or within a
historic district that is included on the State Historic Resources Inventory.
Nor may the lot be or be within a site that is designated by ordinance as a
town or county landmark or as a historic property or district.
      (5)   No impact on protected housing.
         (a)   The two-unit project shall not require or include the demolition
or alteration of any of the following types of housing ("protected housing"):
            1.   Housing that is income-restricted for households of moderate,
low, or very low income.
            2.   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of its policy power.
            3.   Housing, or a lot that used to have housing, that has been
withdrawn from rental or lease under the Ellis Act (Cal. Gov. Code §§ 7060-
7060.7) at any time in the 15 years prior to submission of the urban lot split
application.
            4.   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three
years.
         (b)   The application for the two-unit project shall include a sworn
affidavit from the applicant and the owner of the property that the two-unit
project will not demolish or alter protected housing as set forth in division
(E)(5)(a)1. - 4. above. The town may require additional evidence of the
applicant and owner as necessary to determine compliance with this requirement.
      (6)   Unit standards.
         (a)   Quantity.
            1.   No more than two dwelling units of any kind may be built on a
lot that results from an urban lot split. For purposes of this paragraph,
"unit" means any dwelling unit, including, but not limited to, a primary
dwelling unit, a unit created under this chapter (
Chapter 17.049), an accessory dwelling unit, or a junior accessory dwelling
unit (
Chapter 17.048).
            2.   A lot that is not created by an urban lot split may have a
two-unit project under this section, plus any accessory dwelling unit or junior
accessory dwelling unit that shall be allowed under state law and the town's
accessory dwelling unit ordinance.
         (b)   Unit size.
            1.   The total floor area of each primary dwelling built that is
developed under this section shall be
               a.   less than or equal to 800 and
               b.   more than 500 square feet.
            2.   A primary dwelling that was legally established on the lot
prior to the two-unit project and that is larger than 800 square feet is
limited to the lawful floor area at the time of the two-unit project. The unit
may not be expanded.
            3.   A primary dwelling that was legally established prior to the
two-unit project and that is smaller than 800 square feet may be expanded to
800 square feet after or as part of the two-unit project.
         (c)   Height restrictions.
            1.   On a lot that is larger than 2,000 square feet, no new primary
dwelling unit may exceed a single story or 16 feet in height, measured from
grade to peak of the structure.
            2.   On a lot that is smaller than 2,000 square feet, no new
primary dwelling unit may exceed two stories or 22 feet in height, measured
from grade to peak of the structure. Any portion of a new primary dwelling that
exceeds one story shall be stepped back by an additional five feet from the
ground floor; no balcony deck or other portion of the second story may project
into the stepback.
            3.   No rooftop deck is permitted on any new or remodeled dwelling
or structure on a lot with a two-unit project.
         (d)   Demo cap. The two-unit project may not involve the demolition of
more than 25 percent of the existing exterior walls of an existing dwelling
unless the site has not been occupied by a tenant in the last three years.
         (e)   Lot coverage. The total lot coverage shall not exceed 35 percent
of the lot. This lot coverage standard is only enforced to the extent that it
does not prevent two primary dwelling units on the lot at 800 square feet each.
         (f)   Open space. No dwelling unit on a resulting lot subject to
division (E)(6)(d) may cause the open space area to fall below 300 square feet
per unit. "Open space area" shall not include any required yard or setback,
required building separation, access area, or area with dimensions of less than
ten feet or slope of greater than ten percent, subject to division (E)(6)(d)
above open space standard is only enforced to the extent that it does not
prevent two primary dwelling units on the lot at 800 square feet each.
         (g)   Setbacks.
            1.   Generally. All setbacks shall conform to those objective
setbacks that are imposed through the underlying zone.
            2.   Exceptions. Notwithstanding division (E)(6)(g) above:
               a.    Existing structures. No setback is required for an
existing legally established structure or for a new structure that is
constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing
legally established structure.
               b.   The setbacks imposed by the underlying zone shall yield to
the degree necessary to avoid physically precluding the construction of up to
two units on the lot or either of the two units from being at least 800 square
feet in floor area; but in no event may any structure be less than four feet
from a side or rear property line.
            3.   Front setback area. Notwithstanding any other part of this
code, dwellings that are constructed under this section shall be at least ten
feet from the front property lines. The front setback area shall:
               a.   be kept free from all structures greater than three feet
high;
               b.   be at least 50 percent landscaped with landscaping on the
FireSafe Marin Fire-Smart Plant list, drought-tolerant landscaping is
encouraged, with vegetation and irrigation plans approved by a licensed
landscape architect;
               c.   allow for vehicular and fire-safety access to the front
structure.
         (h)   Parking. Each new primary dwelling unit shall have at least one
off-street parking space per unit unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The lot is located within one-half mile walking distance of
either
               a.   a corridor with fixed route bus service with service
intervals no longer than 15 minutes during peak commute hours or
               b.   a site that contains the intersection of two or more major
bus routes with a frequency of service interval of 15 minutes or less during
the morning and afternoon peak commute periods.
            2.   The site is located within one block of a permanently
designated car-share vehicle location.
         (i)   Architecture.
            1.   If there is a legal primary dwelling on the lot that was
established before the two-unit project, any new primary dwelling unit shall
match the existing primary dwelling unit in exterior materials, color, and
dominant roof pitch. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by the largest
portion of the roof.
            2.   If there is no legal primary dwelling on the lot before the
two-unit project, and if two primary dwellings are developed on the lot, the
dwellings shall match each other in exterior materials, color, and dominant
roof pitch. The dominant roof slope is the slope shared by the largest portion
of the roof.
            3.   All exterior lighting shall be downward directed, shielded to
prevent direct offsite illumination, the minimum number of fixtures necessary
to provide pathway, stair/step, and entry illumination, and a maximum of two
foot candles lighting intensity. No landscape lighting is allowed.
            4.   No window or door of a dwelling that is constructed on the lot
may have a direct line of sight to an adjoining residential property. Fencing,
landscaping, or privacy glass may be used to provide screening and prevent a
direct line of sight.
            5.   If any portion of a dwelling is less than 30 feet from a
property line that is not a public right-of-way line, then all windows and
doors in that portion shall either be (for windows) with the bottom of the
glass at least six feet above the finished floor, or (for windows and for
doors) utilize frosted or obscure glass.
         (j)   Landscaping.
            1.   Evergreen landscape screening shall be planted and maintained
between each dwelling and adjacent lots (but not rights of way) as follows:
               a.   At least one 15-gallon size plant shall be provided for
every five linear feet of exterior wall.
               b.   Plant specimens must be at least six feet tall when
installed. As an alternative, a solid fence of at least six feet in height may
be installed.
               c.   All landscaping shall on the FireSafe Marin Fire-Smart
Plant list and is encouraged to be drought-tolerant.
               d.   No undesirable tree species as defined by §
8.36.020 shall be planted.
               e.   Any heritage tree, as defined by §
8.36.020, removed shall require two 36" box trees FireSafe Marin Fire-Smart
Plant list to be planted prior to final approval.
         (k)   Nonconforming conditions. An existing legal nonconformity shall
not require any correction prior to approval of a two-unit project.
         (l)   Utilities.
            1.   Each primary dwelling unit on the lot shall have its own
direct utility connection to the utility service provider.
            2.    Notwithstanding division (E)(10)(l)1. above, a primary
dwelling unit may have a direct utility connection to an onsite wastewater
treatment system in accordance with this paragraph and the town's code. Each
primary dwelling unit on the resulting lots that is or that is proposed to be
connected to an onsite wastewater treatment system shall comply with current
county wastewater treatment system requirements for new parcels.
         (m)   Building and safety. All structures built on the lot shall
comply with all current local building standards. A project under this section
is a change of use and subjects the whole of the lot, and all structures, to
the town's current code.
      (7)   Fire-hazard mitigation measures.
         (a)   A lot shall comply with each of the following fire-hazard
mitigation measures:
            1.   All enclosed structures on the site shall have fire
sprinklers.
            2.   Windows in any portion of a dwelling with less than a five-
foot setback to a property line shall be equipped with heat activated self-
closing shutters.
            3.   All sides of all dwellings on the site shall be within a 150-
foot hose-pull distance from either the public right of way or of an onsite
fire hydrant or standpipe.
            4.   A lot shall have direct access to a public right of way with a
paved street with a minimum width consisting of a net horizontal unobstructed
clearance of not less than 20 feet exclusive of gutters, curbs, and shoulders,
that connects to a designated evacuation route.
         (b)   Prior to submitting an application for an urban lot split, the
applicant shall obtain a certificate of compliance with all applicable fire-
hazard mitigation measures in accordance with this division (E)(11). The town
or its authorized agent shall inspect the site, including all structures on the
site, and certify as to its compliance. The certificate shall be included with
the application. The applicant shall pay the town's costs for inspection.
Failure to pay is grounds for denying the application.
      (8)   Separate conveyance.
         (a)   Primary dwelling units on the lot may not be owned or conveyed
separately from each other.
         (b)   Common interest developments, as defined by Cal. Civil Code §
4100, are not permitted within the lot.
         (c)   All fee interest in the lot and all the dwellings shall be held
equally and undivided by all individual property owners.
      (9)   Regulation of uses.
         (a)   Residential-only. No non-residential use is permitted on the
lot.
         (b)   No short term rentals. No dwelling unit on the lot may be rented
for a period of less than 30 days.
         (c)   Owner occupancy. Unless the lot was formed by an urban lot
split, the individual property owners of a lot with a two-unit project shall
occupy one of the dwellings on the lot as the owners' principal residence and
legal domicile.
      (10)   Notice of construction.
         (a)   At least 30 business days before starting any construction of a
two-unit project, the property owner shall give written notice to all the
owners of record of each of the adjacent residential parcels, which notice
shall include the following information:
            1.   Notice that construction has been authorized,
            2.   The anticipated start and end dates for construction,
            3.   The hours of construction,
            4.   Contact information for the project manager (for construction-
related complaints), and
            5.   Contact information for the Department of Planning and
Building Services.
         (b)   This notice requirement does not confer a right on the noticed
persons or on anyone else to comment on the project before permits are issued.
Approval is ministerial. Under state law, the town has no discretion in
approving or denying a particular project under this section. This notice
requirement is purely to promote neighborhood awareness and expectation.
      (11)   Deed restriction. The owner shall record a deed restriction on
each lot that results from the urban lot split, on a form approved by the town,
that does each of the following:
         (a)   Expressly prohibits any rental of any dwelling on the property
for a period of less than 30 days.
         (b)   Expressly prohibits any non-residential use of the lot.
         (c)   Expressly prohibits any separate conveyance of a primary
dwelling on the property, any separate fee interest, and any common interest
development within the lot.
         (d)   State that:
            1.   If the lot is not created by an urban lot split: Expressly
requires the individual property owners to live in one of the dwelling units on
the lot as the owners' primary residence and legal domicile; or
            2.   If the property is formed by an urban lot split, it is
therefore subject to the town's urban lot split regulations, including all
applicable limits on dwelling size and development.
   (F)   Specific adverse impacts.
      (1)   Notwithstanding anything else in this section, the town may deny an
application for a two-unit project if the Building Official makes a written
finding, based on a preponderance of the evidence, that the project would have
a "specific, adverse impact" on either public health and safety or on the
physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.
      (2)   "Specific adverse impact" has the same meaning as in Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65589.5(d)(2): "a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable
impact, based on objective, identified written public health or safety
standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application
was deemed complete" and does not include (1) inconsistency with the zoning
ordinance or general plan land use designation or (2) the eligibility to claim
a welfare exemption under Cal. Revenue and Taxation Code § 214(g).
      (3)   The Building Official may consult with and be assisted by planning
staff and others as necessary in making a finding of specific, adverse impact.
   (G)   Remedies. If a two-unit project violates any part of this code or any
other legal requirement:
      (1)   The buyer, grantee, or lessee of any part of the property has an
action for damages or to void the deed, sale, or contract.
      (2)   The town may:
         (a)   Bring an action to enjoin any attempt to sell, lease, or finance
the property.
         (b)   Bring an action for other legal, equitable, or summary remedy,
such as declaratory and injunctive relief.
         (c)   Pursue criminal prosecution, punishable by imprisonment in
county jail or state prison for up to one year, by a fine of up to $10,000, or
both; or a misdemeanor.
         (d)   Record a notice of violation.
         (e)   Withhold any or all future permits and approvals.
         (f)   Pursue all other administrative, legal, or equitable remedies
that are allowed by law or the town's code.
(Ord. 860, passed 12-1-2021)
CHAPTER 17.050: AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS
Section
   
17.050.010   Title
   
17.050.020   Purpose
   
17.050.030   Definitions
   
17.050.040   Applicability; compliance with state law
   
17.050.050   Application requirements; review and approval
§ 17.050.010 TITLE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the “Affordable Housing
Density Bonus Regulations”.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.050.020 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for density bonuses, concessions,
and incentives to developers who comply with Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65915 through
65918 (State Density Bonus Law) and to establish the standards and procedures
for granting affordable housing density bonuses for housing developments in
order to promote the development of affordable units in the town consistent
with the general plan. This chapter shall be understood to be amended by
operation of law in the event and to the extent the State Density Bonus Law is
amended.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.050.030 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions found in the State Density Bonus Law shall apply to the
terms in this chapter and shall control in the event of a conflict between
definitions in this title and definitions in Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65913.4 and
65915. They are hereby incorporated by reference.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.050.040 APPLICABILITY; COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   (A)   This chapter shall apply to all zoning districts that permit housing
at a prescribed density by the general plan land use designation and/or zoning
district. Where the density allowed under the zoning district is inconsistent
with the density allowed under the General Plan, the General Plan site
designation density shall prevail.
   (B)   When an applicant seeks a density bonus, incentive, or concession for
a housing development, the town will comply with the requirements in the State
Density Bonus Law, follow the procedures for calculating the allowable density
bonus using the procedures in the State Density Bonus Law, and grant a density
bonus, concessions, and incentives in accord with the State Density Bonus Law.
   (C)   No affordable housing impact fee, including any inclusionary fees and
in-lieu fees that may be adopted by the town, shall be imposed on the
affordable units approved under the housing development density bonus program
established by this chapter.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.050.050 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   A developer seeking a state density bonus, incentive or concession,
waiver or modification of a development standard, or a revised parking
standard, shall submit an application for approval of a housing development
with a density bonus. This application shall be processed concurrently with all
other applications required for the housing development. The application shall
be submitted on a form prescribed by the Planning Director and the application
shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   A site plan showing the total number and location of all proposed
housing units and the number and location of proposed housing units which
qualify the housing development for density bonus housing units;
      (2)   The manner in which the applicant shall satisfy the affordability
requirements for the housing units that qualify the housing development for
density bonus units;
      (3)   A description of any requested incentives and concessions, waivers
or modification of development standards, or modified parking standards;
      (4)   For all incentives and concessions, except mixed use development,
the application shall include evidence deemed sufficient by the Planning
Director to demonstrate that the requested incentives and concessions result in
identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. The Planning
Director may require that an independent financial review be conducted at the
expense of the applicant.
      (5)   For waivers or modifications of development standards, the
application shall include evidence deemed sufficient by the Planning Director
to demonstrate that the requested waivers or modifications are necessary to
make the housing units economically feasible and that the development standard
from which a waiver or modification is requested will have the effect of
precluding the construction of the housing development at the densities to
which the applicant is entitled pursuant to this chapter.
      (6)   If the application is requested for a project that will include
housing units for extremely low income households, the applicant shall be
entitled to a density bonus that is 50 percent greater than the bonus that
would be granted if these units were for very low income households.
      (7)   If a density bonus is requested for a land donation, the
application shall show the location of the land to be dedicated and provide
evidence that each of the conditions pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code §§ 65915(g)(2)
(A through H) are met.
      (8)   If a density bonus or incentive or concession is requested for a
child care facility pursuant to Cal. Gov't Code § 65915(h), the application
shall show the location and square footage of the child care facility and
provide evidence that the community lacks adequate child care facilities.
      (9)   A written acknowledgement that the project will be subject to a
condition of approval and deed restriction to retain affordability of the
affordable unit(s) for at least 55 years.
      (10)   If the density bonus is requested for a proposed housing
development that would result in the removal or conversion of existing rental
dwelling units, or if the property upon which the housing development is
proposed has within the past five years been occupied by rental dwelling units,
the application shall include the following:
         (a)   A description of the housing units removed, converted, proposed
to be removed or proposed to be converted;
         (b)   The income levels of the persons occupying each unit removed,
converted, proposed to be removed or proposed to be converted;
         (c)   The rental rates charged for the immediately preceding five
years for each unit removed, converted, proposed to be removed or proposed to
be converted.
      (11)   Payment of fees set forth in a resolution adopted by the Town
Council.
   (B)   An application for a density bonus, incentive or concession, waiver or
modification of a development standard, or revised parking standard shall be
considered and acted upon by the Planning Commission based on its permit review
authority for the housing development.
   (C)   Before approving an application for a density bonus, incentive or
concession, or waiver or modification of a development standard, the Planning
Commission shall make the following findings:
      (1)   If the density bonus is based all or in part on a donation of land,
the conditions of Cal. Gov't Code § 65915 (g)(2)(A through H) are met.
      (2)   If the density bonus, incentive or concession is based all or in
part on the inclusion of a child care facility, that the conditions included in
Cal. Gov't Code § 65915 (h)(2)(A) and (B) are met.
      (3)   If the incentive or concession includes mixed use development, the
findings included in Cal. Gov't Code § 65915 (k)(2) are met.
      (4)   If a waiver or modification of a development standard is requested,
the developer has demonstrated, for each requested waiver or modification, that
the waiver or modification is necessary to make the housing units economically
feasible and that the development standards from which a waiver or modification
is requested will have the effect of precluding the construction of a housing
development at the densities to which the applicant is entitled pursuant to
this chapter or with the concessions and incentives permitted by this chapter.
   (D)   The Planning Commission may deny a concession or incentive if it makes
a written finding based upon substantial evidence of either of the following:
      (1)   The concession or incentive does not result in identifiable and
actual cost reductions to provide for affordable rents or affordable housing
costs as required by this chapter.
      (2)   The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact
upon public health or safety or the physical environment or on any real
property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources, and there
is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact without rendering the development unaffordable to lower, very low-, or
moderate income households. For purposes of this subsection, “specific adverse
impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based
on objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies,
or conditions as they existed on the date that the application was deemed
complete.
   (E)   The Planning Commission may deny a waiver or modification of a
development standard only if it makes a written finding based upon substantial
evidence of either of the following:
      (1)   The waiver or modification would have a specific adverse impact
upon health, safety or the physical environment and there is no feasible method
to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without
rendering the housing development unaffordable to lower, very low- or moderate
income households. For purposes of this subsection, “specific adverse impact”
means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on
objective, identified, written public health or safety standards, policies, or
conditions as they existed on the date that the application was deemed
complete.
      (2)   The waiver or modification would have an adverse impact on any real
property listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.
   (F)   If a density bonus or concession or incentive is based on the
provision of childcare facilities, the Planning Commission may deny the density
bonus or concession or incentive if it finds, based on substantial evidence,
that the town already has adequate childcare facilities.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.052: OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
17.052.010   General requirements
   
17.052.020   Exceptions
   
17.052.030   Required parking spaces
   
17.052.040   Standards for parking spaces
   
17.052.050   Required loading spaces
   
17.052.060   Standards for loading spaces
   
17.052.070   Delineation
   
Appendix A: Width of Aisles
   
Appendix B: Gross Floor Area; Spaces
§ 17.052.010 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise required by variance, every building or use
hereafter created or established shall be provided with minimum off-street
parking and loading spaces.
   (B)   No off-street parking spaces or garage, carport or other accessory
structure for parking use, required or additional thereto, shall be located in
a required side yard setback.
   (C)   (1)   No garage, carport or other accessory structure for parking use
shall be located in the front yard setback except as set forth in §
17.052.020.
      (2)   Uncovered parking spaces may be created in the portion of the
required front yard setback not included in the side yard.
   (D)   At least one of the off-street parking spaces for a residential unit
must be covered, except as set forth in §
17.052.020.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 490, passed - -1982)
§ 17.052.020 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   If particular circumstances justify an exception, the amount,
dimensions and location of required parking and loading facilities may be
altered by variance or design review requirements.
   (B)    In RM, SF-RMP and PDD zones, one guest parking space shall be
provided for each five dwelling units. Available curb parking along the
property’s street frontage may be credited toward the required guest parking
where found appropriate and as part of the design review or variance procedure.
   (C)   On lots which have a slope greater than 15 percent on the general plan
slope map or on a topographic map prepared by a licensed land surveyor and
which are downslope lots, uncovered parking decks which have a finished
elevation equal to or less than the elevation of the town right-of-way may be
constructed in the front yard setback. Decks of this type may exceed the height
requirement for accessory buildings.
   (D)   Lots which have a slope greater than 15 percent on the general plan
slope map or on a topographic map prepared by a licensed land surveyor, and
which are downslope lots, are exempted from the covered parking requirement set
forth in §
17.052.010(D).
(Prior Code, § 17.28.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 490, passed - -1982)
§ 17.052.030 REQUIRED PARKING SPACES.
    Off-street parking spaces shall be provided according to the following
schedule, and where a parcel includes two or more uses, the parking
requirements shall be the aggregate of the requirement for the various uses.
Fractional numbers shall be rounded up to the next highest value:
   (A)   (1)   Dwellings, including one-family and two-family dwellings,
apartments and mobile homes:
         (a)   Studio units without separate bedrooms or tiny houses: one
space.
         (b)   One-bedroom units: 1.5 spaces (except for single family detached
homes which shall require two spaces).
         (c)   Two-bedroom units: two spaces.
         (d)   Units with three or more bedrooms: two spaces.
      (2)   In addition to the required parking spaces set forth in divisions
(A)(1)(a) through (d) above, one guest parking space is required when a legal
on-street parking space is not available along the immediate frontage of the
property. Availability is determined by whether a space of standard dimensions
exists off the traveled portion of the roadway.
   (B)   Hotels and motels: one space per guest room and one for each employee
and manager.
   (C)   Theaters and other places of assembly which are used daily or nearly
daily: one space for every six seats.
   (D)   Churches, auditoriums in high schools, colleges or universities, and
other places of assembly which are not used daily or nearly daily: one space
for every six seats.
   (E)   Dance halls, commercial places of amusement, assembly halls without
fixed seats and exhibition halls: one space per 300 square feet of gross floor
area.
   (F)   Retail and personal service stores: three spaces for the first 500
square feet of gross floor area and one space for each additional 500 square
feet thereafter.
   (G)   Offices and banks: three spaces for the first 500 square feet of gross
floor area and one space for each additional 500 square feet thereafter.
   (H)   Restaurants and bars: one space per each 200 square feet of gross
floor space.
   (I)   Hospitals: one space per each three beds.
   (J)   Convalescent homes and convalescent hospitals: one space per each six
beds.
   (K)   Industrial uses, including wholesale and storage: one space per two
employees of the maximum shift.
   (L)   Mechanical amusement device arcades and accessory uses: one vehicular
parking space for each five amusement devices; two on-site bicycle spaces for
each amusement device up to ten devices; and one on-site bicycle space per each
amusement device in excess of ten devices. Bicycle parking shall be in bicycle
racks or stands and shall not obstruct required exits. Bicycle parking may be
required inside buildings if no acceptable outside area exists on site. Bicycle
parking may be waived for adults-only establishments.
   (M)   Uses not listed: required parking spaces shall be as provided by the
applicable individual zone regulations.
   (N)   Commercial parcels which are located in parking districts: shall meet
only parking requirements of that district.
   (O)   Public or governmental uses: three spaces for the first 500 square
feet of gross floor area and one space for each additional 500 square feet
thereafter. The Town Council may grant exceptions to this standard. Existing
town owned facilities and properties are exempt from this standard.
   (P)   Short-term rentals (STR's).
      (1)   Short-term rentals must provide one additional parking space for
every one to four guests, on-site, in addition to the required parking for the
existing residential use.
      (2)   If a short-term rental use meets all other requirements of the
zoning ordinance, the applicant may apply for a waiver from the parking
requirement, according to the following:
         (a)   Apply under the procedures in §§
17.044.090 and
17.044.100.
         (b)   The waiver may be approved by the Director if it can be
demonstrated that the lack of parking will not result in undue hardship on
adjacent properties and if one or more of the following conditions exist and
the findings in §
17.044.100 can be met:
            1.   Parking is available on site, but it does not meet the
standard size or configuration requirements specified in the code.
            2.   On-street or off-site parking is readily available within 300
feet of the site.
            3.   The applicant demonstrates that the unique characteristic of
the short-term rental use does not necessitate additional parking.
            4.   Providing additional parking has a negative environmental
impact on the site (e.g. requiring removal a significant tree, requireing
significant excavation, etc.).
         (c)   Upon approval of a waiver, notification to the applicant and
property owners within 300 feet shall be provided with a notification of appeal
rights under
Chapter 17.036.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 490, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 788,
passed 5-6-2015; Am. Ord. 865, passed 7-6-2022; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023); Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025
§ 17.052.040 STANDARDS FOR PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   Parking facilities shall be designed to provide for safe circulation
of vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the parking area and in relation to
adjacent streets. Direct backing into or out of parking from a public street
shall not be permitted, except for one-family and two-family dwellings.
   (B)   Minimum dimensions of parking spaces shall be as follows:
      (1)   Width: nine feet, excluding any interfering structure.
      (2)   Length: 19 feet, or 22 feet if abutting and parallel to a curb,
wall or other obstruction.
   (C)   In all zones except RS-7.5, RS-6 and RD 5.5-7, 25 percent of the
assigned spaces may have a minimum size of 8 feet by 16 feet.
   (D)   Width of parking aisles shall be according to the schedule in Appendix
A to this chapter.
   (E)   No tandem parking stall shall be allowed, except for a guest space in
tandem with required parking for the principal residence. Tandem parking shall
not be used in conjunction with a parking space required for a residential
second unit.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 490, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991)
§ 17.052.050 REQUIRED LOADING SPACES.
   Width of parking aisles shall be according to Appendix B to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.28.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.052.060 STANDARDS FOR LOADING SPACES.
   (A)   Loading facilities shall be designed to provide for safe circulation
of vehicular andpedestrian traffic within the parking area and in relation to
adjacent streets.
   (B)   Dimensions of loading spaces shall be as follows:
 
       Large Space Small Space
Width  12 feet     10 feet
Length 45 feet     20 feet
 
(Prior Code, § 17.28.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.052.070 DELINEATION.
   All parking and loading spaces shall be marked or otherwise physically
delineated, except those for single-family and two-family  dwellings .
(Prior Code, § 17.28.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
APPENDIX A: WIDTH OF AISLES
Angle of Parking         Width of Aisles
Spaces to Aisle          One-Way (Feet) Two-Way (Feet)
More than 80 degrees     24             24
71 degrees to 80 degrees 22             22
61 degrees to 70 degrees 18             20
56 degrees to 60 degrees 15             20
53 degrees to 55 degrees 14             20
46 degrees to 52 degrees 13             20
45 degrees or less       12             20
 
(Prior Code, § 17.28.040)
APPENDIX B: GROSS FLOOR AREA; SPACES
Gross Floor Area (in Square Feet)
                                                 50,000 to     Each additional
                3,000 to 10,000 10,000 to 50,000 100,000       100,000 or
                                                               fraction thereof
Hotels and
motels
Offices                                          One small and
Hospitals       None required   One small        one large     One large
Convalescent
facilities
Bank
Retail stores
Personal
service stores  One small       One small and    One small and One large
Industrial uses                 one large        one large
Wholesale and
storage uses
 
(Prior Code, Sch. 17.28.050)
CHAPTER 17.056: TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT
Section
   
17.056.010   Intent
   
17.056.020   Definitions
   
17.056.030   Required
   
17.056.040   Term
   
17.056.050   Applicable projects
   
17.056.060   Application
   
17.056.070   Traffic study
   
17.056.080   Traffic impact mitigation plan
   
17.056.090   Planning Commission hearing
   
17.056.100   Town Council hearing
   
17.056.110   Required findings
Cross-reference:
   Vehicles and Traffic, see Title 10
§ 17.056.010 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is:
   (A)   To provide an equitable tool for assessing traffic impacts of
development and changes in land use;
   (B)   To permit development on a scale proportionate with the capacity of
existing and proposed transportation facilities;
   (C)   To permit development and land use changes when appropriate traffic
mitigation measures can be adopted; and
   (D)   To meet the goals and objectives of the community and avoiding the
disruption of neighborhoods from through traffic.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJUSTED DAILY TRAFFIC VOLUMES. Correction to reflect seasonal variations on
a month-to-month basis within a year and/or day-to-day within a given week
(e.g., traffic patterns will differ from weekends to weekdays and from summer
[vacation] months to winter).
   AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC or ADT. The total volume of traffic crossing a fixed
point (for example, the boundary of a project) over a 24-hour period, averaged
over some period of time.
   DISCRETIONARY APPROVALS. Approvals attained at public hearings before the
Fairfax Planning Commission or Town Council, as required by this code and this
title, including, but not limited to the following: use permits, variances,
design review, grading permits, tentative subdivision maps and master plans
authorized under the Planned Development and Single-Family Residential Master
Plan zoning districts.
   INTERSECTION, IMPACTED. Those intersections that regularly experience
atypical traffic volumes, which require special study and standards.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE or LOS. A measure of the conditions existing under various
speed and volume conditions on any highway or street. These levels of service,
designated “A” through “F,” from best to worst, cover the entire range of
traffic operations that may occur.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE, ACCEPTABLE. The acceptable level of service for signalized
intersection of the principal circulation system is level of service “D.” For
unsignalized intersections, the ACCEPTABLE LEVEL OF SERVICE shall be as
designated by the Town Council.
   PRINCIPAL CIRCULATION SYSTEM. The system of roads and highways and
associated intersections shown on a map adopted by a resolution of the Fairfax
Town Council.
   PROJECTED TRAFFIC. Traffic demand projected for five years from the date of
the traffic report, based on estimates of future development provided by the
town and other public agencies.
   ROADWAY SEGMENT. An entire length of roadway between intersections or a
portion separate from an intersection.
   TOWN. The Town of Fairfax.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.030 REQUIRED.
   A currently valid traffic impact permit (TIP) is a prerequisite to any
building permit, site improvement, occupancy permit or any discretionary
approval from the town for applicable projects, as defined in §
17.056.050.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.040 TERM.
   (A)   (1)   The traffic impact permit will be valid for a period of one year
from the date of approval. Any physical improvements for the project must begin
within the term of the permit and then be diligently pursued to completion. If
no physical improvements are required, the use of the property must begin
operation within the term of the permit. Each phase of a multi-phase project
must be started within the term of the permit and then be diligently pursued to
completion.
      (2)   A further permit must be obtained for any required improvements not
begun within the term of the permit. The term of a permit shall include any
extensions thereof.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may grant one year extensions of an approved
TIP at duly noticed public hearings provided they are supplied with adequate
information establishing that the basis of their findings for the original
permit has not substantially changed.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.050 APPLICABLE PROJECTS.
   (A)   Except as noted below, these regulations are applicable to:
      (1)   Any project that creates a structure or adds additional square
footage to an existing structure that meets either of the following conditions:
         (a)   Generates more than 100 ADT; or
         (b)   Has a floor area of 5,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   The reuse of existing structures where the new use will generate
100 ADT or more beyond that generated by the prior use;
      (3)   The incremental development of property or the subdivision and
development of multiple properties when, within any five-year period, the
cumulative traffic generated by the project exceeds the criteria set forth in
division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   The following are exempt from these regulations:
      (1)   Individual single-family dwellings and additions thereto on legally
created lots; and
      (2)    Projects which, on the effective date of the ordinance adopting
this chapter, had an approved precise plan, use permit, or design review
approval and which began construction within one year of the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (C)   When a question as to the applicability of the regulations arises, the
proponents must demonstrate to the Planning Commission and Town Council that
these standards do not apply to their project.
   (D)   The town shall use the “Traffic Generation Manual” of the Institute of
Traffic Engineers to assess the application standards of this section. When
considering the traffic generation of a shopping center the town shall employ
the thirtieth design hour traffic generation volumes. The town may accept other
sources of traffic generation figures for unique land uses.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.060 APPLICATION.
   Application for a traffic impact permit shall include:
   (A)   An application form provided by the Planning Department that has been
signed by the property owner or authorized representative;
   (B)   A site location map showing the location of the project and the town's
principal circulation system;
   (C)   The project’s preliminary site plan showing structures, parking and
circulation,
   (D)   Preliminary floor plans;
   (E)   A traffic study of the project and its impact on the town’s traffic
system; and
   (F)   Deposits as required by the Planning Department to cover the time and
expense of the town in reviewing and processing of the application.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.070 TRAFFIC STUDY.
   (A)   The TIP shall be accompanied by a traffic study that is found by the
town’s Traffic Engineer to be complete and in compliance with professional and
written standards for the reports. The Planning Commission or Town Council may
request the clarification or expansion of any of the materials that is
submitted. When a traffic study is required in conjunction with environmental
review documents mandated by the California Environmental Quality Act, the
study shall be prepared by or under the authority of the town, and paid for by
the applicant.
   (B)   The study shall include, but not be limited to the following
information:
      (1)   A description of the project and the existing traffic and
circulation setting;
      (2)   For the intersection and roadway segments identified in division
(E) below, an assessment of the adjusted daily traffic volumes, a.m. and p.m.
peak hour traffic volumes, and a.m. and p.m. level of service analysis for each
of the following conditions:
         (a)   Existing traffic, the unadjusted traffic counts;
         (b)   Existing daily traffic plus projected traffic; and
         (c)   Existing daily traffic, plus projected traffic, plus project
traffic. Estimate of future levels of service may take into account only those
traffic and circulation system improvements that have received all necessary
approvals and funding or funding is adequately provided for by ordinance or
other means satisfactory to the town.
   (C)   The report shall be appended with the total listings of traffic counts
and the intersection capacity worksheets.
   (D)   The report may include a traffic impact mitigation plan (TIMP), as
described in §
17.056.080.
   (E)   The report shall address all of the intersections and roadways of the
town’s principal circulation system for which the project is expected to
increase the existing adjusted average daily traffic volumes of any approach or
segment by one percent or by 100 cars, whichever is less. The town shall
determine the scope.
   (F)   The methodology to be used in the traffic study shall be that set
forth in a resolution of the Town Council. The methodology may provide, but it
is not limited to the following:
      (1)   Specific standards for individual impacted intersection for level
of service or when to take traffic counts; and
      (2)   Adjustment to traffic counts taken during particular seasons of the
year.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.080 TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION PLAN.
   (A)   The project proponent may submit with the traffic study a plan
detailing measures that will mitigate the project’s adverse circulation
impacts. If the plan is submitted it shall include the following:
      (1)   The plan will provide details of mitigation measures, such
mitigation measures including, but not limited to any of the following types:
         (a)   Physical improvements to street systems, such as intersection
designs, signalization, turn or deceleration lanes and the like (e.g., bike
path systems and the like);
         (b)   Transportation system management programs;
         (c)   In-lieu fees for permanent circulation improvements;
         (d)   Annual contributions for transit operation programs; and
         (e)   Reduction in the scale or density of a project or the intensity
of the proposed types of uses.
      (2)   A time schedule for the implementation of the proposed mitigation
measures;
      (3)   The comments of other responsible agencies on any mitigation
improvements proposed outside the town.
   (B)   Prior to issuance of a building, grading or occupancy permit, or
approval of a tentative or final subdivision map, the project proponents must
either implement any approved improvement plan or provide the town with
adequate guarantees of its implementation in a manner acceptable to the town.
The guarantees shall be set forth in an agreement between the town and the
applicant and supported by bonds or other securities acceptable to the town,
guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work and payment for the labor and
materials. The agreement shall provide for a time limit to perform the work;
the time limit shall be as determined adequate by the town, but shall not
exceed two years. The permit may be extended by the town for reasonable cause.
   (C)   Pursuant to state law, no project that qualifies for a density bonus
for affordable housing under
Chapter 17.050 or a project with at least ten percent of the units reserved for
lower income tenants or purchasers shall be required to pay a transportation
impact fee or in-lieu fee for traffic impact mitigation.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.056.090 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   The traffic impact permit application shall be presented to the
Planning Commission at a duly noticed public hearing.
      (2)   The TIP hearing can be held simultaneously with any other
discretionary approvals being considered by the Planning Commission in
connection with the project in question.
   (B)   This hearing shall be noticed as required for the discretionary
approval or if other hearings are not otherwise required, the TIP hearing shall
be noticed as required for a use permit.
   (C)   The Planning Commission will approve, approve with conditions or
modifications or deny the permit application based on the findings contained
within §
17.056.110.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.100 TOWN COUNCIL HEARING.
   (A)   Upon approval or conditional approval of a TIP application by the
Planning Commission, the permit shall be presented to the Town Council at a
duly noticed public hearing.
   (B)   Proceedings by the Town Council on a TIP permit shall be the same as
those which govern the Planning Commission’s actions as specified in §
17.056.090 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -19 73 ; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.056.110 REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   To approve the traffic impact permit, the Planning Commission and Town
Council must make one of the following findings.
   (A)   The project’s average daily traffic, when added to the existing daily
traffic, plus projected traffic, will not cause the performance of intersection
of roadway linkages to fall below the acceptable level of service or otherwise
further reduce the system performance if it is already below the acceptable
level of service; nor will it cause a significant degradation in service levels
for impacted intersections at their peak traffic periods.
   (B)   (1)   The traffic impact mitigation plan approved by the Planning
Commission and Town Council will adequately mitigate the project’s adverse
traffic impacts.
      (2)   This plan is consistent with the goals and objectives of the
Fairfax general plan or applicable specific plans and the intent of the zoning
district in which the project is situated, and of this chapter.
   (C)   The project’s average daily traffic will not increase the traffic
volume on any roadway segments or intersection approaches of the town’s
principal circulation system by more than one percent or by more than 100
vehicles, whichever is less.
   (D)   The project will provide an overriding public benefit that will
sufficiently offset its adverse traffic impacts. Any affirmative decision of
the Planning Commission or the Town Council based upon this finding must be
approved by a five-sevenths majority of the Planning Commission and a four-
fifths majority of the Town Council. The grounds for making this finding must
be set forth in the approving motion.
   (E)   The traffic impact mitigation plan approved by the Planning Commission
and Town Council will adequately mitigate the project's adverse traffic impacts
but no transportation impact fee or in-lieu fee for traffic impact mitigation
will be levied because the project will provide affordable housing for lower
income households, either through the town’s density bonus program or with a
minimum of ten percent of the units reserved for lower income households, and
only physical improvements directly related to access to the project site for
vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians and reasonable off-site improvements needed
to mitigate impacts on the town’s street systems, such as intersection designs,
signalization, turn or deceleration lanes and the like (e.g., bike path systems
and the like) and maintain acceptable levels of service shall be required to
offset identified traffic impacts. A deed restriction shall be recorded against
the property that runs with the land for 55 years to ensure affordability for
lower income units that is approved by the Town Attorney and Town Council shall
be required as a condition of approval of a traffic impact permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.30.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.060: RIDGELINE DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
17.060.010   Purpose
   
17.060.020   Definitions and terms of reference
   
17.060.030   General requirements
   
17.060.040   Affected significant view corridors
   
17.060.050   Criteria for review of application
   
17.060.060   Application; procedures generally
   
17.060.070   Approval of design review application; required findings
   
17.060.080   Approval of application for exception; required findings
   
17.060.090   Time limits; extensions
   
17.060.100   Appeals
   
17.060.110   Enforcement
§ 17.060.010 PURPOSE.
    The purpose of this chapter is to implement the General Plan’s policies for
open space and resource conservation by establishing objective review criteria
for land use applications, in order to conserve the existing scenic resources
and protect the sense of community and/or neighborhood identity now afforded by
the presence of the unurbanized open spaces on the ridge tops above the town by
preserving them in an open and scenically attractive state.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.020 DEFINITIONS AND TERMS OF REFERENCE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions and terms of
reference shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ADJACENT RIDGE. The portion of the ridgeline within 150 feet horizontal
distance or 100 feet vertical distance from the subject structure, from which a
line drawn perpendicular to the ridgeline strikes or passes over the subject
structure. When a structure is built in a swale between two ridges, the higher
ridge will determine the height of the structure.
   MODEL WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE ORDINANCE. The Model Water Efficient
Landscape Ordinance adopted by the California State Legislature, 23 CA ADC 490
et seq., as it may be amended from time to time, and as adopted by the town and
made a part of this chapter by reference.
   RIDGE(S). Those areas located on General Plan Figure OS-I , Map of Visual
Resources augmented by additional topographic reference mapping by town staff.
   RIDGELINE. The uppermost line in elevation traversing a major ridge (chain
of hills).
   RIDGELINE SCENIC CORRIDORS. Those areas defined as community and/or
neighborhood separators and visual resources providing community and/or
neighborhood identity, further defined as the area on either side of the
ridgeline within 150 feet horizontal distance measured at right angles to the
ridgeline or 100 feet vertically of the major ridge, whichever is a greater
area as located on General Plan Figure OS-1 Map of Visual Resources.
   SCENIC HIGHWAYS. Those roadways depicted on the General Plan Figure OS-I Map
of Visual Resource as Scenic Highways, including Bolinas Road and Sir Francis
Drake Boulevard.
   SIGNIFICANT VIEW CORRIDORS. Identified by the Planning Commission as places
from which the visual impact of development in a ridgeline scenic corridor
could be significant and contrary to the purposes of this title.
   UTILITY LINES. Public or private utility distribution and transmission
lines.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.030 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)    No building, accessory building, or structure or modification
thereof, shall be erected within ridgeline scenic corridors as located on
General Plan Figure OS-I Map of Visual Resources, except in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The applicant demonstrates with submissions of photographic visual
simulations and architectural drawings, plans and sections showing existing and
proposed conditions and how the standards of this section apply to building
elevations to the town staff and the Planning Commission that a new building,
an accessory structure or addition will have minimal impact on significant
views due to the proposed location of the structure in relation to existing
improvements; and/or
      (2)   The Planning Commission approves or conditionally approves a permit
for building in the ridgeline scenic corridor.
   (B)   If new buildings, accessory buildings or additions and modifications
to existing buildings are to be approved for placement within the restricted
area, they shall be designed and located to have the least impact on existing
visual resources and significant view corridors.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord.
886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.040 AFFECTED SIGNIFICANT VIEW CORRIDORS.
   (A)   (1)   In considering an application for building in the restricted
area, the Planning Commission will determine the significant view corridors
which are affected by the project through field observations by town officials
and the Planning Commission, and by examining photographs of the project site
from public gathering places, scenic highways, major roadways, and neighboring
properties.
      (2)   Significant view corridors will be addressed by the applicant in
the application using photographs and/or illustrations which demonstrate how
the proposed project is seen from:
         (a)   Public gathering places, scenic highways, and major roadways;
         (b)   Neighboring properties and neighborhood roadways; and
         (c)   Critical points within the subject property.
   (B)   (1)   Views from public gathering places, scenic highways, and major
roadways will be considered significant view corridors unless the Planning
Commission makes the specific finding that a given location is not significant
for a project.
      (2)   Views from neighboring properties, neighborhood roadways and points
within the subject property may be significant if the Planning Commission makes
the finding that regulation of views from the point is necessary to protect the
general public welfare, as defined in the purpose of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.050 CRITERIA FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall use the following criteria to review
applications.
   (B)   These criteria must be complied with unless an exception is granted by
the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Native planting shall be retained to provide screening and avoid
abrupt changes in the natural, vegetative cover. Tree pruning and tree removal
around structures may be allowed if needed to reduce fire hazards, accommodate
low impact clustered residential development consistent with the standards of §
17.072.090 (H), and ensure emergency ingress and egress. A tree plan, including
revegetation requirements and proposed locations of trees of approved suitable
species, may be required pursuant to §
16.24.070.
      (2)   Additional screening and cover shall be provided, with new planting
utilizing native species compatible with existing vegetation and designed to
break up silhouettes, reflections and large, unnatural surfaces. If required as
a condition of design review approval, a maintenance bond shall be posted for
one year to ensure the vitality of essential landscaping.
      (3)   Buildings, fences and structures shall be of materials and colors
compatible consistent with materials and colors in the surrounding area within
300 feet of the project site. Exterior paint colors shall be muted earth tones,
consistent with a color palette of paint colors based on Pantone color
standards, which have been approved by the Planning Commission. Other colors
may be approved through discretionary design review by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Cuts, fills and retaining structures will be minimized except as
reguired exclusively for foundations. Major topographic features shall maintain
their natural landforms.
      (5)   Roadways shall follow contours to also minimize cuts, fills and
retaining structures. Disturbed areas shall be revegetated to harmonize with
the surrounding environment, and retaining structures shall include planting or
similar means, as necessary, to harmonize as well.
      (6)   No roads or streets shall be permitted to traverse a ridge.
      (7)   If exterior lighting is to be installed, it shall conform to the
following:
         (a)   Light intensity. Lighting shall have a low-level of intensity,
meaning having a total light output on the site of 3,000 lumens or less and a
low profile;
         (b)   Shielding. All fixtures shall be fully-shielded to minimize
glare and protect the night sky.
         (c)   Color temperature. The color temperature of all outdoor lighting
shall be 3,000 Kelvin or less.
         (d)   Lighting curfew. A “dark sky” curfew shall be respected, and
unless outdoor lighting is for building entries or exits, pathways and adjacent
landscape areas, parking areas, or driveways, or is on a motion sensor that
shuts off five minutes after activation, all exterior lighting shall be
extinguished as soon as there are no longer people present in exterior areas.
         (e)   Light trespass. The maximum allowable “light trespass,” meaning
light falling beyond the property line, shall be 0.1 foot candles.
      (8)   Utilities and alternative energy systems.
         (a)   All utilities and cables shall be placed underground.
         (b)   Alternative energy sources, not including small residential
rooftop solar energy systems, may be approved where their impacts are
minimized. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall be subject to
the review and approval procedures set forth in §§
17.138.200 through
17.138.270. This provision supersedes §
17.044.020 of this title relating to public utilities.
      (9)   Ridgeline view protections.
         (a)   All structures shall be located so that the roof does not extend
into a ridgeline scenic corridor when viewed from a public gathering place,
including town parks, public schools, sidewalks in the Central Commercial area
identified in the General Plan, or a major roadway.
         (b)   No part of a building's height shall exceed 28.5 feet on an
upslope lot and 35 feet on a downslope lot, 24 feet within 20 feet of a front
property line on an upslope lot, and 24 feet at a rear setback line, measured
to the adjacent natural or finished grade, whichever is lower. One foot of
additional building height in the front and the rear is allowed if the portion
of the building above the 24-foot height limit is setback one foot, up to the
maximum height limits established for upslope lots (28.5 feet) and downslope
lots (35 feet).
         (c)   Where the Planning Commission approves the placement of a
structure so that its roofline extends into a ridgeline scenic corridor because
of a particular topographical feature or the location of the site and because
there is no other suitable building location on the site, no part of the roof
of the structure shall extend more than 15 feet above the lowest elevation of
the adjacent ridgeline and the maximum horizontal dimension above this
elevation shall not exceed 20 feet.
      (10)   In order to minimize bulk and mass, long, unbroken rooflines and
large, uninterrupted wall surfaces greater than 40 feet in length shall be
allowed only if there is a horizontal or vertical offset of at least five feet
or dormers break up the visual mass.
      (11)   A landscape documentation package shall be provided with the
development application that complies with the standards of the Model Water
Efficient Landscape which applies to all new residential development with 500
square feet or more of landscape area. If the total landscaped area is 2,500
square feet or less, an applicant may use the prescriptive compliance option
provided in Appendix D of the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance to
streamline the review process.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015; Am. Ord.
886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.060 APPLICATION; PROCEDURES GENERALLY.
   (A)   An application for a permit for building in the ridgeline scenic
corridor shall be made in accordance with §§
17.020.050 and
17.020.060 of this title.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may approve, modify, deny or continue an
application for design review of development in a ridge line scenic corridor
and exceptions in accordance with the procedures, including procedures
governing notice of public hearings, as set forth herein. The Planning
Commission may impose reasonable conditions of approval, provided those
conditions of approval are needed to ensure compliance with objective
development and design standards.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -1994; Am. Ord. 764,
passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.070 APPROVAL OF DESIGN REVIEW APPLICATION; REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   In approving or conditionally approving an application for design review of
a structure in a ridgeline scenic corridor, the Planning Commission shall make
the following findings:
   (A)   Other suitable building locations are not available on the site; and/
or
   (B)   The visual impact of the proposed structure on significant view
corridors has been minimized and the project substantially conforms to the
criteria in §
17.060.040.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.080 APPROVAL OF APPLICATION FOR EXCEPTION; REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   In approving an application for an exception, the Planning Commission shall
make the following findings:
   (A)   The exception is the minimum necessary for use and enjoyment of the
property;
   (B)   The exception is necessary due to a particular topographical feature
or location of the property; and
   (C)   Granting the exception results in a project which meets the intent of
§
17.060.070.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.060.090 TIME LIMITS; EXTENSIONS.
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any permit granted for
building in the ridgeline scenic corridor shall comply with §
17.040.110 (“Permit Time Limits and Extensions”) of
Chapter 17.040 (“General Zone Regulations”).
(Ord. 837, passed 10-2-2019)
§ 17.060.100 APPEALS.
   Appeals shall be in accordance with the provisions in §§
17.020.110  of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.060.110 ENFORCEMENT.
   Enforcement shall be in accordance with the provisions in § 17.020.130 of
this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.32.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 476, passed - -
1980)
CHAPTER 17.064: SIGNS
Section
   
17.064.010   Purpose and intent
   
17.064.020   Definitions
   
17.064.030   Signs permitted without sign permit
   
17.064.040   Signs requiring permit and staff approval but exempted from design
review
   
17.064.050   Permanent business identification signs; regulations
   
17.064.060   Signs requiring an exception
   
17.064.070   Sign permit; requirements
   
17.064.080   Sign permit; application requirements
   
17.064.090   Building and electrical permits
   
17.064.100   Exception; granting authority; required findings
   
17.064.110   Exception; application
   
17.064.120   Exception; appeal from Planning Commission decision
   
17.064.130   Exception; term; extension
   
17.064.140   Design criteria
   
17.064.150   Non-conforming signs
   
17.064.160   Violations; nuisance declaration
   
17.064.170   Nuisance; abatement procedure
§ 17.064.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:
   (A)   Protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the town by
ensuring that the number, type, size and design of all signs will be compatible
with the town’s unique character;
   (B)   Safeguard and enhance property values;
   (C)   Protect and enhance the town’s natural setting and small-scale
residential character;
   (D)   Protect the high quality of architectural design of the newer
buildings and preserve the character of the older buildings;
   (E)   Improve the appearance of the town as a place to live and to work, and
as an attraction to non- residents who come to visit or to trade;
   (F)   Encourage sound signing practices as an aid to business and for the
information of the public; and
   (G)   Encourage creative designs and a high quality sign program throughout
the town through implementation of the design review criteria and standards in
this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.064.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AREA OF SIGN.
      (1)   The area in square feet of the smallest rectangle enclosing the
total exterior surface of a sign having but one exposed exterior surface;
should the sign have more than one surface, the sign area shall be the
aggregate area of all sign surfaces measured as above; except that, strictly
two-sided faced signs (surfaces back to back) shall be considered to have only
one face.
      (2)   If any structural element which supports a sign is designed,
painted or otherwise arranged so as to substantially contribute to the
advertising qualities of the sign, the structural elements shall be included in
the smallest rectangle used to compute the area of the sign.
      (3)   In the case where a name or design is applied directly to a wall
the area shall be the smallest rectangle enclosing the name and/or design. In
the case where a name or design is applied to an awning, the area shall also be
the smallest rectangle enclosing the name and/or design.
   AREA OF DOUBLE-FACED SIGN. The area of a sign in which the two faces are
parallel and not more than two feet apart. In computing the area of a
doublefaced sign, only one face of the sign shall be included.
   BUILDING FACE. The general outer surface of a main exterior wall of a
building. For example, a building whose plan is rectangular has four main
exterior walls and four building faces.
   BUILDING FRONTAGE. The portion of a building parallel and adjacent to a
public street and serving as the main access to the building.
   FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is self-supporting, standing on the ground
in a fixed location and not attached to or projecting over any building or
building projection. The signs may be supported from the ground by one or more
uprights, poles or posts, with or without braces.
   LIGHT POLLUTION. Excessive artificial light that includes LIGHT TRESPASS
(light falling where it is not intended, wanted, or needed) or GLARE (excessive
brightness which causes visual discomfort or can decrease visibility).
   PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign, other than a wall sign, which is erected or
supported by a building or roof and which projects outward or upward therefrom.
Any sign under a marquee, porch, walkway covering or similar covering structure
and in place generally perpendicular to the wall of the adjoining building
shall be deemed to be a projecting sign.
   SIGN. Any written, pictorial representation, symbol, insignia, banner,
placement of lighting or any other feature of similar character, or whatever
material, which is used to identify, announce, direct attention to or advertise
which is erected on the ground or on any bush, tree, rock, wall, post, fence,
building, structure, vehicle or in or on any place whatsoever and which is
visible from outside a building.
   WALL SIGN. Any sign posted, painted on, suspended from or otherwise affixed
to or a part of the material of the exterior surface of any building or
structure in an essentially flat position or with the exposed face of the sign
in a place approximately parallel to the front of a canopy, porch or similar
covering structure.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign secured to the inside or outside of any window or
otherwise located within any building as to be primarily visible from the
exterior of any building through any window or door.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 785, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.064.030 SIGNS PERMITTED WITHOUT SIGN PERMIT.
   The following signs are not to be included in the measurement of the total
allowable area and may be erected without a permit:
   (A)   Commercial signs.
      (1)   Nameplates and business information signs limited to name,
occupation, and hours of operation, not exceeding one square foot in area,
provided that they are not illuminated and contain no reflective paint or
material, except gold leaf or silver leaf.
      (2)   Signs indicating credit cards honored, advertising stickers,
trading stamps, hours of special operation or association memberships, provided
that no individual sign exceeds one square foot in area and that the total area
of all signs does not exceed three square feet.
      (3)   One sign indicating the price of gasoline which complies with the
requirements of the State of California Business and Professions Code and which
is no larger than 24 square feet.
      (4)   Real estate signs; provided, however, that, each parcel shall have
no more than one sign, the sign shall not exceed three square feet in area,
shall pertain only to the prospective sale or lease of the premises on which
displayed and may display the name, address and telephone number of the owner,
agent or lessor of the premises; provided further, that the real estate open
house directional signs of similar dimensions may be located on premises other
than that advertised for sale or lease between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 4:00
p.m. on Sundays only.
      (5)   Construction signs; one on a site to give information about what is
being constructed not to exceed 16 square feet. (The signs shall not be erected
prior to the commencement of construction and shall be removed before a final
release on the construction is given by the Building Official.)
      (6)   Temporary window signs announcing specials, sales and/or hours of
special operation.
         (a)   The signs may be of the following sizes:
 
Store Frontage      Sign Size
0 - 20 linear feet  Up to 6 square feet
0 - 30 linear feet  Up to 12 square feet
0 - 40 linear feet  Up to 18 square feet
0 - 40+ linear feet 1 square foot of signing per linear foot
 
         (b)   In all cases, the size of permitted signs shall not exceed 25
percent of the window area. Each sign so displayed shall be dated on the back
of the sign and shall not be displayed for more than 15 days. There shall be at
least eight days in any consecutive 30-day period, beginning the first of the
month, where no temporary window signs shall be displayed. The lettering on
read-a-boards will be considered as temporary signing under this section, but
exempted from the time requirements stated above.
      (7)   Garage and yard sale signs located on private property when not
exceeding two square feet in size, when posted and removed the day of the sale.
   (B)   Temporary noncommercial signs (including, but not limited to,
political or ideological signs, holiday displays, and announcements for non-
commercial public activities or events); with the owner’s permission in all
zones and when not over 24 inches by 48 inches; provided, however, that, the
sign shall be erected no sooner than 60 days before and shall be removed within
seven days after the election or event; or if not concerning a particular
event, then the sign may be posted for 67 days without a permit. Additionally,
temporary noncommercial signs are allowed in the same locations, in the same
size, and for the same duration that commercial signs are allowed without a
permit. (Note: Permanent non- commercial signs, and temporary noncommercial
signs exceeding the size limitations set forth in § 17.064.030, may be approved
pursuant to § 17.064.070).
(Prior Code, § 17.34.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 585, passed - -1989; Am. Ord. 785, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.064.040 SIGNS REQUIRING PERMIT AND STAFF APPROVAL BUT EXEMPTED FROM DESIGN
REVIEW
   (A)   Temporary business identification signs.
      (1)   A temporary business identification sign may be issued if an
application for a permanent sign is pending.
      (2)   The signs may be up to eight square feet and in two colors.
      (3)   Temporary business identification signs may be approved by staff
for 120 days if they meet the design review criteria of §
17.064.140.
      (4)   The fee for the permanent sign permit shall cover the temporary
sign permit.
   (B)   Banners.
      (1)   Temporary banners.
         (a)   1.   A sign permit for temporary banners may be approved by
staff if the banner is to inform the public of events which are not commercial
enterprises.
            2.   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
               BANNER. A free-floating sign which is not attached to a solid
surface.
         (b)   The banners may be up to 60 square feet with a width of three
feet.
         (c)    Banners of larger dimensions may be approved by the Planning
Commission.
         (d)   Banners must conform to the design review criteria of §
17.064.140 and the requirements of the Fairfax Public Works Department.
         (e)   Banners may be displayed seven days preceding the event and
removed the day following the event.
         (f)   A fee set by resolution of the Town Council will be charged to
cover the cost of installing
and removing the banner. The fee may be held as a deposit for applicants who
accept the responsibility of installing and removing the banner themselves.
      (2)   Decorative banners.
         (a)   A sign permit for decorative cloth banners having no insignia,
lettering or logo representing any store, manufacturer or product may be
approved by staff.
         (b)   The banners are limited to one per ten feet of frontage up to
two per storefront.
         (c)   The banners must be fastened to allow eight feet of clearance
from the sidewalk and two feet of clearance from the curb. The sign permit
shall include the right to encroach over the town right- of-way if these
minimum standards are complied with.
         (d)   A fee set by resolution of the Town Council will be charged to
cover the cost of processing the application.
      (3)   Grand opening signs. A sign permit for a grand opening sign in
addition to other allowed signs may be approved by staff for 60 days, provided
that, the sign conforms to size standards for temporary signs.
   (C)   Conforming signs. Signs which conform to the sign regulations in §
17.064.050 and the design criteria in §
17.064.140 are conforming signs.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -1983 ; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.064.050 PERMANENT BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGNS; REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted area of signing.
      (1)   The aggregate area of all permanent identification signs for any
building shall not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of frontage of
the building; provided, however, that, no single sign shall exceed 100 square
feet in area.
      (2)   Projecting signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area per face.
      (3)   Read-a-boards are permanent signs and their square footage shall be
included in the aggregate area for the building. The information on the read-a-
board shall be regulated by §
17.064.030(I), temporary window signs.
   (B)   Number of permanent signs. Two signs are allowed for each place of
business in each building as long as one sign is a projecting sign.
   (C)   Additional numbers.
      (1)   In addition to the number of signs permitted above, one additional
identification sign may be permitted for a shopping center where there is any
combination of five or more businesses on a single, commonly owned or leased
parcel with common access and parking.
      (2)   The total area of the additional sign shall not exceed 100 square
feet.
   (D)   Multi-sided signs.
      (1)   Multi-sided signs constructed with faces at any angle shall be
counted as one sign per face, both as to the number and area.
      (2)   Other signs constructed in the form of a cylinder, sphere or
similar figure, shall be considered as one sign and the total surface area
shall be computed as sign area.
      (3)   In computing the area of double-faced signs, only one face of a
sign shall be included, provided that, the two faces shall be parallel and not
more than two feet apart.
   (E)   Height; projecting or wall sign. No part of any sign shall extend
above the top level of the wall upon or in front of which it is situated.
   (F)   Clearances.
      (1)   The owner of any sign shall maintain legal clearances from
communications and electrical facilities. The clearances shall be no less than
those specified by the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California.
      (2)   Any sign located in or projecting into a pedestrian right-of-way
shall maintain a minimum eight-foot clearance from ground level to the lowest
part of the sign, excluding vertical supports, and shall have a minimum two-
foot clearance from the curb.
      (3)   Signs located in vehicular rights-of-way shall have a minimum
clearance of 14 feet in height and may not be illuminated.
      (4)   No sign may project more than four feet from a building wall.
      (5)   Every freestanding sign shall be wholly on the property occupied by
the use or uses identified or advertised and not within ten feet of any public
right-of-way.
   (G)   Prohibited locations.
      (1)   No sign shall be erected in a manner that any portion of the sign
or its support will interfere with the free use of any fire escape, exit or
standpipe, or obstruct any required stairway, door, ventilator or window.
      (2)   No sign shall be erected in such a manner that it will, or
reasonably may be expected to, interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead
traffic.
      (3)   No sign shall be erected upon any public street, sidewalk, parking
lot or other public way or place.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -1983)
§ 17.064.060 SIGNS REQUIRING AN EXCEPTION.
   The following signs are prohibited unless an exception is granted under §
17.064.100:
   (A)   Vehicle signs; a sign attached to or suspended from a motor vehicle
when located or displayed in a manner that the purpose of the vehicle is the
display of the sign;
   (B)   Roof signs; no sign or structure shall be painted or erected upon or
over the roof or parapet of any building; (No sign shall be supported by or
connected to the roof. No sign shall project above the top level of the wall
upon or in front of which it is situated.)
   (C)   Moving sign structures, pennants or whirligigs;
   (D)   Advertising signs; a permanent sign larger than one square foot which
advertises or displays the make, brand name or manufacturer’s name of any
product, article or service, except when essential to and entirely integrated
with the name of the business; (Signs which include words identifying a product
which are not brand names or manufacturers’ names will not be considered
advertising.)
   (E)   Reflectors, reflective lights and flashing lights;
   (F)   Neon and internally illuminated signs; and
   (G)   Freestanding signs with a total height, including structure not
exceeding the building height.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -1983)
§ 17.064.070 SIGN PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
17.064.030, no sign or banner shall be installed, maintained, erected, moved,
altered, replaced or repaired, nor shall any structure work be done in
connection therewith without a sign permit issued by staff.
   (B)   No sign permit shall be issued unless the sign conforms to the
applicable criteria in §
17.064.140 or unless an exception is granted in accordance with §§
17.064.100 through
17.064.130. Noncommercial signs are allowed in the same locations, in the same
size and for the same duration that commercial signs are permitted.
   (C)   (1)   When work is begun without the required permit an investigation
of the work shall be made before the permit is issued.
      (2)   An investigation fee established by resolution of the Town Council
shall be charged in addition to the sign permit fee and the double building
permit fee as provided in the Uniform Building Code.
   (D)   (1)   The staff’s decision on any sign permit application may be
appealed to the Planning Commission within five days of the action.
      (2)   The appeal shall be filed on the prescribed form and accompanied by
a fee set by resolution of the Town Council.
   (E)   Sign permits issued for signs projecting over the town right-of-way
shall include permission to encroach into the town right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -1983; Am. Ord.
passed 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord. 785, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.064.080 SIGN PERMIT; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   An application for a sign permit shall be made, in writing, and filed
with a fee adopted by resolution of the Town Council and plans of the proposed
sign.
   (B)   The plans shall include the following information in order to be
considered complete:
      (1)   Precise location of the sign on the building;
      (2)   Precise location of the sign with respect to street building face;
      (3)   Diagram of the sign with dimensions indicated showing the exact
design drawn to scale including size and style of lettering;
      (4)   Sample colors and materials;
      (5)   Electrical work and lighting; and
      (6)   Sections of the sign drawn to scale.
   (C)   The staff may waive any of these requirements or may require
additional information as needed to describe the proposed signing.
   (D)   An application must be determined to be complete or incomplete by the
staff within five days of filing and either scheduled for design review or held
for additional information.
   (E)   The staff’s determination that an application is incomplete may be
appealed to the Planning Commission within five days of written notice.
   (F)   The appeal must be filed on a prescribed appeal form available from
the Town Clerk and filed with a fee set by resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 515, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 764,
passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.064.090 BUILDING AND ELECTRICAL PERMITS.
   (A)   Upon approval of the application and upon issuance of the sign permit,
a building permit shall be secured and a permit fee paid in accordance with the
Uniform Building Code for freestanding and projecting signs.
   (B)   An electrical permit shall be secured and a fee paid for all lights.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982)
§ 17.064.100 EXCEPTION; GRANTING AUTHORITY; REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   (A)    The Planning Commission  may grant an exception in accordance with
the procedure specified in this section and §§
17.064.110 through
17.064.130 and authorize a specific exception to §§
17.064.050 or
17.064.060.
   (B)    The Planning Commission  may grant an exception if it finds that the
exception is not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and
that the strict adherence to the regulation may cause unnecessary hardship if
one of the following exists:
      (1)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions, not
resulting from any act of the owner or applicant, apply to the location under
consideration and not generally to other business or properties in the
vicinity;
      (2)   The exception is the minimum necessary to serve its intended use;
      (3)   The application submitted is extraordinary and outstanding in
design; or
      (4)   The sign is of historical significance.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982 ; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.064.110 EXCEPTION; APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for exception from the provisions of this chapter
shall be filed with the application for a sign permit, accompanied by the plans
and sketches as required to properly set forth the exception required and a
filing fee set by resolution of the Town Council. The application shall be
acted upon by the Planning Commission in accordance with §
17.064.130.
   (B)   Within 30 days after an application is deemed complete, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the application at a regular or
special meeting of the Planning Commission.
   (C)   The Planning Commission may approve or deny the application. Failure
of the Planning Commission to act on an application shall constitute denial.
   (D)   (1)   The Planning Commission may require such terms or conditions to
the granting of the exception as it may deem necessary. Non- compliance with
these terms or conditions shall be a cause of revocation.
      (2)   Revisions to the terms or conditions of a granted exception shall
require a new application and fee.
   (E)   An application may be continued with the consent of the applicant, in
writing, or recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
   (F)   The exception shall become effective upon issuance of the sign permit
by staff.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.064.120 EXCEPTION; APPEAL FROM PLANNING COMMISSION DECISION.
   (A)   Within ten days following the date of a decision by the Planning
Commission, an appeal to the Town Council from the decision may be filed with
the Town Clerk by the applicant or any aggrieved person on a form prescribed by
the Town Clerk.
   (B)   The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is claimed that there
was an error or abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission, or wherein the
decision is not supported by the evidence in the record.
   (C)   In considering such an appeal, the Town Council shall determine
whether the proposed use conforms to the guidelines of §
17.064.140 and to any other applicable criteria, and may approve or disapprove
the proposed design, or require such changes as are, in its judgment, necessary
to accomplish the general purposes of this chapter.
   (D)   The determination of the Town Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2- 1-2012)
§ 17.064.130 EXCEPTION; TERM; EXTENSION.
   (A)   All approvals granted by the Planning Commission under §§
17.064.100 through
17.064.120 shall expire within six months unless acted upon by the issuance of
a building permit or the erection of the approved sign.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may grant an extension of the expiration
period by six months if it finds that the extension is necessitated by
circumstances beyond the applicant’s control.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.064.140 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   All permanent signs must conform to the following criteria:
      (1)   The sign must meet the purpose and intent of §
17.064.010 of this chapter.
      (2)   The sign may not be garish, excessively brilliant or otherwise
inappropriate to the character or plans of the town.
      (3)   The sign must be architecturally a part of the design of the
building rather than a feature independent of and in conflict with the design
of the building.
      (4)   The color and material of any sign shall be compatible with the
color and material of any wall on which a sign is painted or to which the sign
is attached.
      (5)   The sign must be designed and installed in such a manner as to
ensure adequate security and stabilization to minimize or eliminate risk of
injury to persons and property.
      (6)   If lighting is installed, it shall not cause glare to passing
pedestrians or motorists or cause light pollution.
   (B)   All temporary noncommercial signs must conform to the following
criteria:
      (1)   The sign must be designed and installed in such a manner as to
ensure adequate security and stabilization to minimize or eliminate risk of
injury to persons and property.
      (2)   If lighting is installed, it shall not cause glare to passing
pedestrians or motorists or cause light pollution.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.140) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 500, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 785, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.064.150 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   One-year limitation. Signs existing in the town prior to the date of
enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter, but prohibited herein may
be continued in use without expansion or alteration for one year following the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   (B)   Elimination of non-conformity. At the expiration of this period, the
non-conforming signs shall be removed, changed so as to conform, approved as an
exception under §
17.064.100 or abated.
   (C)   Record of non-conforming signs.
      (1)   Within three months of the effective date of adoption of the
revised sign ordinance, the town shall compile a list of signs which, as of
such date, do not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The town shall cause to be mailed to the owners of property on
which non-conforming signs are located notice of the existence of the non-
conforming signs and the time within which the same must be made to conform or
abated.
      (3)   For purposes of the notification, the last known name and address
of the owner of the property in question shall be used as shown upon the
records of the county or the last equalized assessment roll of the town.
      (4)   Notification to the owner of the property shall be deemed to be
notification to the owner of the sign in question. The mailing of the notice
shall be done primarily as a convenience to the owner, and failure to give the
notice, or of the owner to receive the same, shall, in no way, impair the
effectiveness of the provisions of this section or the validity of any
proceedings taken for the abatement of any such sign.
   (D)   Abatement.
      (1)   Non-conforming signs shall either be made to conform with the
provisions of this chapter or abated within the applicable period of time
hereinafter set forth. In the event they are not, the town shall order the same
abated by the owner of the property and any other person known to be
responsible for the maintenance of the sign.
      (2)   It shall thereafter be unlawful for any such person to maintain or
suffer to be maintained any non-conforming sign on any property owned or
controlled by him or her.
   (E)   Alteration of non-conforming signs. No non- conforming sign may be
altered, reconstructed or moved without being made to comply in all respects
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.150) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.064.160 VIOLATIONS; NUISANCE DECLARATION.
   (A)   Any sign erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter is declared to be a public nuisance in accordance with § 17.02.150 of
this title.
   (B)   The staff may ask the Town Council to declare a sign a public nuisance
if the sign has been abandoned, ceased to function or became dilapidated. The
following defects will be considered in determining where a sign has ceased to
function and/or become dilapidated:
      (1)   Substantial damage either in support structure or sign face;
      (2)   Illegible sign face resulting from fading, rusting or erosion,
faulty lettering or missing illumination; and
      (3)   Safety for passing vehicles or pedestrians.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.160) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981)
§ 17.064.170 NUISANCE; ABATEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The notice to remove the sign shall cite this chapter as authority and
shall provide that the sign shall be removed within seven days from the date of
the notice and shall further provide that upon failure to heed the provision of
the notice, the subject sign shall be impounded by the Police Department.
   (B)   Signs removed upon notice and subsequently returned to the same or
similar location shall be impounded without further notice.
   (C)   Signs impounded under the provisions of this chapter shall be retained
without guarantee for a period of 30 days and may be reclaimed within that
period by the owner of the sign upon application made at Town Hall. The
application shall require proper identification and the payment of a fee set by
resolution of the Town Council to cover the cost of impounding and storage.
   (D)   Signs impounded under the provisions of this chapter and remaining
unclaimed after the 30 days provided in division (C) above may be disposed of
in any manner whatsoever at the discretion of the Town Manager.
(Prior Code, § 17.34.170) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 488, passed - -
1981)
CHAPTER 17.068: FLOODPLAINS
Section
Article I: Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Statement of Purpose,
Methods of Reducing Flood Losses, and Definitions
   
17.068.010   Statutory authorization
   
17.068.020   Findings of fact
   
17.068.030   Statement of purpose
   
17.068.040   Methods of reducing flood losses
   
17.068.050   Definitions
Article II: General Provisions
   
17.068.060   Applicability
   
17.068.070   Basis for special flood hazard area establishment
   
17.068.080   Compliance
   
17.068.090   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
17.068.100   Interpretation
   
17.068.110   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Article III: Administration
   
17.068.120   Establishment of development permit
   
17.068.130   Floodplain Administrator; designated
   
17.068.140   Floodplain Administrator; duties and responsibilities generally
   
17.068.150   Floodplain Administrator; permit review
   
17.068.160   Floodplain Administrator; use of other base flood data
   
17.068.170   Floodplain Administrator; alteration or relocation of watercourse
   
17.068.180   Floodplain Administrator; availability of public records
   
17.068.190   Floodplain Administrator; boundary interpretation
   
17.068.200   Floodplain Administrator; authority
Article IV: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
17.068.210   Standards of construction
   
17.068.220   Standards for utilities
   
17.068.230   Standards for subdivisions
   
17.068.240   Standards for manufactured homes
   
17.068.250   Floodways
   
17.068.260   Mudflow-prone areas
Article V: Variance Procedure
   
17.068.270   Appeal Board
   
17.068.280   Conditions for variances
ARTICLE I: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, STATEMENT OF PURPOSE,
METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES, AND DEFINITIONS
§ 17.068.010 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of California has, in Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65302,
65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt
regulations to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Town Council of Fairfax does ordain as set out in
this article.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.010) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.020 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood hazard areas of Fairfax are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   (1)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas.
      (2)   Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.020) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.030 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in the areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
   (G)   To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
   (H)   To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.030) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.040 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging
increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve the uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.040) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance
rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly
defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and
indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA.
   AREA OF SPECIAL MUDSLIDE (I.E., MUDFLOW) HAZARD. The area subject to severe
mudslides (i.e., mudflows). The area is designated as Zone M on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. Also called the 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALLS.
      (1)   Any type of walls, whether solid or lattice, and whether
constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic or any other stable
building material which is not part of the structural support of the building
and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action
without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which
they are used or any buildings to which they might be carried by floodwaters.
      (2)   A BREAKAWAY WALL shall have a safe design loading resistance of not
less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot.
      (3)   Use of breakaway walls must be certified by a registered engineer
or architect and shall meet the following conditions:
         (a)   Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood; and
         (b)   The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any
structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously in the event of the base flood.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations and storage of
equipment or materials.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of floodwaters, the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source and
the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of
water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of
water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually
high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or
by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal
surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in
flooding as defined in this definition.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP. The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). The official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Insurance
Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
   FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated
by water from any source (see definition of FLOODING).
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management
regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as flood-plain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also
referred to as REGULATORY FLOODWAY.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose
unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface
prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain
management purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers,
travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than
180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which
the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by the community.
   ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD. A flood which has a one percent
annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. It is identical to the “base
flood”, which will be the term used throughout this chapter.
   PERSON. An individual or his or her agent, firm, partnership, association or
corporation, or agent of the aforementioned groups, or this state or its
agencies or political subdivisions.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this
is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts
may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development
from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal financial
exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook and the like.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). An area having special flood or flood-
related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE,
A99 or AH.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the
permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost
of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure
either:
         (a)   Before the improvement or repair is started; or
         (b)   If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before
the damage occurred.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or
other structural part of the building commences, whether that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the structure.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.050) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 668, passed - -
1997)
ARTICLE II: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 17.068.060 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards and areas of
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards within the jurisdiction of Fairfax.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.060) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.070 BASIS FOR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA ESTABLISHMENT.
   The area of special flood hazard and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
hazards identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal
Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood
Insurance Study for Town of Fairfax,” dated March, 1977, with an accompanying
flood insurance rate map and flood boundary and floodway maps, and all
subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared
to be a part of this chapter as well as amendments thereto.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.070) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 668, passed - -
1997)
§ 17.068.080 COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located,
extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
   (B)   Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with
any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Town Council from taking such lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.080) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.090 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant
or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.090) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.100 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.100) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.110 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations.
   (B)   Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may
be increased by man-made or natural causes.
   (C)   (1)   This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of
special flood hazards and areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
      (2)   This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town,
any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.110) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATION
§ 17.068.120 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins within any area of special flood hazards or areas of
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) established in §
17.068.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited
to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing.
   (B)   Specifically, the following information is required:
      (1)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; in Zone AO or VO, elevation of
highest adjacent grade and proposed elevation of lowest floor of all
structures.
      (2)   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
structure will be floodproofed;
      (3)   All appropriate certifications listed in §
17.068.180 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.120) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.130 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; DESIGNATED.
   The Planning Director is appointed to administer and implement this chapter
by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.130) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.140 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES GENERALLY.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but not be limited to the provisions set out in §§
17.068.150 through
17.068.200.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.140) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.150 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; PERMIT REVIEW.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all development permits to
determine that:
      (1)   The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      (3)   The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and
      (4)   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined, but a
floodway has not been designated.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ADVERSELY AFFECTS. Combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more
than one foot at any point.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.150) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988; Am. Ord. 668, passed - -
1997)
§ 17.068.160 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; USE OF OTHER BASE FLOOD DATA.
   (A)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
17.068.070, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source, in order to administer Article IV of this chapter.
   (B)   Any such information shall be submitted to the Town Council for
adoption.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.160) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.170 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; ALTERATION OR RELOCATION OF WATERCOURSE.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall, whenever a watercourse is to be altered
or relocated:
   (A)   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water
Resources prior to the alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit
evidence of the notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;
   (B)   Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse is maintained.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.170) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.180 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; AVAILABILITY OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall obtain and maintain for public inspection
and make available as needed:
   (A)   The certification required in §
17.068.210(C)(1) (floor elevations);
   (B)   The certification required in §
17.068.210(C)(2) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);
   (C)   The certification required in §
17.068.210(C)(3)(c) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
   (D)   The certification required in §§
17.068.210(C)(4)(a) or
17.068.210(C)(4)(b) (wet floodproofing standard);
   (E)   The certified elevation required in §
17.068.230(B) (subdivision standards);
   (F)   The certification required in §
17.068.250(A) (floodway encroachments); and
   (G)   The reports required in §
17.068.260(D) (mudflow standards).
(Prior Code, § 17.36.180) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.190 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards or areas of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) (for example, where there appears
to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions).
   (B)   The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article V of
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.190) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.200 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR; AUTHORITY.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall take action to remedy violations of this
chapter as specified in §
17.068.080.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.200) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
ARTICLE IV: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 17.068.210 STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required.
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of §
17.068.240.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
      (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
   (C)   Elevation and floodproofing.
      (1)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. Non-residential structures may meet the standards in division (C)(3)
of this section. Upon the completion of the structure the elevation of the
lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered professional
engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community’s Building Inspector be
properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the
Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   New construction and substantial improvement of any structure in
Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including basement, above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
FIRM, or at least two feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential
structures may meet the standards in division (C)(3) of this section. Upon the
completion of the structure the elevation of the lowest floor including
basement shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor,
or verified by the Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such
certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain
Administrator.
      (3)   Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance
with divisions (C)(1) or (2) of this section or together with attendant utility
and sanitary facilities:
         (a)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
         (b)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         (c)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall
be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
      (4)   Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements,
that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
         (a)   Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not
less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to
flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters; or
         (b)   Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard
approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.
      (5)   Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in §
17.068.240.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.210) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.220 STANDARDS FOR UTILITIES.
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.
   (B)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.220) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.230 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard
area and the elevation of the base flood.
   (B)   All final subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed
structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final
pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage.
   (D)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (E)   All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.230) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.240 STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOMES.
   All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured
homes shall:
   (A)   Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood
elevation; and
   (B)   Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.240) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.250 FLOODWAYS.
   Located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
17.068.070 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
   (A)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered
professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments
shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this article.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.250) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.260 MUDFLOW-PRONE AREAS.
   (A)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review permits for proposed
construction or other development to determine if it is proposed within a
mudslide area.
   (B)   Permits shall be reviewed to determine that the proposed development
is reasonably safe from mudslide hazards. Factors to be considered in making
this determination include but are not limited to:
      (1)   The type and quality of soils;
      (2)   Evidence of ground water or surface water problems;
      (3)   The depth and quality of any fill;
      (4)   The overall slope of the site; and
      (5)   The weight that any proposed development will impose on the slope.
   (C)   Within areas which have mudslide hazards, the following requirements
apply:
      (1)    A site investigation and further review shall be made by persons
qualified in geology and soils engineering;
      (2)   The proposed grading, excavation, new construction and substantial
improvements shall be adequately designed and protected against mudslide
damages;
      (3)   The proposed grading, excavations, new construction and substantial
improvements do not aggravate the existing hazard by creating either on-site or
off-site disturbances; and
      (4)   Drainage, planting, watering and maintenance shall not endanger
slope stability.
   (D)   Within Zone M on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the community shall
adopt a drainage ordinance which at least complies with the standards of §§
7001 through 7006 and §§ 7008 through 7015 of the most recent amendment of the
1973 Uniform Building Code:
      (1)   The location of foundation and utility systems of new construction
and substantial improvements;
      (2)   The location, drainage and maintenance of all excavations, cuts and
fills and planted slopes;
      (3)   Protective measures including but not limited to retaining walls,
buttress fills, subdrains, diverter terraces, benchings and the like; and
      (4)   Engineering drawings and specifications to be submitted for all
corrective measures, accompanied by supporting soils engineering and geology
reports.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.260) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
ARTICLE V: VARIANCE PROCEDURE
§ 17.068.270 APPEAL BOARD.
   (A)   The Town Council of Fairfax shall hear and decide appeals and requests
for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged
there is anerror in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
   (C)   In passing upon such applications, the Town Council shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing divisions (C)(1) through (11) of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
   (E)   Upon consideration of the factors of division (C) of this section and
the purposes of this chapter, the Town Council may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this
chapter.
   (F)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon
request.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.270) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
§ 17.068.280 CONDITIONS FOR VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this section.
   (B)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (C)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
   (D)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
      (1)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
      (2)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      (3)    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary
public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of, the
public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (E)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of divisions (A)
through (D) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base
flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
   (F)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the
Town Council in the office of the Marin County Recorder and shall be recorded
in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of
land.
(Prior Code, § 17.36.280) (Ord. 577, passed - -1988)
CHAPTER 17.072: HILL AREA RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY ZONE
Section
   
17.072.010   Purpose
   
17.072.020   Applicability
   
17.072.030   Development permit required
   
17.072.040   Development permit; procedural requirements
   
17.072.050   Uses permitted without a development permit
   
17.072.060   Referral to Planning Commission
   
17.072.070   Design review procedures
   
17.072.080   Development permit application; contents
   
17.072.090   Development and design standards
   
17.072.100   Planning Commission action
   
17.072.110   Development permit; required findings for approval
   
17.072.120   Appeal
   
17.072.130   Reapplication
   
17.072.140   Time limits; extensions
§ 17.072.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)    It is the purpose of the hill area residential development overlay
zone to provide review of and objective standards for development proposed for
undeveloped land in hill areas.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to accomplish the following:
      (1)   Encourage maximum retention of natural topographic features such as
drainage ways, streams, slopes, ridgelines, rock outcroppings, vistas, natural
plant formation and trees;
      (2)   Minimize grading of hillside areas;
      (3)   Provide a safe means of ingress and egress for vehicular and
pedestrian traffic to and within hillside areas;
      (4)   Minimize water runoff and soil erosion problems during and after
construction;
      (5)   Prevent loss of life, reduce injuries and property damage and
minimize economic dislocations from geologic hazards; and
      (6)    Ensure that infill development on hillside lots is of a size and
scale appropriate to the property and is consistent with other properties in
the vicinity under the same zone classification.
      (7)   Provide incentives for creation of permanent open space with low
impact clustered residential development.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.020 APPLICABILITY.
    Properties zoned RS-6, RS-7.5, RD 5.5-7, RM, RM-S, PDD, SF-RMP, UR-7, or
UR-10, fall into the HRD overlay zone if they have any of the following
characteristics:
   (A)   The slope of the property is in one of the following categories as
shown on the General Plan Safety Element Figure S-3: Areas Susceptible to
Landslides and/or the California Division of Mines and Geology Map,
"Interpretation of the Relative Stability of Upland Slopes in the Upper Ross
Valley and the Western Part of San Rafael Area Marin County, California," Rice,
Salem J., Smith, Theodore C. and Strand, Rudolph G., 1976 and development of
the lot requires movement of more than the corresponding amount of excavation
and/or fill or replacement of earth with foundation materials:
      (1)   Zero to five percent slope: 200 cubic yards.
      (2)   Five to 15 percent slope: 200 cubic yards.
      (3)   Fifteen to 30 percent slope: 100 cubic yards.
      (4)   Thirty-one percent slope: 50 cubic yards.
   (B)   The property falls within a "Mostly Landslides" or "Multiple
Landslides" landslide hazard zone as shown on Figure S-3: Areas Susceptible to
Landslides and/or the California Division of Mines and Geology Map,
"Interpretation of the Relative Stability of Upland Slopes in the Upper Ross
Valley and the Western Part of San Rafael Area Marin County, California," Rice,
Salem J., Smith, Theodore C. and Strand, Rudolph G., 1976;
   (C)   Access to the property is via a private or public undeveloped roadway;
(an undeveloped roadway is an unpaved or paper road which must be improved.)
(Prior Code, § 17.38.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 845, passed 2-5-
2020; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.072.030 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
    Except for uses listed in §
17.072.050, land in the HRD overlay zone may not be used or developed until
plans for development have been subject to design review to ensure compliance
with objective development and design standards and approved by the Planning
Commission, and a hill area residential development permit is issued.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.040 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The procedural requirements for obtaining the hill area residential
development permit are as follows:
   (A)   Submission of a development plan to the Planning Commission;
   (B)   Public hearing before the Planning Commission, with notice thereof
given pursuant to the provisions of §
17.004.070; and
   (C)   Approval of the hill area residential development permit pursuant to §
17.072.110 of this chapter, subject to appeal to the Town Council under §
17.072.120.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.072.050 USES PERMITTED WITHOUT A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
    The following uses are permitted outright in the HRD overlay zone:
   (A)   Additions to existing structures provided that the addition is not a
50 percent or greater remodel, as prescribed in §
17.016.040 of this title;
   (B)   Accessory structures under 200 square feet in area;
   (C)   Accessory dwelling units and junior accessory dwelling units meeting
the requirements of
Chapter 17.048;
   (D)   Fences and retaining walls (under four feet); and
   (E)   Maintenance and repair of existing structures.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.060 REFERRAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Projects requiring a hill area residential development permit shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to being referred.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall address the following issues using
objective development and design standards established in this title:
      (1)   The visual impact of the structure upon view corridors found to be
significant;
      (2)   The size, scale, siting and design of the proposed structure;
      (3)   Compliance with standards for ridgeline-related development
established by
Chapter 17.060 and standards for low-impact clustered development pursuant to §
17.072.090 (H);
      (4)   Materials and color of the structure; and
      (5)   Landscaping.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 693, passed 7-16-2002; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012; Am. Ord.
886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.072.070 DESIGN REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Projects shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Chapter 17.020 of this title.
   (B)   A separate application for design review shall be required.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.080 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   The submittal shall include the following information:
   (A)   Completed application made by owner or owners of the land involved, or
any agent thereof, on forms prescribed by the town accompanied by fees
established by resolution of the Town Council;
   (B)   Topographical and boundary survey signed by a licensed surveyor
showing:
      (1)   Contours at five-foot intervals;
      (2)   Property lines and dimensions;
      (3)   Native vegetation (freestanding trees over six inches in diameter
and all stands); and
      (4)   Existing structures including fences and retaining walls.
   (C)   Site plan showing:
      (1)    Location of existing and new structures including fences,
driveways and retaining walls;
      (2)   New on-site drainage facilities and necessary off-site
improvements;
      (3)   Easements existing and proposed; if none exist, a notation of this
must be made;
      (4)   Sanitary sewer, water and storm drainage lines labeled with their
sizes; and
      (5)   Points of access.
      (6)   Relation of the site plan, existing structures, and proposed
structures to ridges identified in the General Plan, scenic highways, and
significant view corridors if the proposed development is within 150 feet
horizontal distance or 100 feet vertical distance of an adjacent ridgeline.
   (D)   Fairfax Tree Committee report and permit if tree removal is requested;
   (E)   Report by a registered civil engineer specializing in soils and
foundations, including:
      (1)   Site soil drainage;
      (2)   Relevant watershed boundaries;
      (3)   Relationship of the proposed construction to drainage patterns in
the vicinity and the cumulative effects of runoff;
      (4)   Site geology and the safety of proposed construction; and
      (5)   Foundation adequacy.
   (F)   A grading and erosion control plan;
   (G)   Elevations, floor plans and roof plans;
   (H)   Exterior finishes and materials;
   (I)   Landscape plan delineating natural and planted areas and generic types
of landscape materials to be used; and
   (J)   Profiles and photographic visual simulations showing relationship
between proposed structures and adjacent off-site improvements and ridges and
the required setbacks (150 feet horizontal distance and 100 feet vertical
distance from an adjacent ridge)..
(Prior Code, § 17.38.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.090 DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following objective development and design standards shall apply to new
development in the HRD overlay zone:
   (A)   Fire management. Projects must comply with the town’s Fire Code.
   (B)   Geologic hazards. Construction shall not be permitted on identified
seismic or geologic hazard areas such as on slides, on natural springs, or on
identified fault zones, without approval from the town engineer, based on
acceptable soils and geologic reports. Development shall be prohibited in areas
determined by the Town Engineer to be geotechnically unstable based on a report
by a licensed soils engineer where the Planning Commission determines that the
corrective work would be inconsistent with the purpose and the intent of this
chapter.
   (C)   Topographical.
      (1)   Graded slopes shall be sculptured and contoured to blend with
natural terrain. Cuts and fills shall not exceed one foot or rise for each one
and one-half feet of run without the approval of the Town Engineer.
      (2)   The grading plan shall include preventative measures to reduce dust
generation, protection of trees and other significant natural features.
      (3)   Retaining structures shall be shown in plan and elevation. Height
of retaining structures shall be minimized. Planting and choice of materials
shall be used to visually integrate the structures with natural surroundings.
      (4)   Grading plans shall include erosion control and revegetation
programs. Where erosion potential exists, silt traps or other engineering
solutions may be required. The timing of grading and construction shall be
controlled by the Town Engineer or other staff designated by the Town Engineer
to avoid failure during construction. No initial grading shall be done during
the rainy season, from October 1 through April 1.
   (D)   Ecological. Projects shall be designed to minimize disruption of
existing ecosystems. Removal,
changes or construction which will destroy important or rare vegetation and/or
wildlife habitats shall be avoided.
      (1)   Removal of any tree, as the term is defined in §
8.28.020, shall be subject to issuance of a tree removal permit as required by
Chapter 8.28 of this code.
      (2)   In areas of diverse wildlife habitat as delineated on the General
Plan Wildlife Habitat and Diversity Map, disruption of trees, shrubs and
natural vegetative cover shall be minimized.
      (3)   No development is permitted 50 feet either side of high water
centerline measured perpendicular to the high-water mark away from the
centerline. Water quality and natural conditions shall be maintained.
   (E)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall minimally disturb natural areas and
shall be compatible with native plant settings. Where appropriate use is
determined by the Planning Commission, fire-resistant and drought-resistant
species shall be utilized. Planting shall not obstruct views or alter solar
energy access of nearby properties.
      (1)   A landscape documentation package shall be provided with the
development application that complies with the standards of the Model Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance which applies to all new residential development
with 500 square feet or more of landscape area. If the total landscaped area is
2,500 square feet or less, an applicant may use the prescriptive compliance
option provided in Appendix D of the Model Ordinance to streamline the review
process. Under this option, turf shall not exceed 25 percent of the landscape
area.
      (2)   No fill, grading, or construction shall be permitted within the
dripline of any existing tree designated for preservation except as may be
recommended by an arborist certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture or a California-registered professional forester.
   (F)   Circulation.
      (1)   Roads shall be designed to meet the requirements of the Town
Engineer, as set forth in the Subdivision Ordinance, and the Fire Department as
set forth in the Fire Code.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may require parking areas to accommodate
public and guest parking in addition to off-street parking for dwelling units.
      (3)   Off-street parking shall conform to the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title.
   (G)   Design. Projects shall be designed to meet the criteria set forth in §
17.020.040 of this title.
   (H)   Low impact clustered development option. In order to enable the
creation of permanent open space that will connect or expand existing open
space, create wildlife corridors,and preserve habitat for endangered species,
the Planning Commission may approve a low impact clustered residential
development in an HRD overlay zone on sites greater than one acre with an
average slope greater than 15 percent that are identified in the General Plan
Housing Element for housing development, subject to design review and the
following standards:
      (1)   Maximum density. The maximum number of units (MN) shall be
determined by a slope density formula as follows, unless a different density is
set in the General Plan or the applicable base zone:
         MN = Development site area (sg. ft.) divided by (10,000 plus 1,200 for
each one percent increase in the average slope of the site above 15 percent).
      (2)   Minimum lot size. The Planning Commission may approve lots that are
less than the minimum lot size and dimensions that otherwise would be required
by the base zoning district or overlay zone, provided that the overall density
does not exceed the General Plan maximum for the site.
      (3)   Gross building square footage. The maximum permitted gross building
area for habitable space is limited to 3,500 sguare feet. Any garage space that
exceeds 500 square feet shall be counted as habitable space.
      (4)   Street layout. All new public streets and private streets shall
meet the standards of §
16.24.040, with the following modifications:
         (a)   New street and driveway grades shall not exceed 18 percent
unless an exception has been approved by the Planning Director and the Director
of Public Works to allow street and driveway grades up to 25 percent.
         (b)   Streets and driveways with slopes over 15 percent shall be a
permanent, durable, non-asphalt hardscape surface. Streets and driveways with
slopes over 18 percent shall have grooves/scoring for traction.
         (c)   A transition shall be provided at the street and driveway apron
to allow vehicles to safely transition to/from roadways and parking areas.
      (5)   Emergency access. At least two means of emergency ingress and
egress shall be provided to all clustered hillside developments with five or
more lots. Existing fire roads providing access to open space areas shall be
retained and maintained if this is determined necessary by the Fire Department.
      (6)   Site layout and building design. All clustered development shall:
         (a)   Locate development along the lowest portion of the property away
from ridgelines, adjacent to existing streets and/or on already disturbed land,
to the extent feasible, to protect undeveloped areas;
         (b)   Use split level building terraces, pier foundations and stepped
footings, as appropriate for the proposed building, to reduce grading and
visual impacts and break up building mass;
         (c)   Site buildings with different floor elevations to achieve height
variation;
         (d)   Design roofs with an offset of at least 18 inches, a change in
pitch, or a gable every 60 linear feet;
         (e)   Articulate facades to produce shadows through wall setbacks,
recessed openings, porches, verandas, moderate overhangs, decks, balconies, and
projecting windows;
         (f)   Not exceed the minimum roof slope standards of the International
Residential Code, as adopted by the town and avoid extended horizontal
rooflines exceeding 40 feet; and
         (g)   Provide at least 200 cubic feet of enclosed, lockable private
storage space for each dwelling unit, separate from the space required for off-
street parking, with a minimum horizontal dimension of four feet.
      (7)   Maximum building height. No part of a primary building shall
exceed:
         (a)   Twenty-eight and one-half feet on the upslope of a lot;
         (b)   Thirty-five feet on the downslope of a lot;
         (c)   Twenty-four feet within 20 feet of a front property line on an
upslope lot; and
         (d)   Twenty-four feet at a rear setback line, measured to the
adjacent natural or finished grade, whichever is lower.
         (e)   One foot of additional building height in the front and the rear
is allowed if the portion of the building above the 24-foot height limit is
setback one foot.
         (f)   The maximum height for accessory dwelling units is established
by
Chapter 17.048.
      (8)   Setbacks. The Planning Commission may approve varied setbacks to
preserve natural features, including zero-side yard setbacks provided a minimum
ten-foot separation is maintained between buildings, front setbacks are at
least ten feet, rear setbacks are at least 20 feet, and garage setbacks are at
least 18 feet. Carports only have to meet the ten-foot front setback.
         (a)   The subdivision map shall specify the location of each zero-lot
line house on a hillside cluster development lot.
         (b)   If the side wall of a house is five feet or less from the
property line, windows or other openings for habitable rooms that allow
visibility into adjacent yards are prohibited. However, windows and openings
that do not allow visibility into adjacent yards, such as a translucent window,
are allowed.
         (c)   To allow design flexibility, structures may encroach into a
required setback for 25 percent of the building length a distance not more than
one half of the reguired yard or setback, if approved by the Planning
Commission through design review, provided there is a compensating increase in
the opposing setback (a five-foot reduction in a front yard setback would
increase the rear yard setback by five feet).
      (9)   Required permanent open space. At least 75 percent of the site must
remain in its natural state and be preserved as permanent open space with a
conservation easement, dedication or transfer to the town, another public
agency, or an open space trust, or other development restriction, that runs
with the land and is approved by the Town Attorney, and recorded in the Marin
County Recorder's Office. None of this land can be used to meet the
requirements for common and private open space established by this chapter.
      (10)   Allowable housing types. The Planning Commission may approve a
variety of housing types, such as cluster cottage housing units, courtyard
clusters, detached town homes, and tiny houses, as well as traditional single-
family dwellings. Tiny houses shall meet the standards of § 17.138.520.
      (11)   Minimum private open space as outdoor living area. Each lot shall
have a minimum 200 square foot usable yard with a minimum dimension of not less
than ten feet.
      (12)   Common facilities. A clustered development may include shared
amenities for residents' use that are designed to offer recreational
opportunities and foster social interaction. These may include common open
space and a common house with a kitchen and dining area for residents and
guests at least 150 square feet in size, laundry, and/or recreational spaces,
as well as work space for artist studios and galleries with minimum horizontal
dimensions of 12 feet.
      (13)   A public access easement (or other development restriction that is
approved by the Town Attorney) shall be used to establish new trails and trail
connections to existing trails and public sidewalks to provide public access
through open space parcels. The development restriction that runs with the land
shall be recorded in the Marin County Recorder's Office.
      (14)   Parking. Parking shall be provided as required by
Chapter 17.052 and the following additional requirements.
         (a)   One guest parking space conveniently placed relative to the
dwelling unit shall be provided for every five units. The Planning Commission,
may approve:
            1.   A reduction in order to minimize grading or avoid tree
removal.
            2.   Allow for parking to be provided on-street in parking bays
meeting the standards for parking on narrow streets set in §
10.04.060.
         (b)   The Planning Commission may allow one of the required resident
parking spaces to be provided off-site in a common parking area that is within
200 feet of the main entrance to the dwelling unit.
      (15)   Landscaping. All low impact clustered residential development
shall:
         (a)   Revegetate scarred or graded areas.
         (b)   On slopes of 2:1 or greater, select plant materials with deep
rooting characteristics that will minimize erosion and reduce surface runoff.
Subdividers also shall use a series of low retaining walls, with sub-drain
lines, to increase planting areas, where feasible. This will reduce runoff and
potential erosion.
         (c)   Use irregular spacing for new plants to achieve a natural
appearance on graded slopes. Plant trees along contour lines in undulating
groups to create grove effects which blur the distinctive line of the graded
slopes, and plant shrubs of varying height between tree strands. Ground covers
of native and introduced species are appropriate for slope erosion control.
         (d)   Submit a landscape documentation package that complies with the
standards of the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance which applies to all
new residential development with 500 square feet or more of landscape area. If
the total landscaped area is 2,500 square feet or less, an applicant may use
the prescriptive compliance option provided in Appendix D of the Model
Ordinance to streamline the review process. Under this option, turf shall not
exceed 25 percent of the landscape area.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.072.100 PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   (A)    An application for a hill area residential development permit shall
be acted upon by the Planning Commission within 180 days of the date the
application is considered complete by the town unless a shorter approval
timeframe is established by state law (see
Chapters 17.026 and
17.027).
   (B)   As a condition of approval, the Planning Commission may change the
location and configuration of lots and building sites to ensure compliance with
objective standards and minimize grading, preserve public views of scenic
corridors, reduce hazards to adjacent property, ensure adequate emergency
ingress and egress, or conserve environmental resources.
   (C)   An application shall be “deemed approved” under state law for failure
to comply with required timeframes for approval.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.110 DEVELOPMENT PERMIT; REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.
   Approval of a hill area residential development permit shall be pursuant to
the following findings:
   (A)    The proposed development is consistent with the General Plan, other
adopted codes, subdivision standards established in Title 16, objective zoning
standards, and objective development and design standards, and policies of the
town and is consistent with the purpose and intent of this title;
   (B)   The site planning preserves identified natural features;
   (C)   Based on the soils report finding, the site can be developed without
geologic, hydrologic or seismic hazards;
   (D)   Vehicular access and parking meet the requirements of
Chapter 17.052 as modified by this chapter, Title 10, Title 12, and Title 16;
and
   (E)   The proposed development harmonizes with the surrounding residential
development, meets the design review criteria of
Chapter 17.020, does not result in the deterioration of significant view
corridors under the objective criteria established in
Chapter 17.060, and if a low impact clustered residential development is
proposed, the standards of §
17.072.090 (H) have been met.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024)
§ 17.072.120 APPEAL.
   Appeal of the Planning Commission action to the Town Council is provided as
per the procedures in
Chapter 17.036 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.072.130 REAPPLICATION.
   In the case of denial, six months must lapse before a new application may be
submitted for review.
(Prior Code, § 17.38.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.072.140 TIME LIMITS; EXTENSIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter , any hill area
residential development permit shall comply with §
17.040.110 (“Permit Time Limits and Extensions”) of
Chapter 17.040 (“General Zone Regulations”).
(Prior Code, §§ 17.38.140, 17.38.150) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Ord. 837,
passed 10-2-2019)
CHAPTER 17.076: RS-7.5 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, MEDIUM DENSITY
Section
   
17.076.010   Generally
   
17.076.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.076.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.076.040   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.076.050   Building site requirements
   
17.076.060   Height regulations
   
17.076.070   Yards
   
17.076.075   Driveway standards
   
17.076.080   Signs
   
17.076.090   Off-street parking
   
17.076.100   Traffic impact permit
   
17.076.110   Variances
§ 17.076.010 GENERALLY.
    No premises in the RS-7.5 single-family residential zone may be used for
any purpose or in any manner, except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.076.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
    Uses in the RS-7.5 zone shall be conducted entirely within a building and
restricted to a single-family dwelling and accessory dwelling units on each
building site. Also permitted by-right are small family day care and limited
residential care. Large family day care, supportive housing for six or fewer
persons, and transitional housing for six or fewer persons also are allowed
with a zoning permit, and no discretionary review is required, provided the
objective standards of
Chapter 17.138 are met.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.076.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Conditional uses and structures in the RS-7.5 zone are as follows:
   (A)   Agricultural uses, including crop and tree farming and viticulture,
but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes or the
sale of any products on the premises;
   (B)   Public or quasi-public buildings and uses of an educational,
religious, cultural or public service type, not including corporation yards,
storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;
   (C)   Temporary tract offices;
   (D)   Public and private non-commercial recreation areas and facilities,
such as country clubs, golf courses and swimming pools;
   (E)   Private stables and corrals;
   (F)   Public utility buildings, structures or facilities, except
transmission lines;
   (G)   Living quarters of persons regularly employed on the premises;
   (H)   Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be of
the same general character as those enumerated in this section; and
   (I)   Accessory uses and structures other than those specifically listed in
§
17.076.040.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord, 509, passed - -
1983; Am. Ord. 538, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 800, passed 2-3-2016; Am. Ord.
810, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 17.076.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses in the RS-7.5 zone are as follows:
   (A)   Home occupations;
   (B)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, lath houses, tool sheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances;
   (C)   Private garages, parking spaces and swimming pools for the exclusive
use of the residents of the premises and their guests;
   (D)   Up to two residential accessory dwelling units, which may include or
one junior accessory dwelling unit, which must be approved in accordance with
the procedures and standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title; and
   (E)   Short-term rental uses that include only one short-term rental unit
per single-family zoned property contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as that structure is not an ADU/JADU
created after January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-
2017; Am. Ord. 865, passed 7-6-2022; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.076.050 BUILDING SITE  REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in §§
17.044.030 through
17.044.050 of this title, a use permit or hill area residential development
permit (HRD) must be first secured in the RS-7.5 zone for any use, occupancy or
physical improvement of or on a building site failing to meet the following
minimum requirements:
   (A)   Minimum area of 7,500 square feet and minimum width of 75 feet with a
slope of ten percent or less;
   (B)   The minimum building site area shall be increased by 300 square feet
for each one percent increase in slope over ten percent to and including 15
percent ; and the minimum width shall be increased three feet for each 500
square feet of additional area required, so that a building site having a slope
of 15 percent shall have a minimum area of 10,000 square feet and a minimum
width of 100 feet;
   (C)   Building sites having a slope of more than 15 percent shall increase
in area above 10,000 square feet and in minimum width above 100 feet, at the
rate of 1,200 square feet of area and three feet of width for each one percent
increase in slope; and
   (D)   Fractions shall be disregarded and dropped in all computations made
under this section.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.076.060 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The following height regulations apply in the RS-7.5 zone.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or
less shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories.
      (2)   On lots having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use and situated on the downhill side of the
street upon which it has its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height,
and if situated on the uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in
height nor contain more than three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that,
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.  The height of accessory dwelling units is governed by
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 490, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885,
passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.076.070 YARDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building in the RS-7.5
zone having a slope of not more than ten percent shall have yards as follows:
      (1)   A front and a rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 30
feet, but neither yard having a depth of less than ten feet; and/or
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 20 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
RS-7.5 zone having a slope of more than ten percent shall have yards as
follows:
      (1)   A front and rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 40
feet, but the front yard having a depth of not less than six feet and the rear
yard a depth of not less than 15 feet;
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 25 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than ten feet.
   (C)   Setback standards for accessory dwelling units are established in .
(Prior Code, § 17.40.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.076.075 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the RS 7.5
Single-family Residential Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.076.080 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the RS-7.5 single-family
residential zone, except as authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.076.090 OFF-STREET PARKING.
    Off-street parking spaces and facilities in the RS-7.5 zone shall be
provided as required or allowed by the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title and, for accessory dwelling units, as required by
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.076.100 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the RS-7.5 zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.076.110 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, lot coverage, floor area ratio or buildable area, or any
combination thereof, when the reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining
property from adverse or detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from
constituting a grant of special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Prior Code, § 17.40.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 17.080: RS-6 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE, HIGH DENSITY
Section
   
17.080.010   Generally
   
17.080.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.080.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.080.040   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.080.050   Building site requirements
   
17.080.060   Height regulations
   
17.080.070   Yards
   
17.080.075   Driveway standards
   
17.080.080   Signs
   
17.080.090   Off-street parking
   
17.080.100   Traffic impact permit
   
17.080.110   Variances
§ 17.080.010 GENERALLY.
    No premises in the RS-6 single-family residential zone may be used for any
purpose or in any manner, except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.080.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
    Uses within the RS-6 zone shall be conducted entirely within a building and
are restricted to a single-family dwelling and accessory dwelling units on each
building site. Also permitted by-right are small family day care and limited
residential care. Large family day care, supportive housing for six or fewer
persons, and transitional housing for six or fewer persons also are allowed
with a zoning permit, and no discretionary review is required, provided the
standards of
Chapter 17.138 are met.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.080.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Conditional uses in the RS-6 zone are as follows:
   (A)   Agricultural uses, including crop and tree farming and viticulture,
but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes or the
sale of any products on the premises;
   (B)   Public or quasi-public buildings and uses of an education, religious,
cultural or public service type, not including corporation yards, storage or
repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;
   (C)   Temporary tract offices;
   (D)   Public and private noncommercial recreation areas and facilities, such
as country clubs, golf courses and swimming pools;
   (E)   Private stables and corrals;
   (F)   Public utility buildings, structures or facilities, except
transmission lines;
   (G)   Living quarters of persons regularly employed on the premises;
   (H)   Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be of
the same general character as those enumerated in this section; and
   (I)   Accessory uses other than those specifically listed in §
17.080.040.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 509, passed - -
1983; Am. Ord. 538, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 800, passed 2 -3-2016; Am. Ord.
810, passed 11-1-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.080.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses in the RS-6 zone are as follows:
   (A)   Home occupations;
   (B)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, bath houses, tool sheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances;
   (C)   Private garages, parking spaces and swimming pools for the exclusive
use of the residents of the premises and their guests;
   (D)   Up to two residential accessory dwelling units or one junior accessory
dwelling unit, which must be approved in accordance with the procedures and
standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title; and
   (E)   Short-term rental uses that include only one short-term rental unit
per single-family zoned property contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as that structure is not an ADU/JADU
created after January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-
2017; Am. Ord. 865, passed 7-6-2022; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.080.050 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in §§
17.044.030 through
17.044.050 of this title, a use permit or hill area residential development
permit (HRD) shall be first secured in the RS-6 zone for any use, occupancy or
physical improvement of or on a building site failing to meet the following
requirements:
   (A)   Minimum area of 6,000 square feet and minimum width of 60 feet with a
slope of ten percent or less;
   (B)   The minimum building site area shall be increased by 300 square feet
for each one percent increase in slope over ten percent to and including 15
percent; and the minimum width shall be increased by one foot for each 500
square feet of additional area required;
   (C)   Building sites having a slope of more than 15 percent, shall increase
in area above 7,000 square feet, and a minimum width of 65 feet, at a rate of
1,000 square feet of area and three feet of width for each one percent increase
in slope; and
   (D)   Fractions shall be disregarded and dropped in all computations made
under this section.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.080.060 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height regulations in the RS-6 zone are as follows:
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or structure
occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or less
shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories. On lots
having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or structure occupied by a
principal use and situated on the downhill side of the street upon which it has
its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height, and if situated on the
uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in height nor contain more
than three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that,
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.  The height of accessory dwelling units is governed by
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 490, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885,
passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.080.070 YARDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
RS-6 zone having a slope of not more than ten percent shall have yards as
follows:
      (1)   A front and a rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 25
feet, but neither having a depth of less than six feet; and
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 15 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
RS-6 zone having a slope of more than ten percent shall have yards as follows:
      (1)   A front and a rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 35
feet, but the front yard having a depth of not less than six feet and the rear
yard of not less than 12 feet; and
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 20 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
   (C)   On all corner lots, all street frontage of any corner lot shall have a
yard setback of ten feet.
   (D)   Setback standards for accessory dwelling units are established in
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed 1991;
Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.080.075 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the RS 6 Single-
family Residential Zone, High Density, are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.080.080 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the RS-6 single-family
residential zone, except as authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.068 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.080.090 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking spaces and facilities shall be provided in the RS-6 zone
as required or allowed by the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this  title and, for accessory dwelling units, as required by
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.080.100 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056, are applicable to properties in the RS-6 zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.080.110 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, lot coverage, floor area ratio or buildable area, or any
combination thereof, when the reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining
property from adverse or detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from
constituting a grant of special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Prior Code, § 17.42.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 17.084: RD 5.5-7 RESIDENTIAL ZONE, HIGH DENSITY
Section
   
17.084.010   Generally
   
17.084.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.084.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.084.040   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.084.050   Building site requirements
   
17.084.060   Height regulations
   
17.084.070   Yards
   
17.084.075   Driveway standards
   
17.084.080   Signs
   
17.084.090   Off-street parking
   
17.084.100   Traffic impact permit
   
17.084.110   Variances
§ 17.084.010 GENERALLY.
   No premises in the RD 5.5-7 residential zone may be used for any purpose or
in any manner, except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.084.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Uses within the RD 5.5-7 zone shall be conducted entirely within a building
and are restricted to the following:
   (A)   A single-family dwelling on each building site;
   (B)   A duplex on each building site having a minimum lot area of 7,000
square feet; and
   (C)   Boardinghouse or lodging house, not to exceed five guests.
   (D)   Small family day care and large family day care, subject to the
standards of
Chapter 17.138;
   (E)   Limited residential care; and
   (F)   Supportive housing for not more than six persons and transitional
housing for no more than six persons, subject to the standards of
Chapter 17.138.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.084.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following are conditional uses in the RD 5.5-7 zone:
   (A)   Agricultural uses, including crop and tree farming and viticulture,
but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes or the
sale of any products on the premises;
   (B)   Public or quasi-public buildings and uses of an educational,
religious, cultural or public service type, not including corporation yards,
storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;
   (C)   Temporary tract offices;
   (D)   Public and private noncommercial recreation area and facilities, such
as country clubs, golf courses and swimming pools;
   (E)   Private stables and corrals;
   (F)   Public utility buildings, structures or facilities, except
transmission lines;
   (G)   Living quarters of persons regularly employed on the premises;
   (H)   Accessory uses other than those specifically listed in §
17.084.040; and
   (I)   General residential care, subject to the standards of
Chapter 17.138.
   (J)   Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be of
the same general character as those enumerated in this section.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 509, passed - -
1983; Am. Ord. 538, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 800, passed 2-3-2016; Am. Ord.
810, passed 11-1-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.084.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following are accessory uses in the RD 5.5-7 zone:
   (A)   Home occupations;
   (B)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, bath houses, tool sheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances;
   (C)   Private garages, parking spaces and swimming pools for the exclusive
use of the residents of the premises and their guests; and
   (D)   Up to two residential accessory dwelling units or one junior accessory
dwelling unit, which must be approved in accordance with the procedures and
standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-
2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.084.050 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
    In the RD 5.5-7 zone, a use permit or hill area residential development
permit (HRD)shall be first secured for any use, occupancy or physical
improvement of or on a building site failing to meet the following
requirements:
   (A)   Minimum area of 5,500 square feet for a single family residence and a
minimum area of 7,000 square feet for a duplex, and a minimum width of 60 feet
with a slope of ten percent or less;
   (B)   The minimum building site area shall be increased by 300 square feet
for each one percent increase in slope over ten percent to and including 15
percent; and the minimum width shall be increased by one foot for each 500 feet
of additional area required;
   (C)   Building sites having a slope of more than 15 percent shall increase
in area above 7,000 square feet for single-family or 8,500 square feet for
duplex, and a minimum width above 65 feet, at the rate of 1,000 square feet of
area and three feet of width for each one percent increase in slope;
   (D)   Fractions shall be disregarded and dropped in all computations made
under this section; and
   (E)   A duplex may only be constructed on a lot of 7,000 square feet or
more.
   (F)   Short-term rental uses contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as the residential unit is an ADU/JADU
constructed prior to January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 17.084.060 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height regulations in the RD 5.5-7 zone are as follows.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or
less shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories.
      (2)   On lots having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use and situated on the downhill side of the
street upon which it has its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height,
and if situated on the uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in
height nor contain more than three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that,
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.  The height of accessory dwelling units is governed by
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.084.070 YARDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
RD 5.5-7 zone having a slope of not more than ten percent shall have yards as
follows:
      (1)   A front and a rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 25
feet, but neither yard having a depth of less than six feet; and
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 15 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
RD 5.5-7 zone having a slope of more than ten percent shall have yards as
follows:
      (1)   A front and a rear yard having a combined width of not less than 35
feet, but the front yard having a width of not less than six feet and the rear
yard of not less than ten feet; and
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of 20 feet, but neither yard
having a width of less than five feet.
   (C)   On all corner lots, all street frontage of any corner lot shall be a
yard setback of ten feet.
   (D)   Setback standards for accessory dwelling units are established in
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.084.075 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the RD 5.5-
7 Residential Zone, High Density are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.084.080 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the RD 5.5-7 residential
zone, except as authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.084.090 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the RD 5.5-7 zone as required
or allowed by the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title.  Setback standards for accessory dwelling units
are established in
Chapter 17.048
(Prior Code, § 17.44.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.084.100 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056, are applicable to properties in the RD 5.5-7 district.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.084.110 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, lot coverage, floor area ratio or buildable area, or any
combination thereof, when the reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining
property from adverse or detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from
constituting a grant of special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Prior Code, § 17.44.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 17.088: RM MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.088.010   Generally
   
17.088.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.088.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.088.040   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.088.050   Building site requirements
   
17.088.060   Height regulations
   
17.088.070   Yards
   
17.088.075   Driveway standards
   
17.088.080   Signs
   
17.088.090   Off-street parking
   
17.088.100   Traffic impact permit
   
17.088.110   Variances
§ 17.088.010 GENERALLY.
    No premises in the RM multiple-family residential zone may be used for any
purpose or in any manner, except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.088.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
    Permitted uses in the RM zone are multiple dwellings and apartments at a
density of not more than one living unit for 4,356 square feet of land areas,
except by use permit under the provisions of §
17.088.030 unless a density bonus for affordable housing has been granted under
the provisions of
Chapter 17.050. Large family day care, supportive housing, and transitional
housing also are allowed with a zoning permit, and no discretionary review is
required, provided the standards of
Chapter 17.138 are met.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.088.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Conditional uses and structures in the RM zone are as follows:
   (A)   Multiple dwellings and apartments at a density of not more than one
living unit for each 3,000 square feet of land areas provided the development
is consistent with the Fairfax Area General Plan and its elements;
   (B)   A single duplex on a building site;
   (C)   Public or quasi-public buildings and uses of an educational,
religious, cultural or public service type, not including corporation yards,
storage or repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;
   (D)   Temporary tract offices;
   (E)   Public utility buildings, structures or facilities, except
transmission lines;
   (F)   Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be of
the same general character as those enumerated in this section;
   (G)   Accessory uses other than those specifically listed in §
17.088.040; and
   (H)   General residential care, subject to the standards of
Chapter 17.138.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 509, passed - -
1983; Am. Ord. 538, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-2017; Am. Ord.
885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.088.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses and structures in the RM zone are as follows:
   (A)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, bath houses, tool sheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances;
   (B)   Private garages, parking spaces and swimming pools for the exclusive
use of the residents of the premises and their guests; and
   (C)   Up to two residential accessory dwelling units or one junior accessory
dwelling unit, which must be approved in accordance with the procedures and
standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title.
   (D)   Short-term rental uses contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as the residential unit is an ADU/JADU
constructed prior to January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-
2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 17.088.050 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   Building site requirements in the RM zone are as follows.
   (A)    A use permit or hill area residential development permit (HRD) shall
be first secured for any use, occupancy or physical improvement of or on a
building site failing to meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum area of 7,500 square feet and a minimum width of 60 feet
with a slope of ten percent or less;
      (2)   The minimum building site area shall be increased by 600 square
feet for each one percent increase in slope over ten percent to and including
15 percent, and the minimum width shall be increased by eight feet for each 600
square feet of additional area required, so that a building site having a slope
of 15 percent shall have a minimum area of 10,500 square feet and a minimum
width of 100 feet;
      (3)   Building sites having a slope of more than 15 percent shall
increase in area above 10,500 square feet and a minimum width above 100 feet,
at the rate of 1,200 square feet of area and five feet of width for each one
percent increase in slope.
   (B)    Each building site containing three or more dwelling units shall
contain not less than 300 square feet of common or private open space for each
dwelling unit, of which at least 60 square feet shall be private open space
serving individual dwelling units. The open space shall conform to the
following standards:
      (1)   None of the following shall be counted as a part of the open space
required by this section: required yards or setbacks from a property line;
separations required between buildings containing dwelling units; an open area,
access area or other space required by any other ordinance of the town, such as
a building code or safety code (parking areas and driveways); any area less
than ten feet in width; any area having a finished grade of more than ten
percent;
      (2)    The following shall be counted as a part of the open space
required by this section: patios with a minimum dimension of ten feet and decks
and balconies with a minimum dimension of six feet which serve individual
dwelling units; courtyards or other open spaces having minimum dimensions of
ten feet, uncovered swimming pools, tennis courts, gym and fitness facilities,
indoor space for yoga, dance and instruction, and similar recreation areas, and
tot lots; landscape areas having minimum dimensions of less than ten feet but
at least five feet at any point which are contiguous with and an integral part
of the common open space or are connected to the common open space by walkways,
may be included in calculating the area of such space.
      (3)   Any area or space which qualifies as a part of the open space
required by this section shall continue to be counted as such if it is
landscaped;
      (4)   Not more than two-thirds of the total amount of open space required
on any building site may be consolidated into a single open area; and
      (5)    The amount of open space required for a building site by this
section is a minimum requirement and cannot be reduced unless needed as a
concession or incentive for an affordable housing density bonus under the
provisions of
Chapter 17.050 or a waiver is granted under the provisions of
Chapter 17.044, which include waivers to comply with reasonable accommodation
provisions of state and/or federal law under the provisions of
Chapter 17.044.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.088.060 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height regulations in the RM zone are as follows:
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or
less shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories.
      (2)   On lots having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use and situated on the downhill side of the
street upon which it has its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height,
and if situated on the uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in
height nor contain more than three stories.  Additional height, up to 36 feet,
and an additional story, which shall not include more than 80 percent of the
floor area of the story below and shall be set back at least ten feet from the
front and rear walls of the story below, may be approved for a density bonus
project with affordable housing under the provisions of
Chapter 17.050.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 16 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.088.070 YARDS.
   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the RM zone
having a slope of not more than ten percent shall have yards as follows:
   (A)    A front and rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 40
feet, but neither yard having a depth of less than ten feet and a minimum
setback for garages of 18 feet. The combined depth may be reduced to 35 feet
for an affordable housing project with a density bonus approved under Chapter
17.050.
   (B)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 25 feet, but
neither yard having a width of less than ten feet and a minimum setback for
garages of 18 feet. The combined width may be reduced to 15 feet with a minimum
interior yard width of five feet for an affordable housing project with a
density bonus approved under
Chapter 17.050.
   (C)   On all corner lots, all street frontage of any corner lot shall have a
yard setback of ten feet.
   (D)   Setback standards for accessory dwelling units are established in
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1- 2023)
§ 17.088.075 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the RM Multiple-
Family Residential Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.088.080 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the RM multiple-family
residential zone, except as authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.088.090 OFF-STREET PARKING.
    Off-street parking spaces and facilities in the RM zone shall be provided
as required or allowed by the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title, by
Chapter 17.048 for accessory dwelling units, and the following standards:
   (A)   A minimum of ten percent of the interior of any parking lot area shall
be landscaped;
   (B)   A landscaped island at least six feet in all interior dimensions and
containing at least one 15-gallon tree shall be provided at the end of each
interior row of parking stalls;
   (C)   One canopy tree shall be provided for each five parking stalls;
   (D)   A landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be provided between
any surface parking area and the property line adjacent to a public street; and
   (E)   A landscaped area at least three feet shall be provided between any
surface parking area and an interior property line.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.088.100 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056, are applicable to properties in the RM zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.088.110 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, lot coverage, floor area ratio or buildable area, or any
combination thereof, when the reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining
property from adverse or detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from
constituting a grant of special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Prior Code, § 17.46.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 486, passed - -
1981; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
CHAPTER 17.090: RM-S MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL - SENIOR - RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.090.010   Generally
   
17.090.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.090.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.090.040   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.090.050   Design review
   
17.090.060   Building site requirements
   
17.090.070   Height regulations
   
17.090.080   Yards
   
17.090.085   Driveway standards
   
17.090.090   Signs
   
17.090.100   Off-street parking
   
17.090.110   Traffic impact permit
   
17.090.120   Variances
   
17.090.130   Additional regulations
   
17.090.140   Severability
§ 17.090.010 GENERALLY.
   (A)   The RM-S residential zone is intended to create use and development
standards for senior residential housing in a way that preserves and enhances
its surroundings; recognizes the requirements of state and federal housing laws
(including the Federal Fair Housing Act [42 U.S.C. §§ 3601-3631], the
California Fair Employment and Housing Act [Cal. Gov't Code §§ 12900-12995],
and the California Unruh Civil Rights Act [Cal. Civil Code §§ 51-53]); and to
encourage the development of senior housing. No premises in the RM-S senior
residential zone may be used for any purpose or in any manner, except as set
forth in this chapter.
   (B)    All structures, physical improvements and modifications involving
soil or drainage modifications that fall into any of the categories listed in §
17.072.020 are subject to the Hill Area Residential Development permit
requirements.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 845, passed 2-5-2020; Am. Ord. 885, passed
11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)    Permitted uses in the RM-S zone are multiple dwellings and apartments
for the exclusive use and occupancy of residents who can establish eligible
occupancy, as defined herein, at a density of not more than ten dwelling units
per acre, or as may otherwise be established in the Fairfax General Plan and
this title for affordable housing density bonuses. Supportive housing and
transitional housing also are allowed with a zoning permit, and no
discretionary review is required, provided the standards of
Chapter 17.138 are met.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
      (1)   "Eligible occupancy" requires that the persons commencing any
occupancy of a dwelling unit in the RM-S zone include a senior citizen who
intends to reside in the unit as his or her primary residence on a permanent
basis. The residency of any onsite staff shall comply with the state and
federal laws identified in §
17.090.010 above.
      (2)   "Senior citizen" has the meaning set forth in Cal. Civil Code §
51.3(b)(1).
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
    General residential care is allowed with approval of a conditional use
permit, subject to the standards of
Chapter 17.138. There shall be no other conditional uses or structures in the
RM-S zone.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses and structures in the RM-S zone are as follows:
   (A)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, lath houses, tool sheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances; and
   (B)   Private garages, parking spaces, swimming pools, shared community
rooms and bicycle storage facilities for the exclusive use of the residents of
the premises and their guests.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.050 DESIGN REVIEW.
   All structures, physical improvements and exterior modifications or building
in the RM-S zone are subject to design review, unless specifically exempted in
each instance by the Planning Commission or by other provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.060 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   Building site requirements in the RM-S zone are as follows:
   (A)   A use permit or hill area residential development permit (HRD) must be
first secured for any use, occupancy or physical improvement of or on a
building site failing to meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum area of 87,120 square feet, and a minimum width of 60 feet
with a slope of 15 percent or less;
      (2)   The minimum building site area shall be increased by 600 square
feet for each one percent increase in slope over ten percent to and including
15 percent, and the minimum width shall be increased by eight feet for each 600
square feet of additional area required, so that a building site having a slope
of 15 percent shall have a minimum area of 10,500 square feet and a minimum
width of 100 feet;
      (3)   Building sites having a slope of more than 15 percent shall
increase in area above 10,500 square feet and a minimum width above 100 feet,
at the rate of 1,200 square feet of area and five feet of width for each one
percent increase in slope;
      (4)   No building site with an area of more than 130,680 square feet
shall be permitted to be rezoned to the RM-S zone.
   (B)    Each building site containing three or more dwelling units shall
contain not less than 300 square feet of common and private open space for each
dwelling unit. The open space shall conform to the following standards:
      (1)   None of the following shall be counted as a part of the open space
required by this section: required yards or setbacks from a property line;
separations required between buildings containing dwelling units; an access
area or other space required by any other ordinance of the town/such as a
building code or safety code (parking areas and driveways); any area less than
ten feet in width;
      (2)    The following shall be counted as a part of the open space
required by this section: patios with a minimum dimension of ten feet and decks
and balconies with a minimum dimension of six feet which serve individual
dwelling units; courtyards or other open spaces having minimum dimensions of
ten feet, uncovered swimming pools, tennis courts, gym and fitness facilities,
space for yoga, dance and instruction, and similar recreation areas; landscape
areas having minimum dimensions of less than ten feet but at least five feet at
any point which are contiguous with and an integral part of the common open
space or are connected to the common open space by walkways, may be included in
calculating the area of such space.
      (3)   Any area or space which qualifies as a part of the open space
required by this section shall continue to be counted as such if it is
landscaped. At least 80 percent of the open space provided must have a finished
grade of no more than ten percent.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.070 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height regulations in the RM-S zone are as follows:
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope often percent or
less shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories.
      (2)   On lots having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use and situated on the downhill side of the
street upon which it has its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height,
and if situated on the uphill side of the street, no building shall exceed 28.5
feet in height. Regardless of slope, no building shall exceed three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 17.090.080 YARDS.
   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the RM-
S zone shall have yards as follows:
   (A)    A front and rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 40
feet, but neither yard having a depth of less than ten feet and a minimum
setback for garages of 18 feet;
   (B)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 25 feet, but
neither yard having a width of less than ten feet and a minimum setback for
garages of 18 feet; and
   (C)   On all corner lots, all street frontage of any corner lot shall have a
yard setback of ten feet.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.085 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the RM-
S Multiple-Family Residential Senior - Residential Zone are regulated by Town
Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.090.090 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the RM-S senior residential
zone, except as authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 17.090.100 OFF-STREET PARKING.
    Off-street parking spaces and facilities in the RM-S zone shall be provided
as required or allowed by the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title and the following standards:
   (A)   A minimum of ten percent of the interior of any parking lot area shall
be landscaped;
   (B)   A landscaped island at least six feet in all interior dimensions and
containing at least one 15-gallon tree shall be provided at the end of each
interior row of parking stalls;
   (C)   One canopy tree shall be provided for each five parking stall;
   (D)   A landscaped area at least five feet wide shall be provided between
any surface parking area and the property line adjacent to a public street; and
   (E)   A landscaped area at least three feet shall be provided between any
surface parking area and an interior property line.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.090.110 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056, are applicable to properties in the RM-S zone.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 17.090.120 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, lot coverage, floor area ratio or buildable area, or any
combination thereof, when the reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining
property from adverse or detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from
constituting a grant of special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.090.130 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   To the extent that specific physical features and services are
required for a project, property and/or units in the RM-S zone to meet federal
and/or state requirements, the project operator shall construct, maintain,
repair and provide such physical features and services, as applicable.
   (B)   All advertising and publications shall disclose the status of any
project within the RM-S zone as senior housing.
   (C)   The project operator shall submit a report annually to the Town which
contains a certification or recertification of the occupant eligibility for
each unit, copies of the advertising published regarding the project, the
current form of lease/rental agreement with its attachments, and such other
documents as may be reasonably requested by the Town.
   (D)   Unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, the project
operator shall prohibit any person who has not been determined to be an
eligible occupant based on the annual report from continuing to rent or occupy
a unit and shall cause any such person to vacate any unit so rented or
occupied. Unless otherwise prohibited by state or federal law, when a unit is
completely vacated, for any reason whatsoever, the unit shall then again be
rented or otherwise made available only to eligible occupants.
   (E)   All leases and/or rental agreements shall provide for the enforcement
of this chapter, state and federal senior citizen housing development
requirements and the project's written rules regarding these restrictions.
   (F)   Projects within the RM-S zone must be restricted to eligible occupants
and qualify as "housing for older person" under the Federal Fair Housing Act,
and "senior citizen housing" under the Unruh Civil Rights Act, and be subject
to federal and state housing laws forbidding discrimination based on familial
status.
   (G)   All projects operating within the RM-S zone shall permit temporary
residency, as a guest of an eligible occupant, by a person less than 55 years
of age for a period of not less than 60 days in a year, unless otherwise
permitted or required under applicable law.
   (H)   All projects operating within the RM-S zone must conform to the
applicable requirements of the Federal Fair Housing Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 3601-
3631), the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Cal. Gov’t Code §§
12900-12995), and the California Unruh Civil Rights Act (Cal. Civil Code §§ 51-
53). In the event of any conflict between the provisions of said laws and this
Ordinance, said laws shall prevail.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
§ 17.090.140 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of the chapter.
The Town Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section,
division, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter irrespective of
the unconstitutionality or invalidity of any section, division, subsection,
paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter.
(Ord. 808, passed 6-7-2017)
CHAPTER 17.092: CL LIMITED COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.092.010   Purpose
   
17.092.020   Generally
   
17.092.030   Design review
   
17.092.040   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.092.050   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.092.055   Procedure for Planning Director use determination
   
17.092.060   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.092.070   Building site requirements
   
17.092.080   Height
   
17.092.090   Yards
   
17.092.095   Driveway standards
   
17.092.100   Signs
   
17.092.110   Off-street parking and loading
   
17.092.120   Traffic impact permit
   
17.092.125   Variances
   
17.092.130   Formula businesses and restaurants
§ 17.092.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The CL limited commercial zone provides a location for uses which may
be incompatible with the high density characteristics of the central commercial
zone or which may have difficulty in finding a proper location in the highway
commercial zone.
   (B)    The uses in the CL limited commercial zone are oriented to services
rather than to the retail sale of commodities. Residential uses also are
allowed.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-
2024)
§ 17.092.020 GENERALLY.
   No premises in the CL zone may be used for any purpose or in any manner,
except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.092.030 DESIGN REVIEW.
   All structures, physical improvements and exterior modifications or building
in the CL zone are subject to design review, unless specifically exempted in
each instance by the Planning Commission or by other provisions of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.092.040 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Principal permitted uses and structures in the CL zone are as follows:
   (A)   The uses shall be conducted entirely within a building and are
restricted to the following:
      (1)   Restaurants;
      (2)   Hospitals, sanitariums and rest homes;
      (3)   Clinics, medical and dental offices, laboratories, research
facilities, physical and mental therapy establishments;
      (4)   Professional offices;
      (5)    Music, art, dance and physical culture studios and establishments;
      (6)   Day care facilities; and
      (7)   Multi-family dwelling units with a minimum density of 20 units per
acre on housing opportunity sites as shown in the General Plan.
   (B)   No principal permitted use provided for in division (A) above shall
include entertainment of customers or clientele by music, actors or singing,
nor permit any establishment or business to charge admission or entrance fees.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.092.050 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
    The following conditional uses and structures in the CL zone may not be
established, expanded, substantially modified or changed to another conditional
use unless and until a conditional use permit is obtained:
   (A)    Motels and hotels;
   (B)   Private schools;
   (C)   Private clubs;
   (D)   Any principal permitted use not conducted entirely within a building;
   (E)   Other uses determined by the Planning Commission as equivalent to
those listed in divisions (A) through (D) above, or which are determined to be
equivalent to those listed in §
17.092.040, but requiring regulation of location, extent or operation because
of some unique characteristic;
   (F)   Establishments or businesses which entertain customers or clientele by
musicians, actors or singers or establishments which charge admission or
entrance fees; and
   (G)   Mechanical amusement device arcades subject to the following
standards:
      (1)   Use permits shall be granted for periods of no more than six months
initially. The Planning Commission may approve extensions. In approving use
permits and extensions, findings must be made that the use will not or has not
created or increased the incidence of excessive loitering, vandalism,
pedestrian obstruction, noise or any other activity that may have an adverse
effect on adjacent or vicinity properties, residences or businesses.
      (2)   Hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. The Planning
Commission may grant exceptions to this limitation for adults-only
establishments or when it is demonstrated that the use is clearly ancillary to
another use.
   (H)   Residential uses such as live/work units or shopkeeper units located
above the ground floor of a building (less than 20 dwelling units per acre
permitted).
(Prior Code, § 17.48.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.092.055 PROCEDURE FOR PLANNING DIRECTOR USE DETERMINATION.
   Uses not specifically listed in §§
17.092.040 and
17.092.050 are specifically prohibited unless a use determination by the
Planning Director is made which finds the use not specifically listed is
similar to another use permitted or conditionally permitted within the Limited
Commercial Zone.
§ 17.092.060 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses in the CL zone are as follows:
   (A)   Activities which are characteristic of and usually found in connection
with a principal use on the same premises and which are subordinate to,
dependent on and economically and operationally integrated into the principal
use including, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Parking garages and lots;
      (2)   Storage for principal uses;
      (3)   Offices for principal uses;
      (4)    Accessory dwelling units;
      (5)   Signs; and
      (6)   Mechanical and electronic amusement devices, limited to two devices
per establishment.
   (B)    No detached nonresidential accessory structure, whether permanent or
temporary, fixed or movable, and regardless of the material contained therein,
shall be allowed, except by use permit.
   (C)   Short-term rental uses contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as the residential unit is an ADU/JADU
constructed prior to January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 17.092.070 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
    Building site requirements in the CL zone are 20,000 square feet with a
minimum width of 75 feet. All multi-family dwelling units shall comply with the
design standards for multifamily housing in Article IV of
Chapter 17.138, and all accessory dwelling units shall comply with the
standards of
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.092.080 HEIGHT.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or
less shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories.
      (2)   On lots having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use and situated on the downhill side of the
street upon which it has its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height,
and if situated on the uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in
height nor contain more than three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that,
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991)
§ 17.092.090 YARDS.
   (A)   No yards are required, except when a lot line of a lot in the CL
limited commercial zone is the boundary of a residential zone.
   (B)   When a lot-line of a lot in the CL zone is the boundary of a
residential zone, the CL limited commercial lot shall provide yard space or
spaces along and adjacent to the boundary line and along the street property
line equal to that of the abutting yard space or spaces in the residential
zone, except as may be otherwise permitted by a use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.092.095 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the CL Limited
Commercial Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.092.100 SIGNS.
   No sign shall be established or maintained in the CL limited commercial
zone, except as provided in
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.092.110 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading regulations in the CL zone are as follows:
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Vehicular off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
provided on the same building site and immediately adjacent to the use or
structure served, except as otherwise provided herein.
      (2)   In the event of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail over other provisions of this title.
   (B)   Standard facilities.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be as set forth in
Chapter 17.052 of this title.
      (2)   For any structure or use for which no specific requirements are set
forth in this title under
Chapter 17.052, the following facilities shall be provided:
         (a)   One parking space for each 200 square feet, or fraction thereof,
of gross floor area occupied by, used for, or devoted to the entirety of the
principal use to be served, including accessory uses; and
         (b)   One large off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet
or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   For permitted principal uses. Upon approval of a variance therefor,
the above standard facilities may be reduced, but only to the degree
necessitated, warranted and required by the relevant and consequential facts of
each case, when the reduction does not adversely affect the development or use
of adjacent properties or public ways, and under the following conditions,
circumstances or cases:
         (a)   Conditions of non-conformity which produce and cause exceptional
or extreme hardship or excessive physical difficulty in providing the standard
facilities;
         (b)   Physical conditions, including, but not limited to access,
topography and shape, beyond immediate and reasonable remedy by the town,
applicant or owner, separately or collectively, which restrict or limit the
physical development or use of a building site;
         (c)   Strict compliance is in conflict with design review findings,
criteria or recommendations which are found to be more essential to the common
good or to the protection of adjoining properties and uses, public or private;
         (d)   Facilities and uses owned, operated or conducted by a
governmental, public utility or similar public or semipublic entity or agency;
         (e)   Facilities or uses determined to be singular, unique, transient
or intermittent; and
         (f)   A facility or use which is allowed by other provisions of this
title to provide less parking facilities.
      (2)   For conditional uses. The requirements of division (B) above may be
varied by the terms, provisions or conditions of the use permit approving a
conditional use in accordance with the facts, findings and determinations
governing the approval of the use permit as set forth in Chapter 17.032 and in
conformity with design review requirements of Chapter 17.020 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 703, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 17.092.120 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056, are applicable to properties in the CL zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.092.125 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, or buildable area, or any combination thereof, when the
reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or
detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of
special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.092.130 FORMULA BUSINESSES AND RESTAURANTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any proposed use or
structure within the CL zone which constitutes a formula business or formula
restaurant, as those terms are defined in §
17.040.210, shall comply with Article II of
Chapter 17.040.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
CHAPTER 17.096: CH HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.096.010   Purpose
   
17.096.020   General restriction
   
17.096.030   Design review
   
17.096.040   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.096.050   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.096.060   Procedure for Planning Director use determination
   
17.096.070   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.096.080   Building site requirements
   
17.096.090   Height
   
17.096.100   Yards
   
17.096.105   Driveway standards
   
17.096.110   Signs
   
17.096.120   Off-street parking and loading
   
17.096.125   Variances
   
17.096.130   Traffic impact permit
   
17.096.140   Formula businesses and restaurants
§ 17.096.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)    The purpose of the CH highway commercial zone is to allow a variety
of service, retail and wholesale businesses with long operating hours,
diversity of building size and type and short- term parking. Residential uses
also are allowed.
   (B)   The highway commercial zone is designed to cater to automobile traffic
rather than to pedestrian traffic. The buildings are more dispersed than in the
central commercial zone and allow greater vehicular access.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.096.020 GENERAL RESTRICTION.
   No premises in the CH zone may be used for any purpose or in any manner,
except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.096.030 DESIGN REVIEW.
   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical modifications of
buildings in the CH zone are subject to design review unless specifically
exempted in each instance by the Planning Commission or other provisions of
this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.096.040 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Uses within the CH zone shall be conducted entirely within a building
(unless a business permit and encroachment permit are granted in accordance
with Town Code § 5.58 and §
12.32.025 for parklet uses and/or parklet enclosures) and are restricted to the
following:
      (1)   Animal grooming and supplies;
      (2)   Appliances repair, domestic;
      (3)   Appliances sales, domestic;
      (4)   Artists studios;
      (5)   Audio/video sales and service;
      (6)   Automobile supply stores;
      (7)   Bakeries;
      (8)   Bakery goods stores (no on-site baking);
      (9)   Banks and savings and loans;
      (10)   Barbershops and beauty shops;
      (11)   Bicycle, sales and repair;
      (12)   Blueprint, photocopy services;
      (13)   Book stores;
      (14)   Building contractor’s facilities (provided there is no storage,
servicing and repair of heavy equipment on the premises);
      (15)   Building supplies and lumber when within a building;
      (16)   Business machine sales and repair;
      (17)   Butcher shops;
      (18)   Camera and photography sales, service, developing and printing;
      (19)   Candy shops;
      (20)   Carpenters’ shops, cabinet making;
      (21)   Catering;
      (22)   Christmas tree sale lots;
      (23)   Clothing stores;
      (24)   Computer sales and service;
      (25)   Craft shops, including custom wood, paper, glass and metal work
and sales;
      (26)   Dairy product stores;
      (27)   Delicatessens;
      (28)   Department stores;
      (29)   Diaper service;
      (30)   Drug stores and pharmacies;
      (31)   Electrical appliances, sales and repairs;
      (32)   Electronic products, sales and repairs;
      (33)   Floors, floor coverings (retail);
      (34)   Florists;
      (35)   Furniture repair, upholstery;
      (36)   Gift stores;
      (37)   Gymnasiums and athletic clubs;
      (38)   Hardware stores;
      (39)   Janitorial service and supplies;
      (40)   Jewelry stores;
      (41)   Laboratories;
      (42)   Laundry, dry cleaning;
      (43)   Leather goods stores;
      (44)   Linen supply;
      (45)   Lumberyards;
      (46)   Mail order and catalog sales;
      (47)   Mail services;
      (48)   Multi-family dwelling units with a minimum density of 20 units per
acre on housing opportunity sites as shown in the General Plan:
      (49)   Nurseries and garden supply stores;
      (50)   Office and business machine stores, repair;
      (51)   Office supplies;
      (52)   Offices and office buildings (professional offices, including
medical/dental offices and clinics, real estate and insurance offices,
stockbrokers, financial advisory services, tax services and programming);
      (53)   Packing and crating;
      (54)   Paint, glass and wallpaper stores;
      (55)   Parks, public;
      (56)   Pet stores;
      (57)   Photocopying;
      (58)   Photographic equipment sales and service;
      (59)   Picture framing shops, galleries;
      (60)   Post offices;
      (61)   Prescription pharmacies;
      (62)   Printing, publishing, lithography, engraving;
      (63)   Radio, television, sales and repair;
      (64)   Restaurants (not providing live entertainment or outdoor or fast
food service for carry out);
      (65)   Rug, carpet cleaning services;
      (66)   Scientific instrument shops and service;
      (67)   Secretarial services;
      (68)   Shoe repair;
      (69)   Sporting goods stores;
      (70)   Stationery stores;
      (71)   Storage buildings, garages;
      (72)   Supermarkets and neighborhood grocery stores;
      (73)   Swimming pool sales, services;
      (74)   Tailor and dressmaking shops;
      (75)   Tool and cutlery sharpening;
      (76)   Toy stores;
      (77)   Travel bureaus;
      (78)   Upholstery shops;
      (79)   Variety stores;
      (80)   Veterinarian’s offices and small animal hospitals, including
short-term boarding of animals and incidental care provided all operations are
enclosed in a building with soundproof construction;
      (81)   Warehouses, except for storage of fuel or flammable liquids;
      (82)   Wholesale establishments; and
      (83)   Windows, window coverings.
   (B)   Exceptions are Christmas tree sale lots, parking lots and nurseries.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 672, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006; Am. Ord.
869, passed 9-7-2022; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.096.050 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The following uses may not be established, expanded, substantially
modified or changed to another conditional use in the CH zone.
   (B)    A conditional use permit must be obtained:
      (1)   Permitted principal uses with minor and/or accessory fabrication or
assembly activities limited to light manufacturing or processing activities,
when the entirety of the use, both principal and accessory, is contained
entirely within a building;
      (2)   Permitted principal uses not conducted entirely within a building;
      (3)   Small animal boarding outdoors, provided there is a 500-foot
separation from any residential zone;
      (4)   Car washes, both automatic and self- service;
      (5)    (Reserved)
      (6)   Private and public garages and parking lots improved in conformity
with the provisions in
Chapter 17.052;
      (7)   Automobile repair, parts and service establishments;
      (8)   Used car sales;
      (9)   Motels;
      (10)   Other uses determined by the Planning Commission as equivalent to
those listed in divisions (B)(1) through (9), or which are determined to be
equivalent to those listed in §
17.104.030 of this title but requiring regulation of location, extent or
operation because of some unique characteristic;
      (11)   Establishments or businesses which entertain customers or
clientele by musicians, actors or singers, or establishments which charge
admission or entrance fees;
      (12)   Mechanical amusement device arcades and computers for rent,
subject to the following standards:
         (a)   Use permits shall be granted for periods of no more than six
months initially. The Planning Commission may approve extensions. In approving
use permits and extensions, findings must be made that the use will not or has
not created or increased the incidence of excessive loitering, vandalism,
pedestrian obstruction, noise or any other activity that may have an adverse
effect on adjacent or vicinity properties, residences or businesses.
         (b)   Hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. The
Planning Commission may grant exceptions to this limitation for adults-only
establishments or when it is clearly demonstrated that the use is clearly
ancillary to another use.
      (13)   Bed and breakfasts;
      (14)   Churches;
      (15)   Convalescent homes,
      (16)   Day care centers;
      (17)   Drug and alcohol treatment facilities;
      (18)   Furniture stores;
      (19)   Game rooms, amusement and recreation establishments;
      (20)   Hospitals;
      (21)   Hotels;
      (22)   Institutional, non-profit;
      (23)   Institutional, public;
      (24)   Maintenance and repair services;
      (25)   Motorcycle, sales, service and repair;
      (26)   Musical instrument sales and service;
      (27)   Schools;
      (28)   Tool repair;
      (29)   Transportation services, bus depots;
      (30)   Utility substations and structures;
      (31)   Water tanks; and
      (32)   Cigar shops, smoke shops.
      (33)   Residential uses such as live/work units or shopkeeper units
located above the ground floor of a building (less than 20 dwelling units per
acre permitted).
(Prior Code, § 17.50.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 514, passed - -1983; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -1984; Am. Ord. 672,
passed - -1998; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006; Am. Ord. 883, passed 11-1-2023;
Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.096.060 PROCEDURE FOR PLANNING DIRECTOR USE DETERMINATION.
   Uses not specifically listed in §§
17.096.040 and
17.096.050 are specifically prohibited unless a use determination by the
Planning Director is made which finds the use not specifically listed is
similar to another use permitted or conditionally permitted within the highway
commercial zone district.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.055) (Ord. 672, passed - -1998)
§ 17.096.070 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses and structures in the CH zone are as follows:
   (A)   Activities which are characteristic of and usually found in connection
with a principal use on the same premises and which are subordinate to,
dependent on and economically and operationally integrated into the principal
use, including, but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Parking garages and lots;
      (2)   Storage for principal use;
      (3)   Offices for principal use;
      (4)    Accessory dwelling units;
      (5)   Mechanical amusement devices, limited to two devices per
establishment; and
      (6)   Signs.
   (B)   No detached nonresidential accessory structure, whether permanent or
temporary, fixed or movable, and regardless of the material contained therein,
shall be allowed, except by use permit.
   (C)   Short-term rental uses contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as the residential unit is an ADU/JADU
constructed prior to January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.48.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 17.096.080 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
    Building site requirements in the CH zone are: 7,500 square feet with a
minimum of width of 50 feet. The maximum density for residential uses above the
around-level is 20 units per acre unless the building site is within a WHO zone
in which case the density standards of that overlay zone apply. All multi-
family dwelling units shall comply with the design standards for multi-family
housing in Article IV of
Chapter 17.138, and all accessory dwelling units shall comply with the
standards of
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-
2024)
§ 17.096.090 HEIGHT.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or
less shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories.
      (2)   On lots having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or
structure occupied by a principal use and situated on the downhill side of the
street upon which it has its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height,
and if situated on the uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in
height nor contain more than three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that,
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991)
§ 17.096.100 YARDS.
   (A)   No yards are required in the CH Zone except when a lot line of a lot
in the CH zone is the boundary of a residential zone.
   (B)   When a lot line of a lot in the CH zone is the boundary of a
residential zone, the highway commercial lot shall provide yard space, or
spaces, along and adjacent to the boundary line and along the street property
line equal to that of the abutting yard space, or spaces, in the residential
zone, except as may be otherwise permitted by a use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.096.105 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the CH Highway
Commercial Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.096.110 SIGNS.
   No sign shall be established or maintained in the CH zone, except as
provided under
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.096.120 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   The following off-street parking and loading regulations apply in the CH
zone.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Vehicular off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
provided on the same building site and immediately adjacent to the use or
structure served, except as provided herein.
      (2)   In the event of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail over other provisions of this title.
   (B)   Standard facilities.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading facilities as set forth in
Chapter 17.052 of this title.
      (2)   For any structure or use for which no specific requirements are set
forth in this title under
Chapter 17.052, the following facilities shall be provided:
         (a)   One parking space for each 200 square feet, or fraction thereof,
of gross floor area occupied by, used for, or devoted to, the entirety of the
principal use to be served including accessory uses;
         (b)   One large off street loading space for each 20,000 square feet
or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   For permitted principal uses. Upon approval of a variance therefor,
the above standard facilities may be reduced, but only to the degree
necessitated, warranted and required by the relevant and consequential facts of
each case, when the reduction does not adversely affect the development or use
of adjacent properties or public ways, and under one of the following
conditions, circumstances or cases:
         (a)   Conditions of non-conformity which produce and cause exceptional
and extreme hardship or excessive physical difficulty in providing the
facilities;
         (b)   Physical conditions, including, but not limited to access,
topography and shape, beyond immediate and reasonable remedy by the town,
applicant or owner, separately or collectively, which restrict or limit the
physical development or use of a building site;
         (c)   Strict compliance is in conflict with design review findings,
criteria or recommendations which are found to be more essential to the common
good or to the protection of adjoining properties and uses, public or private;
         (d)   Facilities and uses owned, operated or conducted by a
governmental, public utility or similar public or semi-public entity or agency;
         (e)   Facilities or uses determined to be singular, unique, transient
or intermittent; and
         (f)   A facility or use which is allowed by other provisions of this
title to provide less parking facilities.
      (2)   For conditional uses. The requirements of division (B) above may be
varied by the terms, provisions or conditions of the use permit approving a
conditional use in accordance with the facts, findings and determinations
governing approval of the use permit as set forth in
Chapter 17.032 of this title and in conformity with design review requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.096.125 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, or buildable area, or any combination thereof, when the
reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or
detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of
special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.096.130 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the CH zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.50.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.096.140 FORMULA BUSINESSES AND RESTAURANTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any proposed use or
structure within the CH zone which constitutes a formula business or formula
restaurant, as those terms are defined in §
17.040.210, shall comply with Article II of
Chapter 17.040.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
CHAPTER 17.100: CC CENTRAL COMMERCIAL ZONE
Section
Article I: Generally
   
17.100.010   Purpose
   
17.100.020   Generally
   
17.100.030   Design review
   
17.100.040   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.100.050   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.100.055   Procedure for Planning Director use determination
   
17.100.060   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.100.070   Building site requirements
   
17.100.080   Height
   
17.100.090   Yards
   
17.100.095   Driveway standards
   
17.100.100   Signs
   
17.100.110   Off-street parking and loading
   
17.100.120   Traffic impact permit
   
17.100.125   Variances
   
17.100.130   Formula businesses and restaurants
ARTICLE I: GENERALLY
§ 17.100.010 PURPOSE.
    The CC central commercial zone is the central business district and the
retail commercial heart of the town. It should contain the most valuable land
and structures, on a square-foot basis, of any zone in the town. The
development of the CC central commercial zone caters to and invites pedestrian
traffic. Consequently, store frontages tend to be continuous and driveways,
blank walls and other conflicts with or deterrents to foot traffic tend to be
minimized. Residential uses provide both a nighttime population which is
commercially desirable and affordable living facilities for owners, workers and
those without automobiles.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-
2024)
§ 17.100.020 GENERALLY.
   No premises in the Central Commercial CC zone may be used for any purpose or
in any manner, except as set forth in this chapter. Formula businesses and
formula restaurants, as defined herein, that were not in business as of April
1, 2000, are not permitted in the CC zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 695, passed 8-20-
2002)
§ 17.100.030 DESIGN REVIEW.
   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical modifications of
buildings in the CC zone are subject to design review unless specifically
exempted in each instance by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.100.040 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Uses within the CC zone shall be conducted entirely within a building,
(unless a business permit and encroachment permit are granted in accordance
with Town Code § 5.58 and §
12.32.025 for parklet uses and/or parklet enclosures) and are restricted to the
following:
      (1)   Alternative birthing centers licensed by the state’s Department of
Health Services unless the requirement is waived by the state;
      (2)   Antique stores;
      (3)   Artist’s studios and galleries;
      (4)   Art supply;
      (5)   Audio/visual sales and service;
      (6)   Bakeries, including for sale on premises;
      (7)   Banks;
      (8)   Bars;
      (9)   Barbershops;
      (10)   Beauty shops;
      (11)   Bicycle sales and repair;
      (12)   Butcher shops;
      (13)   Blueprint and photocopy services;
      (14)   Bookstores;
      (15)   Cafes;
      (16)   Camera and photography shops;
      (17)   Camera and photography sales, service, developing and printing;
      (18)   Candy stores and confectioneries;
      (19)   Christmas tree sale lots;
      (20)   Clothing stores;
      (21)   Computer sales and service;
      (22)   Craft shops (including custom wood, paper, glass and metal work
and sales);
      (23)   Curtain and drapery shops;
      (24)   Delicatessens;
      (25)   Drugstores and pharmacies;
      (26)   Electrical appliance sales, repair;
      (27)   Emergency shelters, subject to compliance with
Chapter 17.138 of this title;
      (28)   Finance companies;
      (29)   Floors, floor coverings (retail);
      (30)   Florists;
      (31)   Food stores, excluding, supermarkets;
      (32)   Furniture stores;
      (33)   Gift shops and greeting card shops;
      (34)   Graphic artists, architects, draftsmen and painters (when not
located on the ground floor);
      (35)   Hardware stores;
      (36)   Hobby stores;
      (37)   Ice cream stores;
      (38)   Interior decorating shops (with incidental retail sales);
      (39)   Jewelry sales and service;
      (40)   Laundries;
      (41)   Leather goods and luggage stores;
      (42)   Offices, when not located on the first floor, including medical/
dental offices, real estate, insurance, stockbrokers, financial advisory
services, tax services, programming, employment agencies and personnel offices;
      (43)   Office machines and supplies;
      (44)   Multi-family dwelling units with a minimum density of 20 units per
acre on housing opportunity sites as shown in the General Plan;
      (45)   Music stores;
      (46)   Newsstands;
      (47)   Optician and optometrical shops;
      (48)   Paint, glass and wallpaper stores;
      (49)   Pet and bird stores;
      (50)   Photocopying;
      (51)   Picture framing shops;
      (52)   Printing, publishing, lithography and engraving;
      (53)   Radio, television, stereo sales, repair;
      (54)   Record, tape and compact disc stores;
      (55)   Restaurants not providing live entertainment or fast food service
for carry off trade;
      (56)   Savings and loan offices;
      (57)   Shoe stores and repair;
      (58)   Service uses allowed in the CS zone when not located on the first
floor and not displacing a residential use;
      (59)   Sporting goods stores;
      (60)   Stamp and coin stores;
      (61)   Stationery stores;
      (62)   Tailor and dressmaking;
      (63)   Ticket agencies;
      (64)   Toy stores;
      (65)    Variety stores;
      (66)   Watch and clock sales and repair; and
      (67)   Yard goods stores.
   (B)   No principal permitted use provided for in division (A) above shall
include entertainment of customers or clientele by music, actors or singing,
nor permit any establishment or business to charge admission or entrance fees.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 689, passed 3-6-2002; Am. Ord. 703, passed 3-2-2004; Am. Ord.
716, passed 9-6-2006; Am. Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015; Am. Ord. 869, passed 9-7-
2022; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.100.050 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following uses may not be established, expanded, substantially modified
or changed to another conditional use in the CC zone unless, and until, a use
permit is obtained:
   (A)   Any of the principal permitted uses not conducted entirely within a
building;
   (B)   Drive-up windows or patron service areas and spaces exterior to a
building, for any use;
   (C)   Theaters, nightclubs and entertainment establishments;
   (D)   Offices and service establishments allowed in §
17.100.040 when on the ground floor;
   (E)   Wholesale activities which are accessory to a main use on the same
premises;
   (F)   Uses which combine wholesale and retail sales and/or retail and
service activities when neither aspect of the business is an accessory or
principal use but both are an integral part of the business;
   (G)    Residential uses such as live/work units or shopkeeper units located
above the ground floor of a building (less than 20 dwelling units per acre
permitted).
   (H)   Other uses determined by the Planning Commission as equivalent to
those listed in divisions (A) through (G) of this section or which are
determined to be equivalent to those listed in §
17.100.040, but requiring regulation of location, extent or operation because
of some unique characteristic;
   (I)   Establishments or businesses which entertain customers or clientele by
musicians, actors or singers or establishments which charge admission or
entrance fees;
   (J)   Cigar shops, smoke shops; and
   (K)   Liquor stores.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984; Am. Ord. 703, passed 3-2-2004; Am. Ord. 716, passed 9-6-2006; Am. Ord.
887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.100.055 PROCEDURE FOR PLANNING DIRECTOR USE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Uses not specifically listed in §§
17.100.040 and
17.100.050 are specifically prohibited unless a use determination by the
Planning Director is made which finds the use not specifically listed is
similar to another use permitted or conditionally permitted within the Central
Commercial District.
   (B)   The criteria utilized by the Planning Director to determine if a
proposed use is sufficiently similar to a permitted use as described in §
17.100.040, and can be processed as such is as follows:
      (1)   The proposed use must be retail- oriented and closely approximate a
use described in §
17.100.040 relative to the type of goods offered and/or service provided;
      (2)   The proposed use must cater to and invite pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   The proposed use encompasses store frontage that is open to the
street with window displays that are oriented toward pedestrians.
(Am. Ord. 703, passed 3-2-2004)
§ 17.100.060 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses and structures in the CC zone are as follows:
   (A)   Activities which are characteristic of and usually found in connection
with a principal use on the same premises and which are subordinate to,
dependent on and economically and operationally integrated into the principal
use, including but not limited to the following:
      (1)   Parking garages and lots;
      (2)   Storage for principal uses;
      (3)   Offices for principal uses;
      (4)    Accessory dwelling units;
      (5)   Signs;
      (6)   Mechanical amusement devices, limited to two devices per
establishment; and
      (7)   Mechanical amusement device arcades which have a use permit issued
under
Chapter 17.032 of this title.
   (B)   No detached nonresidential accessory structure, whether permanent or
temporary, fixed or movable, and regardless of the materials contained therein,
shall be allowed, except by use permit.
   (C)   Short-term rental uses contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use as long as the residential unit is an ADU/JADU
constructed prior to January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024; Am. Ord. 891, passed 1-9-2025)
§ 17.100.070 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
    The minimum density for residential uses is 20 units per acre unless the
building site is within a WHO zone in which case the density standards of that
overlay zone apply. No other building site requirements apply in the CC zone
unless the building site is within a WHO zone in which case the standards of
that overlay zone apply. All multi-family dwelling units shall comply with the
design standards for multi-family housing in Article IV of
Chapter 17.138, and all accessory dwelling units shall comply with the
standards of
Chapter 17.048.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 887, passed 2-7-
2024)
§ 17.100.080 HEIGHT.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or structure
occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or less
shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories. On lots
having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or structure occupied by a
principal use and situated on the downhill side of the street upon which it has
its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height, and if situated on the
uphill side of the street shall not exceed 28.5 feet in height nor contain more
than three stories.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story; provided that,
handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be included in
measuring height.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -)
§ 17.100.090 YARDS.
   No yards are required, except when a lot line of a lot in the CC zone is the
boundary of a residential zone, the central commercial lot shall provide yard
space or spaces along and adjacent to the boundary line and along the street
property line, equal to that of the abutting yard space or spaces in the
residential zone, except as may be otherwise permitted by a use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.100.095 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the CH Highway
Commercial Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.100.100 SIGNS.
   No sign shall be established or maintained in the CC zone, except as
provided in
Chapter 17.068 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.100.110 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements in the CC zone are as follows.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Vehicular off-street parking and loading facilities shall be
provided on the same building site and immediately adjacent to the use or
structure served, except as otherwise provided herein.
      (2)   In the event of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail over other provisions of this title.
   (B)   Standard facilities.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be as set forth in
Chapter 17.052 of this title.
      (2)   For any structure or use for which no specific requirements are set
forth in this title under
Chapter 17.052, the following facilities shall be provided:
         (a)   One parking space for each 200 square feet or fraction thereof,
of gross floor area occupied by, used for or devoted to the entirety of the
principal use to be served including accessory uses;
         (b)   One large off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet
or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   For permitted principal uses. Upon approval of a variance therefor,
the above standard facilities may be reduced, but only to the degree
necessitated, warranted and required by the relevant and consequential facts of
each case, when the reduction does not adversely affect the development or use
of adjacent properties or public ways, and under one of the following
conditions, circumstances or cases:
         (a)   Conditions of non-conformity which produce and cause,
exceptional and extreme hardship or excessive physical difficulty in providing
the standard facilities;
         (b)   Physical conditions, including, but not limited to access,
topography and shape, beyond immediate and reasonable remedy by the town,
applicant or owner, separately or collectively, which restrict or limit the
physical development or use of a building site;
         (c)   Strict compliance is in conflict with design review findings,
criteria or recommendations which are found to be more essential to the common
good or to the protection of adjoining properties and uses, public or private;
         (d)   Facilities and uses owned, operated or conducted by a
governmental, public utility or similar public or semi-public entity or agency;
         (e)   Facilities or uses determined to be singular, unique, transient
or intermittent; and/or
         (f)   A facility or use which is allowed by other provisions of this
title to provide less parking facilities.
      (2)   For conditional uses. The requirements of division (B) of this
section may be varied by the terms, provisions or conditions of the use permit
approving a conditional use in accordance with the facts, findings and
determinations governing approval of the use permit as set forth in
Chapter 17.032.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 522, passed - -
1984)
§ 17.100.120 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the CC zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.52.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.100.125 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height, or buildable area, or any combination thereof, when the
reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or
detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of
special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.100.130 FORMULA BUSINESSES AND RESTAURANTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any proposed use or
structure within the CC zone which constitutes a formula business or formula
restaurant, as those terms are defined in §
17.040.210, shall comply with Article II of
Chapter 17.040.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
CHAPTER 17.104: CS COMMERCIAL SERVICE ZONE
Section
   
17.104.010   Generally
   
17.104.020   Design review
   
17.104.030   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.104.040   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.104.045   Procedure for Planning Director use determination
   
17.104.050   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.104.060   Building site requirements
   
17.104.070   Height
   
17.104.080   Yards
   
17.104.085   Driveway standards
   
17.104.090   Signs
   
17.104.100   Off-street parking and loading
   
17.104.110   Traffic impact permit
   
17.104.115   Variances
   
17.104.120   Formula businesses and restaurants
§ 17.104.010 GENERALLY.
   No premises in the CS commercial service zone may be used for any purpose or
in any manner, except as set forth in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.020 DESIGN REVIEW.
   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical modifications of
buildings in the CS zone are subject to design review unless specifically
exempted in each instance by the Planning Commission or other provisions of
this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.104.030 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Principal permitted uses and structures in the CS zone are lumber
yards, home improvement centers and building and construction supply
businesses.
   (B)   The uses shall be conducted entirely within a building and are
restricted to the following: warehouse, storage, wholesale and distribution
facilities having no manufacturing, processing, fabrication, assembly or
similar activities on the premises as a part or accessory thereto.
   (C)   No principal permitted use provided for in division (A) above shall
include entertainment of customers or clientele by music, actors or singing,
nor permit any establishment of business to charge admission or entrance fees.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.040 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The uses may not be established, expanded, substantially modified or changed
to another conditional use unless and until a use permit is obtained:
   (A)   Permitted principal uses with minor and accessory fabrication or
assembly activities, but not including any manufacturing or processing
activities; when the entirety of the use, both principal and accessory, is
contained entirely within a building;
   (B)   Permitted principal uses not conducted entirely within a building;
   (C)   Building contractors facilities provided the premises is the legal or
principal business address of the contractor, and provided there is no storage,
repair or servicing of transport trucks, tractors, cranes, compressors and
similar or other heavy equipment on the premises;
   (D)   Wholesale bakeries, bottling plants, laundries and dry cleaning
plants, when operated entirely within a building;
   (E)   Printing and publishing plants;
   (F)   Other uses determined by the Planning Commission as similar to those
listed in divisions (A) through (E) above, or which are determined to be
similar to those listed in §
17.104.030, but requiring regulation of location, extent or operation because
of some unique characteristic; and
   (G)   Establishments or businesses which entertain customers or clientele by
musicians, actors or singers or establishments which charge admission or
entrance fees.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.045 PROCEDURE FOR PLANNING DIRECTOR USE DETERMINATION.
   Uses not specifically listed in §§
17.104.040 and
17.104.050 are specifically prohibited unless a use determination by the
Planning Director is made which finds the use not specifically listed is
similar to another use permitted or conditionally permitted within the
Commercial Service Zone.
§ 17.104.050 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Accessory uses and structures in the CS zone are activities which are
characteristic of, and usually found in connection with, a principal use on the
same premises, and which are subordinate to, dependent on and economically and
operationally integrated into the principal use.
   (B)   No detached accessory structure, whether permanent or temporary, fixed
or movable, and regardless of the materials contained therein, is allowed,
except by use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.060 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   Building site requirements in the CS zone are as follows:
   (A)   Twenty thousand square feet, with a minimum width of 100 feet.
   (B)   A use permit must be first secured for any use, occupancy of, physical
improvement of, or on, a building site failing to meet the requirements; and
the use permit shall not allow or authorize any use not allowed elsewhere in
the CS zone, and on other building sites therein.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.070 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height restrictions in the CS zone are: one story and 15 feet.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.080 YARDS.
   (A)   No yards are required, except when a lot line of a lot in the CS zone
is the boundary of a residential zone.
   (B)   When a lot line of a lot in the CS zone is the boundary of a
residential zone, the CS lot shall provide yard space, or spaces, along and
adjacent to the boundary line, and along the street property line equal to that
of the abutting yard space, or spaces, in the residential zone, except as may
be otherwise permitted by a use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.085 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the CH Highway
Commercial Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.104.090 SIGNS.
   No sign shall be established or maintained in the CS zone, except as
provided in
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.100 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements in the CS zone are as follows.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Vehicular off street parking and loading facilities shall be
provided on the same building site and immediately adjacent to the use or
structure served, except as provided herein.
      (2)   In the event of conflict, the provisions of this chapter shall
prevail over other provisions of this title.
   (B)   Standard facilities.
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be as set forth in
Chapter 17.052 of this title.
      (2)   For any structure or use for which no specific requirements are set
forth in this title in
Chapter 17.052, the following facilities shall be provided:
         (a)   One parking space for each 200 square feet, or fraction thereof,
of gross floor area occupied by, used for, or devoted to the entirety of the
principal use to be served including accessory uses;
         (b)   One large off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet
or fraction thereof.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   For permitted principal uses. Upon approval of a use permit
therefor, the above standard facilities may be reduced, but only to the degree
necessitated, warranted and required by the relevant and consequential facts of
each case, when the reduction does not adversely affect the development or use
of adjacent properties of public ways, and under the following conditions,
circumstances or cases:
         (a)   Conditions of non-conformity which produce and cause exceptional
and extreme hardship or excessive physical difficulty in providing the standard
facilities;
         (b)   Physical conditions, including, but not limited to access,
topography and shape, beyond immediate and reasonable remedy by the town,
applicant or owner, separately or collectively, which restrict or limit the
physical development or use of a building site;
         (c)   Strict compliance is in conflict with design review findings,
criteria or recommendations which are found to be more essential to the common
good or to the protection of adjoining properties and uses, public or private;
         (d)   Facilities and uses owned, operated or conducted by a
governmental, public utility or similar public or semi-public entity or agency;
         (e)   Facilities or uses determined to be singular, unique, transient
or intermittent; and
         (f)   A facility of use which is allowed by other provisions of this
title to provide less parking facilities.
      (2)   For conditional uses. The requirements of division (B) of this
section may be varied by the terms, provisions or conditions of the use permit
approving a conditional use in accordance with the facts, findings and
determinations governing the approval of the use permit as set forth in
Chapter 17.032 and in conformity with design review requirements of
Chapter 17.020.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.104.110 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the CS zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.54.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
§ 17.104.115 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section, a reduction of
building height or buildable area, or any combination thereof, when the
reduction is found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or
detrimental effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of
special privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.104.120 FORMULA BUSINESSES AND RESTAURANTS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any proposed use or
structure within the CS zone which constitutes a formula business or formula
restaurant, as those terms are defined in §
17.040.210, shall comply with Article II of
Chapter 17.040.
(Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
CHAPTER 17.108: CR COMMERCIAL RECREATION ZONE
Section
   
17.108.010   Purpose
   
17.108.020   General provisions
   
17.108.030   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.108.040   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.108.050   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.108.060   Development procedures and standards
   
17.108.070   Traffic impact permit
§ 17.108.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The CR commercial recreation zone provides a location for private, as
opposed to publicly owned or operated, recreation facilities.
   (B)   The facilities may be single-purpose and occupy large land area, as in
the case of a golf course or country club; they may also consist of a complex
of associated activities, such as an amusement arcade or carnival, or a resort
hotel.
   (C)   The uses in this zone tend toward physical activity in the open, and
consequently adequate land area, careful design of improvements and control of
the type and location of activities are necessary to protect surrounding
properties.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.108.020 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   No premises in the CR zone may be used for any purpose or in any
manner, except as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical
modifications of building are subject to design review unless specifically
exempted in each instance by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.108.030 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following are principal permitted uses and structures in the CR zone:
   (A)   When conducted on a building site of not less than ten acres:
      (1)   Private recreation clubs including boat, swim, fishing, golf,
tennis, riding and country clubs;
      (2)   Other uses determined by the Planning Commission to be of a similar
nature to those listed in division (A)(1) above, and which comply with the
objectives, purposes, policies and standards of the Fairfax Area General Plan;
      (3)   All other commercial recreational uses and structures specifically
approved by the Planning Commission as part of a development plan or master
plan approved by the Planning Commission; and
      (4)   Public recreation facilities and structures approved by the Town
Council after referral of the proposals to the Planning Commission and Parks
and Recreation Commission.
   (B)   No principal permitted use provided for in division (A) above shall
include entertainment of customers or clientele by music, actors or singing,
nor permit any establishment or business to charge admission or entrance fees.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.108.040 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The following uses may not be established, expanded, substantially
modified or changed to another conditional use in the CR zone unless and until
a use permit is obtained:
      (1)   Any principal permitted use or structure on a building site of less
than ten acres;
      (2)   Any commercial or residential use or structure which is determined
by the Planning Commission to be accessory and incidental to an allowed
principal recreational use, including, but not limited to quarters for
custodians, watchmen and other service employees employed or engaged in serving
the principal recreational use and commercial establishments including, but not
limited to restaurants, bars, retail establishments and service establishments
which are operated in connection with, serve the same patrons as, and are
accessory and incidental to an allowed principal recreational use; provided
further that no such accessory use or structure allowed by the provisions of
this division (A)(2) shall under any circumstances become a principal
recreational use unless so allowed by other provisions of this chapter;
      (3)   Signs not specifically allowed or provided for by
Chapter 17.064 of this title;
      (4)   Signs which are not visible beyond the boundary line of the use or
activity so advertised, but which would ordinarily be prohibited by
Chapter 17.064 of this title; provided that, any sign allowed shall be reviewed
by the Planning Commission;
      (5)   Establishments or businesses which entertain customers or clientele
by musicians, actors or singers or establishments which charge admission or
entrance fees;
      (6)   Mechanical amusement device arcades subject to the following
standards:
         (a)   Use permits shall be granted for periods of no more than six
months initially. The Planning Commission may approve extensions. In approving
use permits and extensions, findings must be made that the use will not or has
not created or increased the incidence of excessive loitering, vandalism,
pedestrian obstruction, noise or any other activity that may have an adverse
effect on adjacent or vicinity properties, residences or businesses,
         (b)   Hours of operation shall be no later than 10:00 p.m. The
Planning Commission may grant exceptions to this limitation for adults-only
establishments or when it is demonstrated that the use is clearly ancillary to
another use.
   (B)   In no case shall commercial or residential structures cover more than
ten percent of the area; in no case shall accessory structures requiring a use
permit be permitted to cover more than ten percent of the property.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 491, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-2012)
§ 17.108.050 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Accessory uses and structures in the CR zone are activities which are
characteristic of, and usually found in connection with, a principal use on the
same premises, and which are subordinate to, dependent upon, and economically
and operationally integrated into the principal use.
   (B)   No detached accessory structure, whether permanent or temporary, fixed
or movable, and regardless of the materials contained therein, are allowed,
except by use permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.108.060 DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS.
   The following development procedures and standards apply in the CR zone:
   (A)   Every commercial recreation use, facility or development, and every
addition, modification or change thereof, shall subject to design review unless
specifically exempted by the Planning Commission.
   (B)   For every commercial recreation use, facility or development requiring
a use permit, any design review approval secured in connection therewith shall
not be effective and final until the use permit is effective and final.
   (C)   The Planning Commission, in considering a use permit under the
provisions of this chapter, may require information, maps, reports, drawings
and other submissions in addition to those required for design review.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided or required by use permit, each
commercial recreation use, facility or development shall comply with all other
relevant standards of this title, including off-street parking, design review
and sign regulations.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.108.070 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the CR zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.56.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
CHAPTER 17.110:  CANNABIS USES
Section
   
17.110.010   Purpose
   
17.110.020   Definitions
   
17.110.030   Commercial cannabis activities prohibited unless specifically
authorized by this chapter
   
17.110.040   Cannabis retail uses
   
17.110.050   Adult-use cannabis deliveries by certain existing medical
marijuana dispensaries
   
17.110.060   Reserved
   
17.110.070   Reserved
   
17.110.080   Reserved
   
17.110.090   Reserved
   
17.110.100   Personal cultivation of cannabis
   
17.110.110   Medical cannabis administrative exception
   
17.110.120   Enforcement
   
17.110.130   Liability
§ 17.110.010 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to impose zoning restrictions on various
commercial cannabis businesses authorized and/or licensed by the State of
California and personal cultivation of cannabis activities authorized pursuant
to state law. This section is not intended to give any person or entity
independent legal authority to operate a cannabis business, it is intended
simply to impose zoning restrictions regarding cannabis businesses that may
operate in the town and personal cannabis cultivation activities pursuant to
this Code and state law. This chapter is in addition to any other business
license and regulatory requirements imposed on cannabis businesses by this Code
or other applicable state law.
(Ord. 759, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.020 DEFINITIONS.
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
   ADULT-USE CANNABIS or ADULT-USE. Cannabis or cannabis products intended to
be used for non-medical purposes by persons 21 years of age or older in
conformance with the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act
(Cal. Business and Professions Code Division 10) and the provisions of state
law regarding cannabis use and sale (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1 et
seq.), as each may be amended from time to time.
   CANNABIS. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica,
or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin,
whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin. CANNABIS also means the separated resin, whether crude or
purified, obtained from cannabis. CANNABIS includes “cannabis” as defined in
Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26001 and in § 11018 of the Cal. Health
and Safety Code. CANNABIS shall not include industrial hemp as defined by §
11018.5 of the Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION. Any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. For purposes of
commercial cannabis cultivation, the term CANNABIS CULTIVATION also includes
processing, rolling, storing, packaging, and labeling of non-manufactured
cannabis products.
   CANNABIS DELIVERY. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products
to a customer. CANNABIS DELIVERY also includes the use by a cannabis retailer
of any technology platform that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate
the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabis
products.
   CANNABIS DISTRIBUTION FACILITY. Any facility engaged in the procurement,
temporary storage, non-retail sales, and transport of cannabis and cannabis
products between state-licensed cannabis businesses and any other activity
allowed under the state distributor license(s), including, but not limited to,
quality control and collection of state cannabis taxes.
   CANNABIS MANUFACTURING. The compounding, blending, extracting, infusing, or
otherwise making, preparing or packaging a cannabis product. CANNABIS
MANUFACTURING includes the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding
of manufactured cannabis, or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or
by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a
combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that
packages or repackages medical cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
relabels its container.
   CANNABIS MICROBUSINESS. A commercial cannabis business that must engage in
at least three of the following commercial cannabis activities: cultivation,
manufacturing using nonvolatile solvents, distribution, and/or retail.
   CANNABIS PRODUCTS. Cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant
material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited
to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis
or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients. CANNABIS PRODUCTS include
“cannabis products” as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26001.
   CANNABIS RETAILER. A facility or premises where cannabis or cannabis
products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail
sale or other sales or transfer to consumers, including an establishment that
delivers cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale. For purposes
of this chapter, CANNABIS RETAILER also includes medical cannabis dispensaries,
patient collectives and cooperatives operating, or proposing to operate,
pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.5)
and/or the Medical Marijuana Program (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 et
seq.), as may be amended. Unless otherwise specified, CANNABIS RETAILER means
both a retailer selling medicinal cannabis and medicinal cannabis products to
patients with valid physicians’ recommendations, and a retailer selling adult-
use cannabis and cannabis products for adults 21 years of age and older. The
term CANNABIS RETAILER includes both storefront retailers and delivery-only
retailers unless otherwise specified.
   CANNABIS TESTING LABORATORY. A laboratory, facility, entity, or site that
offers or performs tests or testing of cannabis or cannabis products.
   COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USE. Includes all cannabis cultivation, cannabis
manufacture, cannabis distribution, cannabis testing laboratories, cannabis
retailers, cannabis delivery, and sale of cannabis and/or cannabis products,
whether intended for medical or adult-use, and whether or not such activities
are carried out for profit. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USES includes “commercial
cannabis activity” as defined in Cal. Business and Professions Code §26001, and
includes any activity that requires, or may require in the future, a license
from a state licensing authority pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use
Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Cal. Business and Professions Code Division
10), as may be amended. COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USE does not include the activities
of a qualified patient or a primary caregiver that are exempt from state
licensure pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26033.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Any child day care facility other than a family day care
home, and includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities,
and schoolage child care centers, as defined §§ 1596.76 and 1596.750 of the
Cal. Health and Safety Code.
   DELIVERY-ONLY RETAILER. A cannabis retailer that conducts cannabis sales
exclusively through cannabis delivery from a fixed, physical location that is
closed to the public. Also known as a NON-STOREFRONT RETAILER.
   FULLY ENCLOSED AND SECURE STRUCTURE. A space within a dwelling unit that
complies with the California Building Code, as adopted in the town (“CBC”); or,
if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBC, an accessory structure, on a
lot containing a dwelling unit, having a complete roof and enclosure supported
by connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, a foundation, slab
or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar
attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only
through one or more lockable doors. In order to qualify as a FULLY ENCLOSED AND
SECURE STRUCTURE, the walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials
that cannot be easily broken through, such as two-inch by four-inch or thicker
studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent.
Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products, are not considered
solid materials.
   INDOOR. Within a fully enclosed and secure structure.
   MEDICINAL CANNABIS or MEDICAL USE. Cannabis or cannabis products intended to
be used for medical purposes in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of
1996 (Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.5) and the Medicinal Marijuana
Program Act (Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 et seq.), as each may be
amended from time to time.
   OUTDOOR. Any location not within a fully enclosed and secure structure, such
as a location exposed to the open air or within a greenhouse.
   PERSONAL CULTIVATION. Cultivation of cannabis for a natural person’s own
personal use and possession in accordance with this Code and state law,
including but not limited to Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1 and
11362.2, as may be amended, and such person does not sell or distribute
cannabis to any other person. PERSONAL USE also means and includes cultivation
of medical cannabis conducted by a qualified patient exclusively for his or her
personal medical use, and cultivation conducted by a primary caregiver for the
personal medical purposes of no more than five specified qualified patients for
whom he or she is the primary caregiver, in accordance with state law,
including Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 and 11362.765, as may be
amended. Except as herein defined, PERSONAL CULTIVATION does not include, and
shall not authorize, any cultivation conducted as part of a business or
commercial activity, including cultivation for compensation or retail or
wholesale sales of cannabis, or by a cannabis cooperative association or any of
its members.
   PRIMARY CAREGIVER. The same meaning as the term “primary caregiver” defined
in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. House, an apartment unit, accessory dwelling unit, a
mobile home, or other similar dwelling occupied for residential purposes, or as
defined in Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.2, as may be amended from time
to time.
   QUALIFIED PATIENT. Means and includes both a “qualified patient” and a
“person with an identification card” as each term is defined in Cal. Health and
Safety Code § 11362.7, as amended from time to time.
   SCHOOL. A place of instruction at the primary, secondary or high school
level for at least four grades within a range from transitional kindergarten or
kindergarten through 12 (whether public, private, or charter), but does not
include any place where instruction is conducted primarily in a private home.
   STATE COMMERCIAL CANNABIS LICENSE. A state license issued under the
Medicinal and Adult  Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Cal. Business and
Professions Code Division 10), as may be amended, and includes both an A-
license and an M-license, as well as a testing laboratory license.
   STOREFRONT RETAILER. A cannabis retailer that conducts cannabis sales at a
business premises that is open to the public, and may also conduct cannabis
delivery as part of a retail sale.
   SELL, SALE, and TO SELL. Include any transaction, whereby, for any
consideration title to cannabis or cannabis products is transferred from one
person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis or cannabis products
pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or
receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or
cannabis products by a licensee to the licensee from who the cannabis or
cannabis product was purchased.
   TUTORING CENTER. A place that provides instruction supplemental to that
provided by a school, requires compensation, and offers such instruction to at
least ten clients who do not reside on the premises, for at least 37 weeks a
year. A TUTORING CENTER may be located in a residence as long as the residence
is in a commercial zone.
   YOUTH CENTER. Any public or private facility that is primarily used to host
recreational or social activities for minors, including, but not limited to,
private youth membership organizations or clubs, social service teenage club
facilities, video arcades where ten or more video games or game machines or
devices are operated, and where minors are legally permitted to conduct
business, or similar amusement park facilities. This definition shall not
include any private martial arts, yoga, ballet, music, art studio or similar
studio of this nature nor shall it include any private gym, athletic training
facility, pizza parlor, dentist office, doctor’s office primarily serving
children, or a location which is primarily utilized as an administrative office
for youth programs or organizations.
(Ord. 759, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.030 COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED UNLESS SPECIFICALLY
AUTHORIZED BY THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   All commercial cannabis uses as defined herein (other than as provided
under Cal. Business and Professions Code §§ 26054(c) and (d), 26080(b), and
26090(e)) are prohibited from establishing or operating in all zoning districts
within the Town of Fairfax except and unless expressly permitted by and in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and/or Chapter 5.56.
   (B)   All commercial cannabis uses permitted by this chapter must, prior to
establishing and operating any such commercial cannabis use, obtain and
maintain at all times (1) a valid state commercial cannabis license, (2) a
commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to Title V,
Chapter 5.56 of this Code and (3) any other local or regulatory licenses or
permits required by this Code or state law.
(Ord. 759, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.040 CANNABIS RETAIL USES.
   (A)   Cannabis retailers may be permitted subject to the approval of a
commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to
Chapter 5.56 of this Code, and provided there shall be no more than two
cannabis retailer locations at any one time in the following use categories, or
in any combination thereof:
      (1)   Medical-use cannabis storefront retailer(s); and/or
      (2)   Delivery-only retailer(s), which may be medical-use, adult-use or
both.
      This limit shall include any medical marijuana dispensary that was
legally operating as of April 3, 2018, and continues to operate, and which may
be permitted to conduct adult-use cannabis deliveries pursuant to § 17.110.050
("Adult-Use Cannabis Deliveries By Certain Existing Medical Marijuana
Dispensaries"), below. In the event that the existing medical marijuana
dispensary ceases to operate in accordance with a legally-issued permit,
another a permit may be issued for another operator or location such that at
all times, two, but not more than two, retail locations may hold permits to
legally operate. One retail location may consist of side-by-side licensed
premises as defined in 16 Cal. Code of Regulations § 5025, in order to permit
the licensing and operation of both a medical use storefront retailer and
adult-use delivery only retailer by a single operator.
   (B)   Cannabis retailers may be permitted in the following zones:
      (1)   Medical-use cannabis storefront retailers: Highway Commercial (CH)
and Central Commercial (CC).
      (2)   Cannabis delivery-only retailers: Highway Commercial (CH), Central
Commercial (CC) and Limited Commercial (CL).
   (C)   Cannabis retailers shall not be allowed within the specified distances
to the following uses that are in existence at the time the cannabis use is
established. Specifically, a cannabis retailer shall not locate or establish:
      (1)   Medical-use cannabis storefront retailers: Within a 600-foot radius
of a school, or youth center. (See Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26054.)
Within a 300-foot radius of a daycare center or tutoring center.
      (2)   Cannabis delivery-only retailers: Within a 250-foot radius of a
school or youth center. Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26054
(b), as may be amended, the town finds that no setback or radius is necessary
for cannabis delivery-only retailers near day care centers or other potentially
sensitive uses, beyond the radii contained herein.
      The distances specified in this section shall be the horizontal distance
measured in a straight line from the property line of the specified use to the
closest property line of the lot on which retailer is to be located without
regard to intervening structures. (See Cal. Business and Professions Code §
26054(b); Cal. Health and Safety Code § 11362.768(c).)
   (D)   Cannabis retailers shall meet all standards for development in the
underlying zoning district, in the town’s General Plan, and in any applicable
specific plans or master plans, and in addition:
      (1)   Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Medical-use cannabis storefront retailers: Town Code §
17.052.030(F) for retail and personal service stores at a rate of three spaces
for the first 500 square of gross floor area and one space for each additional
500 square feet thereafter, plus one space per delivery vehicle unless an
employee vehicle is used to conduct deliveries.
         (b)   Cannabis delivery-only retailers: Town Code §
17.052.030(K) for industrial uses, including wholesale and storage: one space
per two employees of the maximum shift, plus one space per delivery vehicle
unless an employee vehicle is used to conduct deliveries.
      (2)   Size of facility. The size of the facility shall not exceed 1,500
square feet exclusive of restroom facilities and common areas.
      (3)   If an application for a proposed cannabis retailer requires
compliance with
Chapter 17.020 (“Design Review Regulations”), then notwithstanding any
provision of
Chapter 17.020 to the contrary, the Planning Commission shall provide a
recommendation on such design review application and final approval authority
shall vested in the Town Council. The Town Council’s review and decision shall
in all respects comply with the criteria set forth in
Chapter 17.020.
      (4)   If an application for a proposed cannabis retailer requires a
traffic impact permit pursuant to
Chapter 17.056 (“Traffic Impact Permit”), then notwithstanding any provision of
Chapter 17.056 to the contrary, the Town Council shall not be required to
approve the methodology used in the traffic study pursuant to §
17.056.070.
      (5)   If an application for a proposed cannabis retailer requires a sign
permit pursuant to
Chapter 17.064 (“Signs”), then notwithstanding any provision of
Chapter 17.064 to the contrary, the Planning Commission shall make a
recommendation on such sign permit, and final approval authority shall vested
in the Town Council. The Town Council’s review and decision shall in all
respects comply with the criteria set forth in
Chapter 17.064, except signage shall be limited to a single window or wall sign
and in no circumstances shall any signage for a cannabis retailer exceed six
square feet in area.
(Ord. 759, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.050 ADULT-USE CANNABIS DELIVERIES BY CERTAIN EXISTING MEDICAL
MARIJUANA DISPENSARIES.
   (A)   A medical marijuana dispensary that was legally operating as of April
3, 2018 and is permitted by the town to operate a medical marijuana delivery
service, may operate as a permitted use in any commercial district, an adult-
use cannabis delivery-only service from its then existing premises, subject to
each of the following conditions:
      (1)   The dispensary shall, prior to conducting any adult-use cannabis
deliveries, obtain and maintain at all times:
         (a)   A valid state cannabis license authorizing adult-use cannabis
deliveries issued by the appropriate state licensing authority pursuant to the
Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (Cal. Business and
Professions Code Division 10);
         (b)   A commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to Title 5,
Division II,
Chapter 5.56 of this Code; and
         (c)   Any other state and local licenses or permits required by this
Code or state law.
      (2)   All cannabis deliveries must conform to state laws and regulations
adopted pursuant to the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act except as set forth herein regarding the state buffer zone.
      (3)   No adult-use customers shall be permitted to access or remain in
the business premises of a medical marijuana dispensary.
      (4)   No adult-use cannabis retail sales shall be permitted to occur at
the premises of a medical marijuana dispensary.
   (B)   Pursuant to Cal. Business and Professions Code § 26054(b), as may be
amended, the town finds that no setback or radius is necessary for the conduct
of adult-use cannabis deliveries by an eligible, existing medical marijuana
dispensary pursuant to this section, beyond the zoning regulations contained
herein.
   (C)   This section is not intended to give any person or entity independent
legal authority to operate an adult-use cannabis non-storefront retail delivery
service, it is intended only to clarify the zoning restrictions regarding
certain existing medical marijuana dispensaries that may conduct adult-use
cannabis deliveries in the town pursuant to this Code and state law. This
section is in addition to any other business license and regulatory
requirements imposed on medical marijuana dispensaries and non-storefront
retail cannabis delivery services by this Code or other applicable state law.
(Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.060 RESERVED.
§ 17.110.070 RESERVED.
§ 17.110.080 RESERVED.
§ 17.110.090 RESERVED.
§ 17.110.100 PERSONAL CULTIVATION OF CANNABIS.
   Personal cultivation of cannabis shall comply with the following:
   (A)   No more than six cannabis plants per private residence are allowed to
be cultivated, whether indoors or outdoors upon the grounds of a private
residence, regardless of the number of individuals residing at the residence.
However, outdoor cultivation shall not exceed six plants per lot, regardless of
the number of private residences located upon the lot.
   (B)   Outdoor cultivation. Outdoor personal cultivation of cannabis shall
comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Outdoor cannabis plants shall be located a minimum of five feet
from property lines.
      (2)   Outdoor cannabis plants shall be located only in the rear and side
yards of a lot, and are not permitted to be located in front yards of any lot.
      (3)   No cannabis plants cultivated shall be visible from a public right-
of-way or any other public place by normal unaided vision.
      (4)   No cannabis plants cultivated shall exceed seven feet in height.
      (5)   The area used for cannabis cultivation shall be contained within a
locked space (e.g., enclosed within a locked gate).
      (6)   Any lot upon which cannabis plants are cultivated shall have
fencing of no more than six feet in height surrounding the lot or that portion
of the lot upon which the plants are cultivated. In no event shall netting or
plastic screening be used in conjunction with cannabis cultivation.
      (7)   Outdoor cultivation is prohibited on parcels within 200 feet of any
school or day care center.
   (C)   Indoor cultivation. Indoor personal cultivation of cannabis shall
comply with the following standards:
      (1)   Plants shall be contained within a locked space of a fully enclosed
and secure structure, as defined, either within the primary residence or within
an accessory structure on the same lot as the primary residence.
      (2)   Indoor grow lights shall not exceed 1,200 watts and comply with the
California Building, Electrical, Plumbing and Fire Codes as adopted by the
town. Gas products (CO2 , butane, propane, natural gas, kerosene, etc.) or
generators may not be used indoors or outdoors.
      (3)   All electrical equipment used in the cultivation or processing of
cannabis (e.g., lighting and ventilation) shall be plugged directly into a wall
outlet or otherwise hardwired; the use of extension cords to supply power to
electrical equipment used in the cultivation or processing of cannabis is
prohibited.
      (4)   All cannabis cultivation areas shall be in compliance with the
current, adopted edition of the California Building Code as regards mechanical
ventilation.
      (5)   Shall not be conducted in a manner that results in the creation of
mold or mildew inside the residence or the accessory structure.
   (D)   General. All personal cultivation of cannabis, whether indoors or
outdoors, shall comply with the following generally applicable standards:
      (1)   A copy of documentation of qualified patient status must be
maintained at any location at which medical cannabis cultivation occurs. If
cultivation is to be conducted by a primary caregiver, documentation of the
legally-required relationship shall be maintained at the location where medical
cannabis cultivation occurs.
      (2)   The residence shall maintain fully functional and usable kitchen,
bathrooms, and bedrooms for their intended use, and the premises shall not be
used primarily or exclusively for cannabis cultivation.
      (3)   No cannabis cultivation area shall be maintained or operated in
such a way as to adversely affect the health or safety of the nearby residents
in any manner, including but not limited to by creating dust, glare, heat,
noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be
hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes. A
public nuisance may be deemed to exist, if such cultivation activity produces:
(a) odors which are disturbing to people of normal sensitivity residing or
present on adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public, (b)
repeated responses to the residence from law enforcement officers, (c) repeated
disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood, (d)
excessive noise which is disturbing to people of normal sensitivity on adjacent
or nearby property or areas open to the public, or (e) any other impacts on the
neighborhood which are disruptive of normal activity in the area.
      (4)   Any cannabis cultivation that would require a license or permit
from the State of California per the Medical and Adult-Use Regulation and
Safety Act (Cal. Business and Professions Code Division 10) is prohibited
within the Town of Fairfax.
(Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.110 MEDICAL CANNABIS ADMINISTRATIVE EXCEPTION.
   (A)   Any qualified patient or primary caregiver may seek a medical cannabis
administrative exception to §
17.110.100(A) or (B)(7).
   (B)   Any request for a medical cannabis administrative exception shall be
submitted to the Town Manager, along with documentation, such as a physician’s
recommendation or verification of more than one qualified patient living in the
residence, demonstrating why the standard required by §
17.110.100(A) or (B)(7) is not feasible.
   (C)   The Town Manager may grant a medical cannabis administrative exception
only if the following findings can be made:
      (1)   The individual requesting the exception can demonstrate a medical
need for the exception, as evidenced by the written recommendation of a
treating physician;
      (2)   The requested exception shall not constitute a public nuisance, as
set forth in §
17.110.100(D).
      (3)   For indoor cultivation, the Building Official may require
additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire
Code, including but not limited to installation of fire suppression sprinklers,
code-compliant electrical systems or one-hour firewall assembly.
      (4)   The cultivation of no more than ten cannabis plants shall be
authorized through a medical cannabis administrative exception.
   (D)   The Town Manager, or his or her designee, shall prepare a written
approval or denial of any request for an exception within ten business days of
its submission to the town. Approval of the requested exception may be made
subject to conditions designed to lessen the impact of the exception on
neighboring uses and the community generally.
   (E)   Any exception granted under this section shall be personal to the
party to whom such exception was granted and shall not run with the land or
otherwise be transferable.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Town Code, any person
aggrieved by the decision of the Town Manager, or his or her designee, with
respect to an exception requested under this §
17.110.110 may appeal said decision within ten days of the date of the decision
to the Planning Commission. Upon review, the Planning Commission shall issue
the requested exception if it meets the requirements of division (C) above, and
subject to any conditions imposed per division (D) above.
(Ord. 759, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.120 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Public nuisance. The violation of this chapter is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance and may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 1.12 of the Fairfax Town Code.
   (B)   Seizure and destruction of cannabis. To the extent authorized by state
law, all cannabis seized by the Town Police in the enforcement of this chapter
shall be seized, retained and destroyed in the same manner and subject to the
same procedures as are provided in Cal. Health and Safety Code §§ 11472 through
11479, for cannabis possessed in violation of Division 10 of the Cal. Health
and Safety Code.
   (C)   Right of entry. The Code Enforcement Officer, Building Official,
Planning Director, Chief of Police, Fire Inspector, or a designee is authorized
to enter upon and inspect private properties to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. Reasonable advance notice of any such entry and
inspection shall be provided and, before entry, consent shall be obtained in
writing from the owner or other person in lawful possession of the property. If
consent cannot for any reason be obtained, an inspection warrant shall be
obtained from a court of law prior to any such entry and inspection. In those
cases where consent is denied, the town may seek to recover the costs it incurs
in obtaining a warrant from the property owner and/or person in lawful
possession of the property.
   (D)   Abatement. The Town Attorney, in the name of and on behalf of the town
and/or the people of the town, may bring a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to enforce any provision of this chapter, or to restrain or abate
any violation of the provisions of this chapter as a public nuisance.
   (E)   Penalties not exclusive. The remedies and penalties provided herein
are cumulative, alternative and nonexclusive. The use of one does not prevent
the use of any others and none of these penalties and remedies prevent the town
from using any other remedy at law or in equity which may be available to
enforce this chapter or to abate a public nuisance.
(Ord. 759, passed 6-1-2011; Am. Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
§ 17.110.130 LIABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to protect the
property owner(s) of record, or their lessees, tenants or other participants
engaged in the personal cultivation of cannabis or commercial cannabis uses
from prosecution pursuant to any state or federal laws regulating or
prohibiting such activities. The property owner(s) of record, or their lessees,
tenants and other participants, assumes any and all risk and all liability that
may arise or result under state and federal laws from the cultivation of
cannabis or commercial cannabis activities conducted on such property.
(Ord. 834, passed 9-4-2019)
CHAPTER 17.112: PDD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ZONE
Section
   
17.112.010   Purpose
   
17.112.020   General requirements for a planned development
   
17.112.030   General standards and requirements
   
17.112.040   Residential density policy
   
17.112.050   Preliminary development plan
   
17.112.060   Master development plan
   
17.112.070   Master development plan; Town Engineer’s report
   
17.112.080   Master development plan; final Planning Commission action
   
17.112.090   Master development plan; approval criteria, standards and
procedures
   
17.112.100   Master development plan; Town Council action
   
17.112.110   Master development plan; modification of plan
   
17.112.120   Precise development plan; application
   
17.112.130   Precise development plan; open space dedication and maintenance
   
17.112.140   Precise development plan; performance bond
   
17.112.150   Final subdivision map
   
17.112.160   Term of approvals
   
17.112.170   Appeals
   
17.112.180   Traffic impact permit
§ 17.112.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purposes of the PDD planned development district include the
following:
      (1)   To encourage development of parcels sufficiently large as to permit
comprehensive site planning and building design;
      (2)   To provide a more flexible regulatory procedure by which the basic
public purposes of this title may be accomplished;
      (3)   To encourage variation in siting of buildings and the appropriate
mixing of several land uses, activities and dwelling types;
      (4)   To enhance the appearance and livability of the community through
encouragement of creative approaches to the use of land and the design of
facilities;
      (5)   To conserve natural features; and
      (6)   To promise and create public and private open space as an integral
part of land development design.
   (B)   These purposes are to be ensured through the preparation and
submission of comprehensive development plans showing proper site layout,
design character and integration with the surroundings; and through the
Planning Commission’s careful review of the plans.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.020 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR A PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Five acres or more may be considered a planned development for
purposes of this chapter, provided the property is owned, or its development
controlled, by a single individual or legally constituted corporation or
partnership.
   (B)   In the case of property in various ownerships, all parties owning and
controlling property in the area to be developed shall become parties to a
legal agreement binding them to abide by the planned development plan, as
approved, with the agreement to run with the land as a condition of future use,
sale or lease.
   (C)   The development shall be initiated and completed by the applicant, or
joint applicants, as the case may be.
   (D)   (1)   Unless otherwise provided in the approval of the Planning
Commission, the developer may divide and transfer units of the development.
      (2)   The transferee shall complete the development and shall use and
maintain it, in strict accordance with the development plan as approved by the
Planning Commission and Town Council.
   (E)   (1)   All the provisions of this title are supplementary to all
subdivision regulations of the town.
      (2)   An application for approval of a tentative subdivision map of lands
zoned PDD shall not be accepted, except in conjunction with the concurrent
filing of a precise development plan under §
17.112.120.
      (3)    No tentative subdivision map shall be approved prior to the
approval of a precise development plan for the property covered by the
tentative map. The tentative map and precise development plan applications
shall be processed concurrently.
   (F)   Any project proposed on a property zoned PDD or proposed for rezoning
to PDD, where any portion of the project site meets one or more of the
categories contained in the Hill Area Residential Development Overlay Zone
applicability §
17.072.020 (A)(1) through (4), (B) and (C), shall also be subject to obtaining
a Hill Area residential development permit from the Planning Commission. The
Hill Area residential development permit application shall be processed
concurrently with the Planned Development District application and any
associated applications. Required HRD development permit application submittal
information shall be provided at the time of the initial PDD application
submittal.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991; Am. Ord. 845, passed 2-5-2020)
§ 17.112.030 GENERAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The following provisions shall apply in a planned development
district, together with all other applicable provisions of the town zoning and
subdivision ordinances. Where conflict in regulation occurs, the regulations
specified in this chapter or on a development plan approved pursuant to this
chapter shall apply:
      (1)   No planned development district shall include less than five acres
of contiguous land unless the Planning Commission and Town Council find that
property of less than five acres is suitable as a planned development district
by virtue of its unique historical character, topography, landscaping features
or other special characteristics as may be determined by the Planning
Commission.
      (2)   A planned development district shall be established by an ordinance
adopted by the Town Council after a recommendation by the Planning Commission,
in accordance with §§
17.004.030 through
17.004.120 of this title. Whenever a planned development district has been
established, its boundary shall be indicated on the zoning maps of the town.
      (3)   Where contiguous properties proposed for a planned development in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter are under separate ownership,
written consent of all participating property owners shall be filed with the
Planning Director before any application for a planned development can be
accepted by the town.
      (4)   Standards for area, coverage, light and air orientation, site
planning, density, yard requirements, open spaces, parking and screening shall
be governed by the standards of the residential, commercial or industrial
zoning district(s) most similar in nature and function to the proposed planned
development district (PDD) use(s), or by standards which the Planning
Commission shall by resolution from time to time adopt.
      (5)   All electrical and telephone facilities, fire alarm conduits,
street light wiring and other wiring conduits or facilities shall be placed
underground by the developer. Electric and telephone facilities shall be
installed in accordance with standard specifications of the serving utilities.
      (6)   Within any planned development district, no proposed use or
structure that constitutes a formula business or formula restaurant, as those
terms are defined in §
17.040.210, shall be approved or allowed to operate without first obtaining a
use permit in compliance with Article II of
Chapter 17.040.
   (B)   Standards for public improvements shall be governed by applicable
ordinances and laws of the town.
   (C)   Exceptions to standards adopted by the Planning Commission may be
granted by the Planning Commission and Town Council only in cases where these
bodies find that the exceptions encourage a more desirable environment and are
warranted in terms of the total proposed development or a unit thereof.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 493, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 787, passed 3-4-2015)
§ 17.112.040 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY POLICY.
   (A)   Conformance to the general plan. All projects must conform to the
adopted General Plan or to any accepted specific plan applicable to the area
under consideration.
   (B)   Residential density. A maximum residential density shall be
established based upon average slope, as set forth in the following table:
 
Average Slope   Maximum Residential Density
30% and greater 1 dwelling unit/10 acres
20 to 29.9%     1 dwelling unit/5 acres
10 to 19.9%     1 dwelling unit/2 acres
 
A density shall be further limited by site conditions including natural
resources, topographic and geological conditions and by the level of public
services and road conditions that can reasonably be provided.
   (C)   Planning Commission determination. The Planning Commission shall
consider the following criteria in further limiting density.
      (1)   Extent of lands which are hazardous to life and property due to
soils, geological, seismic or hydrological factors unless the hazards can be
mitigated by minor modifications to existing land forms and vegetation. These
determinations must be based on the analysis of a licensed engineering
geologist and/or civil engineer specializing in soils problems and hydrologist;
      (2)   The number of safe building sites which exist on the property;
      (3)   The cumulative impact of the development on existing circulation
and drainage systems.
   (D)   Gross acreage calculation.
      (1)   Density shall be set for gross acreage. Hazardous lands may be
excluded from the building area, but will be included in the calculation of
gross density per acre.
      (2)   In cases where a portion of the property falls within two different
categories in the General Plan, the Planning Commission shall determine an
aggregate density based on the percentage of gross acreage in each category.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 493, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 827, passed 2-6-2019)
§ 17.112.050 PRELIMINARY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   Approval, in principle, of the preliminary development plan
shall be limited to the general acceptability and intensity of land use
proposed and their interrelationship and shall not be construed to endorse
precise location of uses, configuration of parcels or engineering feasibility.
      (2)   A preliminary development plan and text shall be prepared by or
under the direction of a licensed architect or a licensed building engineer, a
registered landscape architect or, in the case of an area in excess of 20
acres, by a team including a licensed architect or licensed building engineer,
a registered landscape architect and a qualified urban planner. (A qualified
urban planner shall be defined as a planner holding an associate or full
membership in the American Institute of Planners or a planner authorized by the
state’s Planning Advisory Committee to work on comprehensive general plan
programs in the state of California.)
      (3)   It shall include the following information presented in a general
schematic fashion: a preliminary development plan of the entire proposed
development showing land uses and general configuration of parcels or lots,
traffic circulation, streets, driveways, sidewalks and pedestrianways and off-
street parking.
   (B)   The applicant shall, at the time of filing the preliminary development
plan, pay a filing fee in accordance with a schedule of fees adopted by
resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978)
§ 17.112.060 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   (1)   Within one year of the approval of the preliminary development
plan by the Planning Commission, or extension by the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall submit ten copies of a master development plan, conforming in
all major respects with the approved preliminary development plan.
      (2)   The preliminary development plan shall expire and be of no further
effect or benefit if a master development plan is not submitted within the one-
year period or if an extension is not approved.
   (B)   The final plan shall include all elements included in the preliminary
development plan, plus the following.
      (1)   Survey of the property showing existing features including trees,
structures, streets, easements, utility lines, land uses, existing zoning and
existing ownerships; (The information also to be provided for the surrounding
area within 100 feet of the proposed development.)
      (2)   Master plans for street improvements, water, sewerage, flood
control, draining facilities and public utilities;
      (3)   Site, building and landscaping plans and elevations in a detail
sufficient to fully illustrate the proposal;
      (4)   Grading plans;
      (5)   Character, general design and location of signs, street lighting
and street furniture;
      (6)   Description of design principles for buildings and streetscapes;
      (7)   Tabulation of land uses;
      (8)   Tabulation of number of dwelling units by type for each increment
of the total master plan and the estimated population per increment;
      (9)   Proposed standards for height, open space, building, intensity and
public improvements; and
      (10)   Engineering and economic feasibility studies as necessary.
   (C)   Copies of legal documents required by the Planning Commission for
dedication or reservation for group or private open space, or for the creation
of a non-profit homes association shall also be submitted.
   (D)   The applicant shall submit evidence that he or she has sufficient
control over the land to execute the proposed plan.
   (E)   The final plan shall be prepared by or under the direction of a
licensed architect, and a registered landscape architect, or in the case of an
area in excess of 20 acres, by a team including an architect, landscape
architect, qualified urban planner and registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor.
   (F)   The applicant shall, at the time of filing the master development
plan, pay a filing fee in accordance with a schedule of fees adopted by
resolution of the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978)
§ 17.112.070 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN; TOWN ENGINEER’S REPORT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the master development plan by the Planning
Commission, the Planning Commission shall forward the development plan and
original application to the Town Engineer for review, coordination with other
affected town departments and public agencies, and approval of public
improvements including streets, sewers and drainage.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall not act finally on an application until
it has first received a report from the Town Engineer, which report shall be
returned to the Planning Commission within 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.080 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN; FINAL PLANNING COMMISSION ACTION.
   Upon receipt of the master development plan in proper form, the Planning
Commission, after giving notice pursuant to the provisions of §
17.004.070 of this title, shall hold a public hearing thereon. After the
hearing, and after examining the plan for conformity to the preliminary
development plan and all applicable criteria and standards, the Planning
Commission may recommend approval subject to specified modifications and
conditions. When the Planning Commission finds the proposed plan of development
does not conform to the preliminary development plan or does not meet all
applicable criteria and standards, it shall recommend denial of the
application, giving its reasons therefor. The Planning Commission may permit
the applicant to revise and resubmit the plan within 60 days following its
action recommending denial.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.112.090 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPROVAL CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND
PROCEDURES.
   Before recommending approval, the Planning Commission shall find that the
proposed development conforms to the following criteria and to such other
criteria as may be applicable to planned developments within the area in which
the proposed development is located:
   (A)   The location and design of the proposed development shall be
consistent with the goals and policies of the Fairfax General Plan and with any
other applicable plans or policies adopted by the Town Council.
   (B)   The proposed location shall allow the development to be well
integrated with its surroundings.
   (C)   All vehicular traffic generated by the development must be
accommodated safely and without causing undue congestion upon adjoining
streets.
   (D)   The proposed location and design shall allow residents and business
establishments to be adequately serviced by existing or proposed public
facilities and services. In appropriate circumstances, the Planning Commission
may require that suitable areas for schools, parks and playgrounds,
pedestrianways or public open spaces be dedicated for public use, or reserved
by deed covenant for the common use of all residents, establishments or
operations in the development.
   (E)   The overall design of the proposed planned development shall produce
an attractive healthful, efficient and stable environment for living, shopping
or working.
   (F)   The development shall be well integrated with its settings, shall not
require excessive earth-moving or grading, or destruction of desirable natural
features, nor be visually obstructive or disharmonious with surrounding areas
and facilities, and shall not substantially harm major views from adjacent
properties.
   (G)   The uses proposed shall have a beneficial effect not obtainable under
existing zoning regulations. Any departure from existing ordinance requirements
shall be warranted by the design and the amenities incorporated in the
development plan in accord with adopted policy of the Planning Commission and
Town Council.
   (H)   Demonstration shall be made that each individual unit of development,
and the total development, can exist as an independent unit capable of creating
an environment of sustained desirability and stability.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.100 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN; TOWN COUNCIL ACTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Town Council shall, after giving of public notice and the
holding of a hearing as provided in §
17.112.080 of this chapter, approve or deny the master development plan.
      (2)   In overruling a Planning Commission recommendation for denial, the
Town Council shall make the findings listed in §
17.112.090.
   (B)   Approval of the master development plan shall be by ordinance.
   (C)   Approval of the master plan shall include, but not be limited to the
following stipulations.
      (1)   The development, maintenance and use of the property included in
the master development plan shall be carried on in conformance with the
approved plan drawings and documents; the developer shall substantially adhere
to the state of development schedule submitted as part of the master
development plan.
      (2)   Approval of the master development plan shall not be interpreted as
waiving compliance with other provisions of this code.
      (3)   (a)   The approved master development plan drawings and documents
shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk after written authorization for
the filing has been secured from the owner or owners of the lands in question
and prior to the second reading of the ordinance establishing the planned
development district. The authorization shall be construed to constitute the
owner’s acceptance of the provisions set forth in the master development plan
ordinance.
         (b)   An agreement by the owner or owners agreeing to be bound by the
conditions and regulations imposed by the Town Council shall be deposited with
the Town Clerk prior to final adoption of the ordinance, to be held and
recorded by the town cleric only after the effective date of the ordinance.
      (4)   No land shall be used or developed, and no building shall be
constructed, maintained or used other than for the purpose specified on the
approved master development plan drawings and documents, as filed.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 493, passed - -
1982)
§ 17.112.110 MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN; MODIFICATION OF PLAN.
   Minor changes to an approved master development plan may be approved by the
Planning Commission, provided the change is consistent with the purposes and
character of the master development plan. The changes shall not change the
densities heretofore established, nor the boundaries of the subject property,
nor any use as shown on the approved master development plan, nor the location
or amounts of land devoted to specific land uses. All modifications or
amendments to an approved plan other than minor changes shall be processed as
an original application and shall be subject to all applicable substantive and
procedural requirements of the planned development procedure; provided that,
the filing fee therefor shall be one-half the fee charged for filing an
original application.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.120 PRECISE DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Within one year following approval of the master development
plan, the applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission an application for
approval of a precise development plan for the first increment.
      (2)   Precise plan approval, valid for one year, shall be secured for
each unit or increment of a planned development district as delineated on the
master development plan.
      (3)   No development, improvement or building construction within any
unit of the planned development area covered by the master development plan
shall be commenced until the Planning Commission has approved a precise
development plan for that unit.
      (4)   Precise plans shall set forth in detail specific features of each
increment of development.
      (5)   They shall conform to the master development plan, and be prepared
by a team including a licensed architect or a licensed building designer and
registered landscape architect, and a registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor, and shall consist of:
         (a)   A topographic map of sufficient detail to show all cut and fill
banks, precise drainage and flood control and boundary survey data;
         (b)   Detailed site plan, showing buildings, area utilization and
traffic and pedestrian circulation; location, widths, grades and types of
improvements proposed for all streets, parking areas, driveways, walkways,
trails, utilities and other public improvements; building heights and
dimensions of space between buildings and distances from property lines and
rights-of-way;
         (c)   A precise landscaping plan;
         (d)   A map showing division of the land for the sale of individual
property, if any;
         (e)   Location and dimensions of public or semipublic areas,
including, but not limited to schools, parks, playgrounds and parking areas,
         (f)   A statement setting forth a program for installation and
continued maintenance of parking areas, lighting, courts, public and private
grounds, landscaping, streets, utilities, parks, playgrounds or public or semi-
public community buildings and facilities; and
         (g)   Information necessary for evaluation and assignment of fire zone
designations, including type of construction, where found necessary by the
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Within 45 days following receipt of the application for precise
development plan approval, and after public hearing noticed in the manner set
forth in §
17.004.070 of this title, the Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove
of the proposed precise development plan and shall notify the applicant of its
action. Appeal may be made to the Town Council by the applicant in accordance
with §
17.112.170 of this chapter.
   (C)   The applicant shall, at the time of filing the precise plan, pay a
filing fee in accordance with a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of the
Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 443, passed - -
1978; Am. Ord. 493, passed - -1982; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -1994)
§ 17.112.130 PRECISE DEVELOPMENT PLAN; OPEN SPACE DEDICATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may as a condition of approval require that
suitable areas for schools, parks and playgrounds be set aside, unproved, and
dedicated for public use, or be reserved for the owners, residents and
establishments in the development by deed restrictions.
   (B)   (1)   Whenever group or common open space is provided, whether
required or not, the Planning Commission may, as a condition of approval,
require that an incorporated nonprofit homeowners’ association be established
prior to any sale of land or facilities for the purpose of maintaining the open
space.
      (2)   The association may also undertake other legal and proper
functions. Agreements and covenants running with the land shall include
provisions for automatic membership and charges to be levied for carrying out
of the specified functions and administrative expenses.
      (3)   The association shall be responsible for levying, collecting and
disbursing funds and for enforcement of the agreements.
      (4)   The agreements and covenants shall operate for a minimum of 20
years with a provision for automatic extension, except upon a majority vote for
termination, upon which occasion the mutually owned properties will
automatically go to public ownership.
      (5)   The town shall be a party of interest in any such development and
may by mandatory injunction enforce the provisions in this section.
   (C)   To assure that open space shall be available for the entire developed
planned development district, public sites and development rights to required
open spaces shall be dedicated in advance of development. In any event, whether
a subdivision map is required or not, dedication of public sites and
development rights to required open spaces for the entire district shall be
made before the building permit is issued.
   (D)   Other dedications for street, utility, flood control, rights-of-way
and/or easements and other public purposes, may also be required before the
issuance of the first building permit.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.140 PRECISE DEVELOPMENT PLAN; PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   As a condition precedent to approval of any precise development plan,
the Town Council shall require the applicant to furnish a completion bond, or
the cash equivalent, in an amount deemed sufficient by the Town Engineer to
cover the cost of public improvements, common areas, incidental expenses, and
to cover replacement and repair of existing streets and other improvements
damaged in the development of the unit.
   (B)   All public improvements shall be constructed in accordance with the
standard specifications of the town.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.140) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.150 FINAL SUBDIVISION MAP.
   (A)   (1)   No precise development plan or tentative map shall be approved
under this chapter until the planned development district zoning has become
effective.
      (2)   Disapproval of any precise development plan shall also constitute
disapproval of any application for a tentative subdivision map for the property
covered by the precise development plan.
   (B)   No building permit shall be issued until a final subdivision map, if
required, has been recorded for the area covered by the precise development
plan, or any approved stage thereof, in compliance with the town’s subdivision
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.150) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -
1991)
§ 17.112.160 TERM OF APPROVALS.
   (A)   If the applicant fails to submit a precise development plan for the
first increment within one year of approval of the master development plan by
the Town Council, or fails to record a final subdivision map to effectuate an
approved precise development plan and/or fails to initiate development within
two years after the precise plan approval, then actions taken by the Planning
Commission and Town Council shall be rendered null and void.
   (B)   The failure shall be grounds for reversion to acreage of any recorded
final subdivision map. The time limits may be extended upon mutual agreement by
the Town Council and the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.160) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 493, passed - -
1982; Am. Ord. 605, passed - -1991)
§ 17.112.170 APPEALS.
   (A)   Within ten days following the date of a decision by the Planning
Commission upon an application for approval of a precise development plan, or
for approval of any modification or amendment of any authorized plan, or any
condition imposed therein, an appeal may be taken to the Town Council by the
applicant or the owner.
   (B)   (1)   An appeal shall be made upon the form prescribed and shall be
filed with the Town Clerk. The appeal shall state specifically wherein it is
claimed there was an error or abuse of discretion by the Planning Commission,
or wherein the decision is not supported by the evidence in the record.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the appeal, the Town Council shall set the time for
consideration thereof. The Town Clerk shall notify the Secretary of the
Planning Commission of the receipt of the appeal and of the time and place set
for consideration thereby by the Council; and the town clerk shall, not less
than five days prior to the date set for the hearing upon the appeal, give
written notice to the applicant and to the adverse party or parties, or to the
attorney, spokesperson or representative of the party or parties, of the time
and place of the hearing on the appeal.
      (3)   The Town Council may approve, modify or reverse a Planning
Commission decision. The decision of the Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.170) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.112.180 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit, Chapter 17.056 of this title,
are applicable to properties in the PDD zoning district.
(Prior Code, § 17.58.180) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
CHAPTER 17.116: SF-RMP SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MASTER PLANNED DISTRICT
Section
   
17.116.010   Purpose
   
17.116.020   Division of property
   
17.116.030   Uses permitted outright
   
17.116.040   Principal permitted uses
   
17.116.050   Accessory uses
   
17.116.060   Design standards
   
17.116.070   Site preparation
   
17.116.080   Project design
   
17.116.090   Master plan
   
17.116.100   Master plan; required findings
   
17.116.110   Master plan; required findings for approval
   
17.116.120   Master plan; modification
   
17.116.130   Master plan; action by Town Council
   
17.116.140   Precise development plan approval
   
17.116.150   Special regulations
   
17.116.160   Traffic impact permit
§ 17.116.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the single-family residential master planned district
is to allow development of single-family detached units to be designed without
the confines of specific yard requirements in areas where the amenities
resulting from this flexibility in design will enhance the environmental
quality or benefit the public welfare, and to protect future development in
geologic, hydrologic or fire hazard areas.
   (B)   A further purpose of this district is to implement large lot zoning
for lands shown in the General Plan with a density range of one unit per one
acre to one unit per ten acres.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 492, passed - -
1982)
§ 17.116.020 DIVISION OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   No real property zoned SF-RMP shall be divided so as to create a
parcel of less than ten contiguous acres unless and until the subdivision is
permitted under a planned development which has been approved pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   All structures, physical improvements and modifications involving soil
or drainage modifications that fall into any of the categories listed in §
17.072.020 are subject to the Hill Area residential development permit
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 845, passed 2-5-
2020)
§ 17.116.030 USES PERMITTED OUTRIGHT.
   The following uses are permitted in the SF-RMP district without planned
district approval as required in this chapter:
   (A)    Agriculture;
   (B)   One single-family dwelling on any single holding land zoned SF RMP;
   (C)   Up to two accessory dwelling units, subject to the standards and
requirements of
Chapter 17.048;
   (D)   Small family day care; and
   (E)   Limited residential care.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-
2023)
§ 17.116.040 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses in the SF-RMP district are subject to planned district
approval:
   (A)   On each legal building site, as determined by the town, either one
residential second unit (in addition to the allowed density) or one junior
second unit, either of which must be approved in accordance with the procedures
and standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title;
   (B)   Public and private stables and riding academies;
   (C)   Sale of agricultural products on the premises; provided that, no
building or structure shall be erected or maintained primarily for any such
sale, except that a temporary shelter may be erected for the sale;
   (D)   The grazing or breeding of cattle, sheep or horses is allowed subject
to the following provisions:
      (1)   One grazing animal per acre will be allowed, or such number as
determined by the Marin County farm advisor that can be supported by the range;
and
      (2)   Corral and stable areas shall conform to the standards in this
code.
   (E)   Public or quasi-public buildings and uses of an educational, cultural
or public service type, not including corporation yards, storage or repair
yards, warehouses or similar uses;
   (F)   Temporary tract offices;
   (G)   Public and private non-profit recreation areas and facilities, such as
country clubs, golf courses and swimming pools;
   (H)   Public utility buildings, structures or facilities, except
transmission lines;
   (I)    Living quarters of persons regularly employed on the premises;
   (J)   Large family day care, subject to the standards of
Chapter 17.138; and
   (K)   Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be of
the same general character of those enumerated in this section.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 509, passed - -
1983; Am. Ord. 538, passed - -1985; Am. Ord. 800, passed 2-3-2016; Am. Ord.
810, passed 11-1-2017; Am. Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.116.050 ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses in the SF-RMP district are subject to planned district
approval as part of a planned district application:
   (A)   Home occupations;
   (B)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, lath houses, toolsheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances;
   (C)   Private garages, parking spaces and swimming pools for the exclusive
use of the residents of the premises and their guests; and
   (D)   One residential accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling
unit per lot when approved in accordance with procedures and standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title; provided that, for all units established after
September 8, 1983, the owner(s) of record maintain their principal residence on
the same parcel unless an exception to this residency requirement is granted
pursuant to this
Chapter 17.116.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-
2017)
§ 17.116.060 DESIGN STANDARDS.
   The following requirements for site preparation, design and use of the
project shall be imposed in the SF-RMP district as necessary to implement the
goals and policies of the Fairfax General Plan.
   (A)   The minimum area required for a planned development shall be four
acres of contiguous property unless the Planning Commission finds that property
of less than four acres is suitable for planned development in accordance with
all the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Where contiguous properties proposed for a planned development in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter are under separate ownership,
written consent of all participating property owners shall be filed with the
Planning Director before any application for a planned development can be
accepted by the town.
   (C)   (1)   All projects must conform to the adopted Fairfax General Plan or
to any accepted specific plan applicable to the area under consideration.
      (2)   A density shall be set, at the time the zoning is established,
which is consistent with limitations imposed by site conditions, including
natural resources, topographic and geological conditions, and the level of
public services and road conditions that can reasonably be provided.
      (3)   The Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria in
setting density:
         (a)   Extent of lands which are hazardous to life and property due to
soils, geological, seismic or hydrological factors unless the hazards can be
mitigated by minor modifications to existing land forms and vegetation; (These
determinations must be based on the analysis of a licensed engineering
geologist and/or civil engineer specializing in soils problems and hydrology.)
         (b)   The number of safe building sites which exist on the property;
and
         (c)   The cumulative impact of the development on existing circulation
and drainage systems.
      (4)   (a)   Density shall be set for gross acreage. Hazardous lands may
be excluded from the building area, but will be included in the calculation of
gross density per acre.
         (b)   In cases where a portion of the property falls within two
different categories in the General Plan, the Planning Commission shall
determine an aggregate density based on the percentage of gross acreage in each
category.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 492, passed - -
1982)
§ 17.116.070 SITE PREPARATION.
   The following site preparation provisions apply in the SF RMP district:
   (A)   Projects must comply with the town’s Fire Code.
   (B)   Projects must comply with the excavation and grading provisions of
this code.
   (C)   Projects shall be designed to minimize disruption of existing
ecosystems. Removal, changes or construction which will destroy important or
rare vegetation and/or wildlife habitats shall be avoided.
      (1)   Projects must comply with the tree removal permit as required by
this code.
      (2)   In areas of diverse wildlife habitat as delineated on the General
Plan Wildlife Habitat and Diversity Map, disruption of trees, shrubs and
natural vegetative cover shall be minimized.
      (3)   The project must comply with §
17.040.040 of this title relating to setbacks near creeks.
   (D)   All developments should be designed and located to conserve energy
resources. The efforts might include, but are not limited to the clustering or
location of development to reduce driving time and structural designs which
maximize use of solar energy and reduce the use of electricity and fossil
fuels.
   (E)   The project must comply with
Chapter 17.060, Ridgeline Development.
   (F)   (1)   Roads shall be designed to meet the requirements set forth in
the subdivision ordinance and the Fire Code.
      (2)   Off-street parking shall conform to the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title. The Planning Commission may require parking areas
to accommodate public and guest parking in addition to off-street parking for
dwelling units.
      (3)   Bikeways, sidewalks and trails shall be provided within the project
development when determined to be essential by the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Project shall allow public reasonable access to significant
environmental resource areas such as watercourses, ridgelines, open spaces,
parks or other areas so designated by the Town Council.
      (5)   Any lands whose sole means of access is via existing residential
streets shall be limited to densities which will not produce substantial
increases in traffic volumes above the capacity of the streets. Traffic volumes
exceeding 20 percent of the capacity shall generally be considered substantial.
The aggregate densities of the other undeveloped parcels in the area will be
considered. The 20 percent level shall be used as a general guideline and is
intended to minimize adverse traffic impacts on existing neighborhood traffic
volumes depending upon the particular impact as may be identified in any
environmental impact report prepared for the planned development.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.070) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.080 PROJECT DESIGN.
   The following project design requirements apply in the SF RMP district.
   (A)   Generally, buildings should be clustered in the most accessible, least
visually prominent, and most geologically stable portion or portions of the
site, consistent with the need for privacy to minimize visual and sound
intrusion into each unit’s indoor and outdoor living area from other living
areas. Clustering is especially important on open grassy hillsides. A greater
dispersal of buildings may be preferable on wooded hillsides to save trees. The
prominence of construction can be minimized by such devices as placing
buildings so that they will be screened by wooded areas, rock outcroppings and
depressions in the topography.
   (B)   Land to be preserved as open space may be dedicated by fee title to
the town or county prior to issuance of any construction permit, or may remain
in private ownership with appropriate scenic and/or open space easements in
perpetuity; and the town may require reasonable public access to public land
across those lands remaining in private ownership.
   (C)   The town or other designated public jurisdiction will maintain all
open space lands accepted in fee title. Where open space lands remain in
private ownership with scenic easements, these lands shall be maintained in
accordance with the adopted rules of the town and may require the creation of a
homeowners’ association or other organization for the maintenance of these
private open space lands where appropriate.
   (D)   Uses in open space areas shall be in accordance with policies of the
adopted open space element. Generally, uses shall be compatible with the
natural environment. Pedestrian and equestrian access shall be provided where
possible and reasonable.
   (E)   No part of a building shall exceed 35 feet in height above natural
grade and no accessory building shall exceed 15 feet in height above natural
grade.
   (F)   Materials and colors shall blend into the natural environment
unobtrusively, to the greatest extent possible.
   (G)   Landscaping shall minimally disturb natural areas, including open
areas, and be compatible with native plant settings. Fire protection and
minimal water use shall be considered in landscaping plans. The Planning
Commission shall have the authority to impose height restrictions on planting
materials.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.080) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.090 MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit to the Planning Commission an application
for approval of a master plan for the entire area of a proposed planned
development.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
application, after giving notice thereof, pursuant to the provisions of §
17.02.070 of this title. Approval of the master plan shall establish the
location and design of circulation elements, lotting patterns, buildings,
utilities, landscaping and open space.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.090) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.116.100 MASTER PLAN; DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application shall consist of:
      (1)   Completed application and fee; and
      (2)   Twelve copies of plans containing all information specified in §
17.112.060, master development plan, PDD zone.
   (B)   The Planning Commission reserves the right to request additional
information not included in this list which would facilitate a complete and
comprehensive evaluation of the development proposal.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.100) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.110 MASTER PLAN; REQUIRED FINDINGS FOR APPROVAL.
   The Planning Commission shall approve the master plan if it makes the
following findings.
   (A)   The master plan is consistent with the General Plan.
   (B)   The circulation system is appropriate for the site and provides:
      (1)   Emergency vehicular access;
      (2)   Adequate parking; and
      (3)   Proposed densities will not generate traffic in such amounts as to
substantially overload the street network outside the development as set forth
in §
17.116.070(F)(5).
   (C)   Proposed structures are designed and located to:
      (1)   Harmonize with surrounding residential development;
      (2)   Respond to and complement the natural character of the area; and
      (3)   Provide reasonable privacy for residents of the development and
existing and/or future residents of abutting properties.
   (D)   Proposed landscaping utilizes native plant materials or other material
which is similar to and compatible with native plant material. Use of a highly
flammable or extremely water-consumptive material is minimized.
   (E)   Proposed utilities and other utilities are adequate and other public
improvements are adequate for the population densities proposed.
   (F)   Grading will not significantly alter the character of or adversely
affect view to the site.
   (G)   The proposed development is planned compatibly and in coordination
with the surrounding area.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.110) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.120 MASTER PLAN; MODIFICATION.
   Minor changes to an approved master plan may be accepted by the Planning
Commission provided the change is determined to be consistent with the purposes
and character of the master plan. The changes shall not change the densities
heretofore established nor the boundaries of the subject property, nor any use
shown on the approved master plan, nor the location or amounts of land devoted
to specific land uses. All modifications or amendments to an approved plan
other than the minor changes shall be processed as an original application and
shall be subject to all applicable substantive and procedural requirements of
the master plan procedure.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.120) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.130 MASTER PLAN; ACTION BY TOWN COUNCIL.
   (A)   Within 30 days following the completion of its hearing thereon, the
Planning Commission shall report its recommendations regarding the master plan
application to the Town Council for final action. The Town Council shall
conduct a public hearing after giving notice pursuant to the provisions of §
17.004.070 of this title. The decision of the Town Council shall be final.
   (B)   The Town Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
master plan for the proposed planned development. Approval of the master plan
by the Town Council shall be by resolution, which shall include, but not be
limited to the following stipulations:
      (1)   The development, maintenance and use of the property included
within the scope of the master plan shall be carried on in conformance with the
approved master plan drawings and documents and this chapter.
      (2)   The approved master plan drawings and documents shall be filed with
the office of the Town Clerk after written authorization for the filing has
been secured from the owner(s) of the lands involved. The authorization shall
be construed to constitute the owner’s acceptance of the provisions set forth
in the resolution.
   (C)   No building shall be constructed, maintained or used, nor shall any
land be developed or used, except as permitted by the approved master plan
drawings and documents as filed.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.130) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 628, passed - -
1994)
§ 17.116.140 PRECISE DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Following adoption of a master plan, no development, improvement or
building construction within the planned development area covered by the
adopted master plan shall be commenced until the Planning Commission has
approved a precise development plan for the entire planned development. The
application for the precise development plan shall conform to the requirements
under §
17.112.120, precise development plan, PDD zone.
   (B)   Within 60 days following receipt of the application for precise
development plan approval, the Planning Commission shall schedule a public
hearing to consider the precise development plan in the same manner as provided
for in
Chapter 17.032 for conditional use permits.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall approve, approve conditionally or
disapprove the proposed precise development plan and shall notify the applicant
in writing.
   (D)   Planning Commission approval of a precise development plan shall
become null and void unless action is taken to file a tentative subdivision map
on property covered by the precise development plan within one year after
approval of the precise development plan.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.140) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.150 SPECIAL REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the other requirements governing single-family residential
master planned districts, the following shall apply.
   (A)   Major changes in an approved master plan of a planned development
shall be required to be made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Failure on the part of the applicant to submit a precise development
plan within one year of a master plan approval by the Town Council, or failure
to record a final subdivision map to effectuate an approved single-family
residential master planned precise development plan for a planned development
within two years after the master plan approval by the Town Council, shall
render null and void the actions taken by the Planning Commission and Town
Council.
   (C)   Application for approval of a planned development in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the owner(s) of the land
involved, or any agent thereof, on forms prescribed by the town, and shall be
accompanied by fees to be established by resolution adopted by the Town
Council.
   (D)   Design review approval is required for all structures. Application
maybe made for approval of individual residences or for the entire project as a
unit.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.150) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.116.160 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the SF RMP zoning
district.
(Prior Code, § 17.60.160) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
CHAPTER 17.120: A AGRICULTURAL AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT
Section
   
17.120.010   Applicability
   
17.120.020   Permitted uses
   
17.120.030   Yards
   
17.120.040   Building site area requirements
   
17.120.050   Livestock and related accessory buildings
   
17.120.060   Traffic impact permit
§ 17.120.010 APPLICABILITY.
   The following A district may be combined with an RS-7.5, RS-6, or planned
development district in which case the resulting district shall be governed by
the regulations for the respective residential district and by the regulations
in this chapter; provided, however, that, if any of the regulations specified
in this chapter differ from or conflict with any of the corresponding
regulations specified for the residential district, then in such cases the
regulations of the A district shall apply.
(Prior Code, § 17.62.010) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.120.020 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in all A districts:
   (A)   Crop and tree farming and truck gardening;
   (B)   Viticulture;
   (C)   Nurseries and greenhouses, but not including any salesrooms or other
buildings for the sale of any products unless and until a use permit is secured
therefor;
   (D)   Small livestock farming; provided that not to exceed one horse, or one
cow, or three goats or other similar livestock may be kept for each 20,000
square feet of area of the parcel of land upon which the same are kept, to a
maximum of three horses or three cows or three hogs, or six goats, or other
similar livestock maintained in any one establishment;
   (E)   Dairies, on any parcel of land not less than five acres in area;
   (F)   Public and private stables and riding academies upon the securing of a
use permit for each case of any such use;
   (G)   Sale of agricultural products produced on the premises, provided that
no building or structure shall be erected or maintained primarily for any such
sale, except that a temporary shelter may be erected for the sale upon the
securing of a use permit therefor; or
   (H)   Accessory uses and accessory structures.
(Prior Code, § 17.62.020) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.120.030 YARDS.
   Yard requirements applicable in all A districts shall be the same as
specified for the designated residential districts.
(Prior Code, § 17.62.030) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.120.040 BUILDING SITE AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   Building site area required in all A combined districts shall be the same as
specified for the designated residential districts.
(Prior Code, § 17.62.040) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.120.050 LIVESTOCK AND RELATED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   No livestock or any building used in connection with the same shall be
located or maintained on any lot closer than 50 feet to the street upon which
the lot faces, or closer than 50 feet to any dwelling on the same lot, or
closer than 50 feet to any property line of any contiguous lot.
(Prior Code, § 17.62.050) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973)
§ 17.120.060 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in any A zoning
district.
(Prior Code, § 17.62.060) (Ord. 352, passed - -1973; Am. Ord. 553, passed - -
1986)
CHAPTER 17.124: UR UPLAND RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Section
   
17.124.010   Generally
   
17.124.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.124.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.124.040   Accessory uses and structures
   
17.124.050   Building site requirements
   
17.124.060   Height regulations
   
17.124.070   Yards
   
17.124.075   Driveway standards
   
17.124.080   Signs
   
17.124.090   Off-street parking
   
17.124.100   Traffic impact permit
   
17.124.110   Variances
   
17.124.120   Environmental impact mitigation measures
§ 17.124.010 GENERALLY.
   (A)    No real property zoned SF-RMP shall be divided so as to create a
parcel of less than ten contiguous acres unless and until the subdivision is
permitted under a planned development which has been approved pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   All structures, physical improvements and modifications involving soil
or drainage modifications that fall into any of the categories listed in §
17.072.020 are subject to the Hill Area residential development permit
requirements.
   (C)   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical
modification of a building are subject to design review.
   (D)   All structures, physical improvements and modifications involving soil
or drainage modifications that fall into any of the categories listed in §
17.072.020 are subject to the Hill Area residential development permit
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.010) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 845, passed 2-5-
2020)
§ 17.124.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Uses within the UR zoned are restricted to a single-family dwelling on each
building site.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.020) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991)
§ 17.124.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Conditional uses in the UR zone are as follows:
   (A)   Agricultural uses, including crop and tree farming and viticulture,
but not including the raising of animals or fowl for commercial purposes or the
sale of any products on the premises;
   (B)   Public or quasi-public buildings and uses of an education, religious,
cultural or public service type, not including corporation yards, storage or
repair yards, warehouses or similar uses;
   (C)   Temporary tract offices;
   (D)   Public and private noncommercial recreation areas and facilities, such
as country clubs, golf courses and swimming pools;
   (E)   Private stables and corrals;
   (F)   Public utility buildings, structures or facilities, except
transmission lines;
    (G)   Living quarters of persons regularly employed on the premises;
   (H)   Other uses which are determined by the Planning Commission to be of
the same general character as those enumerated in this section; and
   (I)   Accessory uses other than those specifically listed in §
17.124.040.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.030) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 800, passed 2-3-
2016; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-2017)
§ 17.124.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses in the UR zone are as follows:
   (A)   Home occupations;
   (B)   Cabanas, greenhouses, patios, bath houses, tool sheds, playhouses,
barbecue pits, fences, walkways, hedges and similar improvements and
appurtenances;
   (C)   Private garages, parking spaces and swimming pools for the exclusive
use of the residents of the premises and their guests;
   (D)   Up to two residential accessory dwelling units which may include one
junior accessory dwelling unit, which shall be approved in accordance with the
procedures and standards in
Chapter 17.048 of this title; and
   (E)   Short-term rental uses that include only one short-term rental unit
per single-family zoned property contained within an existing structure
permitted for residential use if that structure is not an ADU/JADU created
after January 1, 2020.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.040) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 810, passed 11-1-
2017; Am. Ord. 865, passed 7-6-2022; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-2024)
§ 17.124.050 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as otherwise provided in §§
17.044.030 through
17.044.050 of this title, a use permit must be first secured in the UR zone for
any use occupancy or physical improvement failing to meet the following
requirements.
   (A)    Minimum building site area shall be identical to the acreage
expressed in the Fairfax General Plan classification for the site unless the
Planning Commission approves a low impact clustered residential development
under the provisions of §
17.072.090 (H).
   (B)   Minimum width shall be 60 feet unless the Planning Commission approves
a low impact clustered residential development under the provisions of §
17.072.090 (H).
(Prior Code, § 17.66.050) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024
§ 17.124.060 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no building or structure
occupied by a principal use on a lot having a slope of ten percent or less
shall exceed a height of 28.5 feet nor contain more than two stories. On lots
having a slope in excess of ten percent, no building or structure occupied by a
principal use and situated on the downhill side of the street upon which it has
its primary frontage shall exceed 35 feet in height, and if situated on the
uphill side of the street, shall not exceed 28.5 feet in height nor contain
more than three stories.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance or by the provisions
of §
17.052.020 of this title, no accessory building or structure on any lot shall
exceed 15 feet in height nor contain more than one story.  The height of
accessory dwelling units shall be governed by
Chapter 17.048.
      (2)   Handrails required by the Uniform Building Code shall not be
included in measuring height.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.060) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024
§ 17.124.070 YARDS.
   (A)    Except as otherwise permitted by variance, or by a low impact
clustered residential development plan approved by the Planning Commission,
each building site in the UR zone having a slope of not more than ten percent
shall have yards as follows:
      (1)   A front and rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 25
feet, but neither having a depth of less than six feet; and
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 15 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, or by a low impact
clustered residential development plan approved by the Planning Commission,
each building site in the UR zone having a slope or more than ten percent shall
have yards as follows:
      (1)   A front and a rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 35
feet, but the front yard having a depth of not less than six feet and the rear
yard of not less than 12 feet;
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 20 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.070) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024
§ 17.124.075 DRIVEWAY STANDARDS.
   The width and number of driveways for each property within the UR Upland
Residential Zone are regulated by Town Code
Chapter 12.12, Driveway Entrances.
(Ord. 875, passed 12-7-2022)
§ 17.124.080 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the UR upland residential
zone, except as authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 or this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.080) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991)
§ 17.124.090 OFF-STREET PARKING.
    Off-street parking spaces and facilities shall be provided in the UR zone
as required or allowed by the provisions of
Chapter 17.052 of this title unless modified for a low impact clustered
residential development plan approved by the Planning Commission.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.090) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 886, passed 1-24-
2024
§ 17.124.100 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 are applicable to properties in the UR zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.100) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991)
§ 17.124.110 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Planning Commission may require, as a condition of a variance
approved and issued under the provision of this section a reduction of building
height, or buildable area, or any combination thereof, when the reduction is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
   (B)   The Planning Commission may require as a condition of a driveway
variance approved and issued under the provision of this section an increase in
the width or number of driveways entering a property, when the increase is
found necessary to protect adjoining property from adverse or detrimental
effect, or to prevent the variance from constituting a grant of special
privilege.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.110) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991; Am. Ord. 875, passed 12-7-
2022)
§ 17.124.120 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT MITIGATION MEASURES.
   All mitigation measures as listed in the adopted environmental documentation
for any project undertaken in this zone district shall be performed and
monitored. All mitigation measures adopted by the town shall be monitored by
the town, other agencies and project developers, as required.
(Prior Code, § 17.66.120) (Ord. 607, passed - -1991)
CHAPTER 17.126: WORKFORCE HOUSING OVERLAY ZONE
Section
   
17.126.010   Purpose and applicability
   
17.126.020   Permitted uses
   
17.126.030   Development standards for the WHO zones
   
17.126.040   Reserved
   
17.126.050   Reserved
   
17.126.060   Review procedures
   
17.126.070   Additional parking regulations
§ 17.126.010 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Purpose and applicability. The purpose of the Workforce Housing
Overlay (WHO) zone is to promote the development of affordable workforce
housing for lower and moderate income households in specific areas of the town
identified in the General Plan. The WHO contains WHO-A zone and WHO-B zone. The
WHO-A zone applies to downtown sites and permits densities of up to 75 dwelling
units per acre if specified percentages of affordable housing are provided: the
WHO-B applies to sites along Sir Francis Drake Boulevard and permits up to 40
dwelling units per acre if specified percentages of affordable housing are
provided. In addition, the approval process for projects in the WHO zones is
streamlined, with ministerial approval for qualifying projects with affordable
housing using checklists and objective standards as required by state law.
   (B)   Relation to base zone. The WHO use regulations and development
standards only apply to proposed housing and mixed use projects, and these use
regulations and development and design standards zones shall apply in the case
of a conflict with the commercial zoning district regulations for the base
zones.
(Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.126.020 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Additional permitted uses. In addition to the uses that are permitted
within the applicable base zone with which the WHO zones are overlaid,
additional permitted uses in the WHO zones include multiple dwellings
(townhouses, condominiums, and apartments) and mixed use development
(residential units above the ground floor or adjacent to commercial, office, or
retail uses).
      (1)   (a)   In the WHO-A zone, the minimum density is one housing unit
for each 1 ,089 square feet of lot area, which represents a density of 40 units
per acre of net land area. The maximum density of 40 units per acre may be
increased up to a maximum of 75 units per net acre in exchange for a commitment
to make a greater percentage of the total units affordable in accordance with
Table 17.126.020-A. If the maximum number of units resulting from this
calculation yields a fraction, it shall be rounded down to the nearest whole
number.
         (b)   In the WHO-B zone, the minimum density is one living unit for
each 2,178 square feet of lot area, which represents a density of 20 units per
acre of net land area. The maximum density of 20 units per acre may be
increased up to a maximum of 40 units per net acre in exchange for a commitment
to make a greater percentage of the total units affordable in accordance with
Table 17.126.020-A. If the maximum number of units resulting from this
calculation yields a fraction, it shall be rounded down to the nearest whole
number.
      (2)   As an alternative to developing for-sale affordable units within a
residential or mixed use development project, for-sale residential and mixed
use development projects may satisfy the requirements of this section by
developing rental low-income units included within the residential portion of
the development equal to 20 percent of the total number of for-sale and rental
units included in the development. The developer may create a separate leqal
parcel within the development project upon which the rental low-income units
may be located. Also, the developer may, at its discretion. provide very
lowincome units instead of low-income units.
   Table 17.126.020-A: Minimum Percentage of Affordable Units Required for
Specified Maximum Densities in WHO-A and WHO-B Zones
WHO-A                                  WHO-B
Maximum    Minimum % Affordable Units  Maximum    Minimum % Affordable Units
Density                                Density
           For Sale for Rental for Low            For Sale for Rental for Low
Units/acre Moderate     Income         Units/acre Moderate     Income
           Income                                 Income
WHO-A                                  WHO-B
Maximum    Minimum % Affordable Units  Maximum    Minimum % Affordable Units
Density                                Density
           For Sale for Rental for Low            For Sale for Rental for Low
Units/acre Moderate     Income         Units/acre Moderate     Income
           Income                                 Income
40         20           15             20         20           15
44         21           16             22         21           16
48         22           17             24         22           17
52         23           18             26         23           18
56         24           19             28         24           19
60         25           20             30         25           20
62         26           21             32         26           21
64         27           22             34         27           22
66         28           23             36         28           23
70         29           24             38         29           24
75         30           25             40         30           25
 
      (3)   If a project with at least 60 units per acre is in compliance with
the affordability requirements of
Table 17.126.020-A, then the developer is eligible for any or all of the
following additional incentives provided that, when all incentives are
combined, the overall density on the site shall not exceed 90 units per acre
prior to the application of any state density bonus:
         (a)   If a developer includes family units with three or more bedrooms
in a mixed use or residential only project, one bonus unit for each family unit
provided shall be permitted in addition to the density established in
Table 17.126.020-A up to a maximum of ten additional units. These bonus units
are not required to be income restricted.
         (b)   If a developer includes units for statutorily defined special
needs populations listed in Cal. Gov. Code § 65583(a)(7) (including the
elderly, persons with disabilities (including a developmental disability),
large families, farmworkers, families with female heads of households, and
families and persons in need of emergency shelter), one bonus unit for each
special needs unit provided shall be permitted in addition to the density
established in
Table 17.126.020-A up to a maximum of 10 additional units. These bonus units
are not required to be income restricted.
         (c)   For any unit that is eligible for more than one of the above
incentives, the developer shall identify and inform the town under which
incentive the bonus unit is beinq requested and, in the case of special needs
units, how continued occupancy for those with special needs will be assured,
which shall be subject to approval by the Town Attorney.
      (4)   Income qualifications for affordable units shall be determined in
the same manner established for inclusionary units in
Chapter 17.140. For moderate, low, very low, or extremely low affordable
housing units, deed restrictions or covenants shall be recorded with the Marin
County Assessor - Recorder - County Clerk and shall run with the land.
   (B)   Additional land use regulations for WHO zones.
      (1)   Residential only projects.
         (a)   A covered pedestrian entrance, that provides a minimum of three
feet of covered weather protection shall be provided in front of exterior entry
doors along primary building frontages.
         (b)   Windows and doors (with windows) shall be provided alonq primary
building frontages to achieve a minimum visual transparency of 25 percent of
the building frontage to allow for residents to view out and allow for sunlight
to come in.
         (c)   For privacy, building entrances at the ground floor shall be
separated from any public sidewalk either horizontally with a courtyard with a
minimum dimension of eight feet or vertically with a porch or stoop that is a
minimum of 18 inches in height.
      (2)   Types of mixed use allowed. Where the base zone allows commercial
uses, both horizontal and vertical mixed-use development shall be allowed in
the WHO zones.
         (a)   Horizontal mixed use development allows a range of uses adjacent
to one another, either in separate buildings or parcels. Individual buildings
may share project components, such as parking, serving, loading, and utility
areas.
         (b)   Vertical mixed use allows for a mix of uses within a single
building where nonresidential uses occupy the ground floor and residential uses
are on the upper levels. A vertical mixed use project may have surface parking,
subterranean parking decks, and/or at grade and above grade parking decks.
      (3)   Minimum amount of residential in a mixed use project. A minimum of
50 percent of the total floor area in a mixed use project shall be devoted to
residential use.
      (4)   Active and pedestrian-oriented frontages required in a mixed-use
project. Along the primary building frontage, active ground floor uses are
required in mixed use buildings with residential uses above commercial uses for
at least 70 percent of street-facing tenant space. These may include but are
not limited to retail shops, eating and drinking establishments, retail banks,
financial and business services, personal services, and offices for walk-in
clientele, such as employment agencies, insurance offices, real estate offices,
travel agencies, and offices for elected officials. In a mixed use project with
through lots, the primary frontage may be the frontage providing the principal
pedestrian access from an adjoining street; it does not have to be the frontage
with primary vehicular access.
(Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.126.030 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE WHO ZONES.
   All residential and mixed use development in the WHO zones shall comply with
the development standards in Table 17.126-A, the table notes, and the
supplemental standards following the table.
TABLE 17.126-A: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR THE WHO ZONES
Feature Standard    Additional Regulations
        WHO-A WHO-B
Feature            Standard                              Additional
                                                         Regulations
                   WHO-A               WHO-B
Site Requirements                                       
Minimum Site Area  6,000               5,000              
(sq. ft.)
Minimum Lot Width  75                  60                 
(ft.)
Maximum Lot        None                75 (Note 1)        
Coverage (%)
Maximum Floor Area
Ratio              0.80                0.40              See also §
(nonresidential                                          17.126.020(B)(4)
uses)
Minimum Landscape  15                  15                See §
Coverage (%)                                             17.138.470
Building Form and                                       
Location
                   3 stories, up to 35 2 stories, up to
                   feet for            28.5 feet for
Maximum Building   residential; 4      residential; 3     
Height             stories and up to   stories and up to Note 2
                   45 feet for mixed   35 feet for mixed
                   use                 use
Minimum Ground     14 feet nonresidential; 9 feet
Floor Ceiling      residential                            
Height
Minimum Setbacks:                                       
   Front        None                10 feet           Notes 3 and 4
   Rear         None; 15 feet if adjacent to a
                   residential zone                      See also §
   Interior Side5 feet: 12 feet if adjacent to a      17.138.420
                   residential zone
   Street Side  None                10 feet           Notes 3 and 4
Minimum Building   15 feet             15 feet            
Separations
Other Requirements                                      
                   See §§
                   17.138.430,
                   17.138.440,
                   17.138.450, and
Design standards   17.138.480. A ten-foot upper-story setback shall not be
for multi-family   required above the second level if the floor area of the
housing            third level or higher does not exceed the floor area of
                   the level below. This exception does not apply to
                   17.138.420, which requires setbacks for windows in
                   residential units facing an interior side or rear yard for
                   privacy considerations.
Off-street parking See
and loading        Chapter 17.052 and §
                   17.138.460
Notes:
[1]   Applies to mixed use projects only; for 100 percent residential
projects located outside of the Town Center Area shown on Figure TC-2 Town
Center Land Use Map in the General Plan, the maximum lot coverage shall be 60
percent (see Section
17.010.100 (Determining Lot Coverage).
 
 
 
Notes:
[2]   Additional height and an additional story is allowed up to 45 feet and four
stories in the WHO-A zone and 35 feet and three stories in the WHO-B zone for up
to one-half of the floorplate of the story below if the project includes at least
50 percent of the ground-floor building area accommodates commercial uses such as
retail, restaurants, or personal services with walk-in clientele. The maximum
height for the remainder of the building is 35 feet in the WHO-A zone and 28.5
feet in the WHO-B zone. Enclosures for elevators and stair towers, roof-top
equipment screens, roof-top open space amenities, and other vertical components
that are located on the roof may project up to ten feet above these height limits
provided they are stepped back at least ten feet from the edge of the building.
Parking levels are not counted in determining the number of stories on a site. At
least 75 percent of the street-facing elevation of a story above 35 feet shall be
setback back a minimum of ten feet from the front facade of the stories below
that height.
[3]   A minimum 20-foot setback must be provided for garages and carports facing
a street. In the WHO-B, allowable projections into required setbacks are those
listed in §
17.044.070. In addition, awnings and canopies may project up to six feet into a
required setback, and outdoor seating area shall be allowed in a required
setback.
[4]   Where ground-floor residential units are proposed with adjoining ground-
floor decks along a street frontage, a two-foot landscaped front or corner side
setback shall be provided between the deck and the street property line.
 
   (A)   Required building walls. Along Sir Francis Drake Boulevard, Bolinas
Road, and Broadway, building walls shall be constructed along or within ten
feet of the front property line for a minimum of 70 percent of the primary
street frontage and 40 percent on secondary street frontages. This requirement
may be waived by the Planning Director upon finding that:
      (1)   Ground-floor residential uses are proposed, a minimum 15-foot
setback will be provided, and substantial landscaping will be located between
the build-to and ground-floor residential units as a buffer:
      (2)   Entry courtyards, plazas, entries, or outdoor eating areas are
located between the build-to line and the building and buildings are
constructed at the edge of the courtyard, plaza, or outdoor dining area: or
      (3)   The building incorporates an alternative entrance design that
creates a welcoming entry facing the street.
   (B)   Building entrances.
      (1)   Principal building entries shall front upon the primary street.
      (2)   Building entries shall be accented with features such as moldings,
lighting, overhangs, canopies, or awnings.
      (3)   Where pedestrian paths or walkways cross parking areas or
driveways, the paths shall incorporate landscaping and decorative paving to
define the pedestrian space.
   (C)   Required ground floor transparency for non-residential uses. Exterior
walls for nonresidential ground-floor uses facing and within 20 feet of a front
or street side property line shall include windows, doors, or other openings
for at least 60 percent of the building wall area between two feet and eight
feet above the sidewalk. No street facing wall shall run in a horizontal plane
more than 25 feet without an opening.
      (1)   Openings fulfilling this requirement shall have transparent glazing
and provide views into display areas, sales areas, work area, lobbies or other
active spaces, and window displays shall be at least three feet in depth.
      (2)   Parking garages are not required to meet these transparency
requirements.
      (3)   Alternatives to the building transparency requirement may be
approved by the Planning Commission for uses that have unique operational
requirements making windows or doors infeasible or for street-facing building
walls that exhibit architectural relief and detail with landscaping that
creates visual interest at the pedestrian level.
   (D)   Open spaces standards for residential and mixed use projects. The open
space requirements of the RM Multiple-Family Residential Zone in §
17.088.050(B) for private areas and common areas shall apply to all proposed
residential development and to residential units in mixed use development with
the following modifications.
      (1)   In the WHO-A Zone, the minimum amount of outdoor living area
(private or common open space) is reduced to 150 square feet of open space for
each dwelling unit, of which at least 36 square feet (60 square feet for
ground-level units) shall be private open space serving at least 50 percent of
the individual dwelling units.
      (2)   In the WHO-B Zone, the minimum amount of outdoor living area
(private or common open space) is reduced to 200 square feet of open space for
each dwelling unit, of which at least 48 square feet (60 square feet for
ground-level units) shall be private open space serving at least 50 percent of
the individual dwelling units.
      (3)   Common open space may be provided on rooftops in areas having
minimum horizontal dimensions of ten feet. Roof decks located within 12 feet of
a residential zoning district shall be setback a minimum of 30 inches from the
building edge.
      (4)   Landscaped areas that are less than ten feet in width and
contiguous with and an integral part of the common open space or are connected
to the common open space may be counted in determining compliance with the open
space standards of this section provided they are at least five feet in width.
      (5)   The minimum amount of required common open space may be reduced by
20 percent if a site abuts or is within one-quarter mile walking distance of a
public park or playing field open to the public.
      (6)   At least half of the residential units constructed without private
open space (a deck or balcony) shall have a balconet (e.g., a Juliet balcony).
(Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.126.040 RESERVED.
§ 17.126.050 RESERVED.
§ 17.126.060 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Preliminary review. A developer requesting additional density above
the minimum density allowed for the site shall submit an application for
preliminary review, accompanied by the required application fee, for feedback
prior to the submittal of any formal requests for approval of additional
density. The purpose of the preliminary review is to determine whether the
proposed development is in substantial compliance with applicable zoning
regulations and objective development standards and to establish the basis and
procedures for granting the additional density. The following information is
required to be submitted for preliminary review in the form of a proposed
affordable housing plan:
      (1)   Evidence that the project includes the qualifying percentages of
affordable units set forth in §
17.126.020(A) to justify the additional density requested;
      (2)   Calculations showing the minimum density and the density with the
additional units proposed;
      (3)   Number and percentage of total units that are proposed to meet
affordability criteria and the income level to which the units will be
restricted; and
      (4)   A description of any proposed waivers or reductions of development
standards or other zoning requirements, consistent with the provisions of Cal.
Gov't Code § 65915(k).
   (B)   Design review required. All residential development or mixed use
development with residential units in an WHO zone is subject to design review
by the Planning Commission unless a project qualifies for ministerial review
under
Chapter 17.026; see division (C) below. The purpose of this design review
procedure shall be to determine compliance with the town's objective design
standards.
      (1)   Additional findings required for design approval. The Planning
Commission shall grant approval if it determines the project complies with the
design criteria of §
17.020.040 and the following additional findings:
         (a)   The proposed development meets the affordability criteria for
the requested density in accordance with the requirements of §
17.126.020(A); and
         (b)   The increased density would not have a specific adverse impact,
as defined in paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of § 65589.5 of the Cal. Gov't
Code, upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real
property listed in the California Register of Historic Resources.
      (2)   Conditions of approval. In granting a design approval, the Planning
Commission has the authority to impose reasonable conditions that are related
and proportionate to what is being requested by the applicant, as deemed
necessary and appropriate to ensure that the provisions of the General Plan,
any applicable specific plan adopted by the Town Council, and this title are
met, including requirements for needed off-site public improvements. The
Commission may require reasonable guarantees and evidence that such conditions
are being, or will be, met.
   (C)   Streamlined ministerial review. An applicant that qualifies for
streamlined ministerial review under Cal Gov. Code § 65912.122 or other
provisions of state law may request such review. Procedures for streamlined
ministerial approvals are in Chapter 17.026. The additional Planning Commission
findings listed above are not required.
   (D)   Required affordable housing agreement for continued affordability and
deed recorded restriction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for any
residential or mixed use development project with affordable housing units in
an WHO zone, the applicant shall enter into a written agreement with the town
ensuring the continued affordability of the affordable dwelling units for a
period of not less than 55 years or as long as the property is in residential
use, whichever is greater, for rental units and 55 years for for-sale units.
The terms and conditions of the agreement shall be binding upon the successor
in interest of the developer and shall be recorded as a deed restriction or
covenant in the office of the Marin County Assessor-Recorder-County Clerk and
shall run with the land. The agreement shall be executed by the Town Manager,
be in a form acceptable to the Town Attorney, and include provisions for the
following:
      (1)   The number and proportion of housing units affordable to moderate-
income, low-income, and very-low income households by type, their location, and
the number of bedrooms in each one;
      (2)   Standards for maximum qualifying household incomes and maximum
rents or sale prices;
      (3)   Minimum home buyer payments and sources of funds for them:
      (4)   The party responsible for certifying rents and sales prices of
affordable housing units and reporting this information to the town;
      (5)   The process that will be used to certify incomes of tenants or
purchasers of the affordable housing units;
      (6)   The manner in which vacancies will be marketed and filled,
including the screening and qualifying of prospective renters and purchasers of
the affordable units;
      (7)   Deed restrictions on the affordable housing units binding on
property upon sale or transfer and any subsequent sale or transfer;
      (8)   Enforcement mechanisms to ensure that the affordable rental units
are continuously occupied by eligible households and are not rented, leased,
sublet, assigned, or otherwise transferred to non-eligible households, with
reasonable allowances for inherited units and units initially occupied by very
low income individuals who incomes may increase to a low income level; and
      (9)   Project phasing, including the timing of completions, and rental or
sale of the affordable housing units, in relation to the timing of the market-
rate units.
(Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
§ 17.126.070 ADDITIONAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   An applicant proposing a mixed use development may request modifications to
the parking standards for individual uses established in
Chapter 17.052 as follows.
   (A)   Reductions to the required number. An applicant may request, and the
Planning Commission may grant a reduction in the amount of required parking for
individual uses when one or more of the following conditions exist:
      (1)   Multiple uses may use joint parking facilities when operations for
the respective uses are not normally conducted during the same hours, or when
hours of peak use differ. Requests for the use of shared parking must meet the
following conditions:
         (a)   A parking demand study has been prepared which demonstrates that
there will be no substantial conflicts between the subject uses with regard to
principal hours of operation and periods of peak parking demand.
         (b)   The total number of parking spaces required for the subject uses
does not exceed the number of parking spaces reasonably anticipated to be
available at periods of maximum use.
         (c)   The proposed joint parking facility is not located further than
400 feet from the uses which it serves.
         (d)   A written agreement by and between the Town of Fairfax and all
other affected parties shall be executed and recorded with the county recorder,
assuring the availability of the number of parking spaces designated for joint
use, during the hours specified in the agreement, for the duration of the uses.
      (2)   The number of parking spaces required by
Chapter 17.052 may be reduced if it can be demonstrated that the use will not
utilize the required number of spaces due to the nature of the specific use, or
the manner in which the specific use is conducted.
      (3)   A residential or mixed use development project located within 400
feet of a bus stop may reduce the number of required parking spaces by up to
five percent.
      (4)   When an applicant can demonstrate on the basis of a parking demand
study to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that modifications in the
number of spaces or the standards or dimensions otherwise required by this
chapter are warranted for affordable housing, an alternative parking area
design and loading plan may be allowed with design approval. To grant such
modifications, the Planning Commission shall make the following findings in
addition to the findings otherwise required for a site approval:
         (a)   That the applicant qualifies for reduced parking under § 65915
of the Cal. Gov't Code; or
         (b)   That the applicant has convincingly demonstrated that the
alternative plan is a superior solution and the requested modifications in the
design and parking area layout standards are warranted to be able to reduce
development costs and, as a consequence, provide the required affordable
housing for the requested density; and
         (c)   That the alternative parking arrangement will be in place at all
times during operation and life of the principal uses to be served by the
parking.
   (B)   Location and design of parking areas.
      (1)   Parking spaces for multi-family dwellings shall be located within
150 feet, measured as a straight-line distance from the dwelling unit (front or
rear door) for which the space is provided.
      (2)   For residential development at densities exceeding 20 units per
acre, including residential uses in mixed use development, required off-street
parking located in the front half of a lot or within 25 feet of the side street
on a corner lot shall be covered with a carport, garage or roofed structure.
Other spaces may be uncovered if located in the rear half of the lot or site or
when more than 25 feet from a side street. On sites with ten or more dwelling
units, uncovered spaces are allowed if setback at least 50 feet from a front
property line and 25 feet from a street side property line and screened by a
wall or landscaping so as not to be visible from a public street.
(Ord. 887, passed 2-7-2024)
CHAPTER 17.128: O-A OPEN AREA ZONE
Section
   
17.128.010   Generally
   
17.128.020   Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.128.030   Conditional uses and structures
   
17.128.040   Uses prohibited
   
17.128.050   Building site requirements
   
17.128.060   Height regulations
   
17.128.070   Yards
   
17.128.080   Signs
   
17.128.090   Off-street parking
   
17.128.100   Traffic impact permit
§ 17.128.010 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No premises in the O-A open area zone may be used for any purpose or
in any manner except as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical
modification of building are subject to design review.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.010) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Uses within the O-A zone are restricted to the following:
   (A)   Public uses as follows: public schools, parks, playgrounds and
recreation areas;
   (B)   Crop farming, truck gardening and grazing;
   (C)   Golf courses, country clubs, forest preserves, wildlife reserves,
equestrian and hiking areas.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.020) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following uses are permitted upon the securing of a use permit in each
case, which use permit if granted shall prescribe conditions as are necessary
to assure the prevention of hazards to life and property, to preserve and
promote agricultural enterprise, to preserve scenic beauty, to preserve
historic enterprise, to preserve historic interest, to maintain such land in a
permanent open state:
   (A)   Private schools, day care centers or nurseries;
   (B)   Public or civic buildings;
   (C)   Private recreational uses;
   (D)   Residences clearly accessory to the primary use of property for
agricultural purposes;
   (E)   Stables and riding academies;
   (F)   Public utility or public service uses, provided, however, that no use
permit shall be required for gas, water, electrical and communications
transmission and distribution facilities be located below ground level.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.030) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.040 USES PROHIBITED.
   All uses of land unless set forth in §§
17.128.020 and
17.128.030 are specifically prohibited, as are the following uses:
   (A)   Commercial wood cutting or logging;
   (B)   Removal of topsoil;
   (C)   Excavation or filling to any extent whatsoever except as such
excavation or filling is approved by the town upon the finding that same is
necessary in the pursuit of a permitted use within the district.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.040) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.050 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   A use permit must first be secured in the O-A zone for any use, occupancy or
physical improvement which is located on a site containing an area of less than
five acres and a width of less than 100 feet.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 1989)
§ 17.128.060 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Height regulations in the O-A zone are as follows: Except as otherwise
permitted by variance, no structure shall be higher than 35 feet above natural
grade.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.060) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.070 YARDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
O-A zone having a slope of not more than ten percent shall have yards as
follows:
      (1)   A front and rear yard having a combined depth of not less than
twenty-five feet but neither having a depth of less than six feet;
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 15 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
   (B)   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, each building site in the
O-A zone having a slope of more than ten percent, shall have yards as follows:
      (1)   A front and rear yard having a combined depth of not less than 35
feet, but the front yard having a depth of not less than six feet and the rear
yard of not less than 12 feet;
      (2)   Two side yards having a combined width of not less than 20 feet,
but neither yard having a width of less than five feet.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.070) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.080 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the O-A zone except as
authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 of this title.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.080) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.090 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street parking spaces and facilities shall be provided in the O-
A zone as required or allowed by the provision of
Chapter 17.048 of this title.
   (B)   Off-street parking requirements for uses allowed in the O-A zone but
not listed in
Chapter 17.048 of this code shall be determined on a case-by-case basis
utilizing the information provided in the traffic study required by
Chapter 17.056 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.090) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
§ 17.128.100 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   A traffic impact permit shall be obtained under
Chapter 17.056 for any structure or use in the O-A zone.
(Prior Code, § 17.64.100) (Ord. 584, passed - -1989)
CHAPTER 17.130: PD PUBLIC DOMAIN ZONE
Section
   
17.130.010      Generally
   
17.130.020      Principal permitted uses and structures
   
17.130.030      Conditional uses and structures
   
17.130.035      Procedure for Planning Director Use Determination
   
17.130.040      Accessory uses and structures
   
17.130.050      Uses prohibited
   
17.130.060      Building site requirements
   
17.130.070      Height regulations
   
17.130.080      Yards
   
17.130.090      Signs
   
17.130.100      Off-street parking
   
17.130.110      Traffic impact permit
§ 17.130.010 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No premises in the PD open area zone may be used for any purpose or in
any manner except as set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   All structures, physical improvements and exterior physical
modification of building are subject to design review unless the Planning
Director makes a determination that the improvements are minor in nature.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.020 PRINCIPAL PERMITTED USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Uses within the PD zone are restricted to the following:
   (A)   Public or governmental buildings and facilities, including maintenance
or corporation yards;
   (B)   Public parking areas;
   (C)   Public schools and preschools;
   (D)   Public parks, playgrounds and recreation areas;
   (E)   Museums, libraries, and cultural institutions; and
   (F)   Emergency shelters, subject to compliance with Chapter 17.138 of this
title.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.030 CONDITIONAL USES AND STRUCTURES.
   The following uses are permitted upon the securing of a use permit in each
case, which use permit if granted shall prescribe conditions as are necessary
to assure the public health, safety, and welfare are preserved:
   (A)   Other uses determined by the Planning Commission as equivalent to
those listed in §
17.130.020, but requiring regulation of location, extent or operation because
of some unique characteristic; and
   (B)   Hospitals, or day care centers.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.035 PROCEDURE FOR PLANNING DIRECTOR USE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   Uses not specifically listed in §§
17.130.020 and
17.130.030 are specifically prohibited unless a use determination by the
Planning Director is made which finds the use not specifically listed is
similar to another use permitted or conditionally permitted within the Public
Domain zone.
   (B)   The criteria utilized by the Planning Director to determine if a
proposed use is sufficiently similar to a permitted use as described in §
17.130.020 or §
17.130.030, and can be processed as such is as follows:
      (1)   The proposed use must be consistent with the General Plan; and
      (2)   The proposed use must serve a public function and closely
approximate a use described in §
17.130.020 or §
17.130.030 relative to the type of service provided.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.040 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES.
   Accessory uses and structures allowed in the PD zone shall consist of those
activities which are characteristic of and usually found in connection with a
principal use on the same premises and which are subordinate to, dependent on
and economically and operationally integrated into the principal use, including
but not limited to the following:
   (A)   Parking garages and lots;
   (B)   Storage for principal uses;
   (C)   Offices for principal uses; and
   (D)   Signs.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.050 USES PROHIBITED.
   All uses of land unless set forth in §§
17.130.020,
17.130.030, or
17.130.040 are specifically prohibited.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.060 BUILDING SITE REQUIREMENTS.
   No building site requirements apply in the PD zone.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.070 HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   Except as otherwise permitted by variance, no structure within the PD
district shall be higher than 28.5 feet above natural grade, nor contain more
than two stories.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.080 YARDS.
   No yard requirements apply in the PD zone, except that if a parcel within
the PD zone is immediately adjacent to a parcel bearing a zoning designation
allowing residential dwelling units as a permitted use, such parcel within the
PD zone shall be deemed to have a setback along the shared property line
identical to the setback required by such adjacent zone.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.090 SIGNS.
   No signs shall be established or maintained in the PD zone except as
authorized or allowed under the provisions of
Chapter 17.064 of this title. Town owned facilities and properties are exempted
from this provision.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.100 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street parking spaces and facilities shall be provided in the PD
zone as required or allowed by the provision of
Chapter 17.052 of this title.
   (B)   Off-street parking requirements for uses allowed in the PD zone but
not listed in
Chapter 17.052 of this title shall be determined on a case-by-case basis
utilizing the information provided in the traffic study required by
Chapter 17.056 of this title.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
§ 17.130.110 TRAFFIC IMPACT PERMIT.
   The provisions of the traffic impact permit,
Chapter 17.056 of this title, are applicable to properties in the PD zone with
the exception of Town owned facilities and properties.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015)
CHAPTER 17.132: WATER CONSERVATION
Section
   
17.132.010   Water conservation landscaping
   
17.132.020   Verification of water availability
   
17.132.030   Water conserving toilets
   
17.132.040   Specific toilet regulations
   
17.132.050   Compliance with § 17.132.040
§ 17.132.010 WATER CONSERVATION LANDSCAPING.
   All projects subject to review by the Fairfax Planning Commission which
include landscaping must comply with the latest adopted water conservation
ordinance of the Marin Municipal Water District.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.010) (Ord. 615, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 764, passed 2-1-
2012)
§ 17.132.020 VERIFICATION OF WATER AVAILABILITY.
   Prior to the issuance of a building permit or other authorization to proceed
by the town, the applicant for the permit shall provide to the town,
verification from the Marin Municipal Water District that water is available to
serve the subject project.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.020) (Ord. 615, passed - -1992)
§ 17.132.030 WATER CONSERVING TOILETS.
   Whenever a toilet (water closet) is replaced, added, or moved under a
plumbing permit issued by the town, the rated water usage on the new toilet
shall not exceed 1.28 gallons per flush or as required by the CPC as amended
and adopted by the Town Council.
(Prior Code, § 17.68.030) (Ord. 615, passed - -1992; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-6-
2016)
§ 17.132.040 SPECIFIC TOILET REGULATIONS.
   All structures in Fairfax, in all zoning districts, shall have all of their
toilets (water closets) whose rated water usage exceeds 1.28 gallons per flush,
replaced with water conserving toilets not exceeding 1.28 gallons per flush, or
as required by the CPC as amended and adopted by the Town Council, no later
than 60 days after the sale or transfer of the property. The requirement to
replace non-compliant toilets with water conserving toilets shall not delay the
sale or transfer of property.
(Ord. 687, passed 10-2-2001; Am. Ord. 796, passed 4-6-2016)
§ 17.132.050 COMPLIANCE WITH § 17.132.040.
   In order to gain compliance with §
17.132.040, building permit application to retrofit toilets may be made with
the application for “report of residential building records.” Application fees
will be covered by the cost of the resale report. Installation will be
inspected as a part of the resale reinspection performed by the Fairfax
Building Inspector to insure that required corrections and repairs listed in
the resale reinspection report have been completed in compliance with the
Uniform Building Code and other town ordinances.
(Ord. 687, passed 10-2-2001)
CHAPTER 17.136: FLOOR AREA
Section
   
17.136.010   Purpose
   
17.136.020   Generally
   
17.136.030   Maximum floor area and floor area ratio.
   
17.136.040   Existing structures
   
17.136.050   Floor area exception process
§ 17.136.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)    It is the purpose of this chapter to impose a maximum limit for the
floor area of single-family residences and duplex properties.
   (B)   It is the intent of this chapter to accomplish the following:
      (1)   To preserve the quality of life and small town and rural character
in the neighborhoods of Fairfax by limiting the size of new or renovated
residences. The size limitation shall be based upon a ratio between the floor
area of residential structures and building lot size. The establishment of an
overall maximum limit on floor area size of 3,500 square feet for any
residential structure shall serve to ensure the continuity and ecological
sustainability of residential development in Fairfax.
      (2)   To limit negative environmental impacts from the development of new
residential structures or expansion of existing residential structures through
the establishment of a uniform standard limiting the size of residential
structures on a lot.
      (3)   Provide a standard that serves to protect property values through
the preservation of views, neighborhood character, scenic resources and
environmental quality;
      (4)   Ensure that property owners can adequately develop or redevelop
their properties for residential uses in a manner that correlates with lot size
and the overall level of potential negative impacts on or off-site; and
      (5)   Minimize water runoff and soil erosion problems during and after
construction.
(Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019)
§ 17.136.020 GENERALLY.
    The general requirements and regulations set forth in this title shall be
subject to the specific modifications and interpretations set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019)
§ 17.136.030 MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA AND FLOOR AREA RATIO.
   (A)   The maximum floor area ratio for any lot containing a single-family
residence or duplex shall be no greater than 0.40. See §
17.010.080 for the floor area calculation and §
17.010.090 for the floor area ratio calculation.
   (B)   The maximum floor area for any lot containing a single-family
residence, duplex, or townhouse shall not exceed 3,500 square feet regardless
of lot size. The maximum floor area limit shall exclude the floor area of: (1)
one accessory structure containing 120 square feet or less and featuring no
utilities; (2) one or two accessory dwelling units pursuant to
Chapter 17.048; and garages space as defined in §
17.010.080 and §
17.010.090.
(Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019; Am. Ord. 885, passed
11-1-2023)
§ 17.136.040 EXISTING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Any single family residential or duplex property whose legally
established floor area exceeds the maximum floor area limit in §
17.136.030(B) as of June 1, 2019, shall not be deemed a legal non-conforming
structure solely based on floor area.
   (B)   If any structure on a property specified in division (A) is
involuntarily destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act of God or by the
public enemy, to a greater extent than 50 percent, such structure may be
rebuilt and reconstructed in kind with the same floor area, provided there is
no increase in any nonconformity of the original structure and shall not be
required to comply with §
17.016.070(B) except with respect to improvements located in the public right
of way.
   (C)   If any structure on a property specified in division (A) is
voluntarily altered, remodeled, reconstructed or demolished to a greater extent
than 50 percent, such structure may be rebuilt or reconstructed with the same
floor area, but otherwise in full conformity with the requirements of Title 17
(Zoning).
   (D)   Any structure on a property specified in division (A) may be
voluntarily altered, remodeled, reconstructed or demolished to an extent of 50
percent or less, provided that the alteration, construction, or reconstruction
of the structure shall not increase the existing, legally-established floor
area.
   (E)   The limitations in this section shall not apply to the construction of
one accessory dwelling unit per lot in conformance with
Chapter 17.048.
   (F)   If any single family residential or duplex property containing less
than the maximum floor area stated in §
17.136.030(B) is involuntarily destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act of
God or by the public enemy, to a greater extent than 50 percent, such structure
may be rebuilt and reconstructed in kind with the same floor area, provided
there is no increase in any nonconformity of the original structure and shall
not be required to comply with §
17.016.070(B) except with respect to improvements located in the public right
of way.
   (G)   Evidence of the floor area and existing legal nonconformities of the
existing structure(s) shall be based on floor plans of record retained at the
Fairfax Department of Planning and Building Services or other evidence reviewed
and approved by the Director of the Department of Planning and Building
Services. The extent of destruction, alteration, or reconstruction of any
structure, shall be determined in accordance with §
17.016.040(B).
(Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019)
§ 17.136.050 FLOOR AREA EXCEPTION PROCESS.
   An exception to the maximum floor area requirement may be granted to prevent
or minimize inconsistencies with the floor area of adjacent or neighboring
properties, to assist with the provision of adequate off-street parking, or if
the lot is one acre or greater in size; provided that, the granting of such an
exception would not be a grant of special privilege or be inconsistent with the
intent of the General Plan or the Zoning Ordinance. Granting of an exception
requires the review and approval of the Planning Commission. An exception that
meets all of the above conditions may be granted by the Planning Commission,
provided the total floor area shall not exceed 5,000 square feet per property.
(Ord. 696, passed 9-3-2002; Am. Ord. 832, passed 6-5-2019)
CHAPTER 17.138: REGULATIONS APPLYING IN MULTIPLE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
Article I: Emergency Homeless Shelters
   
17.138.010   Emergency homeless shelter standards
Article II: Small Residential Rooftop Solar
and Renewable Energy Systems
   
17.138.200   Purpose
   
17.138.210   Definitions
   
17.138.220   Applicability
   
17.138.230   Small residential rooftop solar energy system requirements
   
17.138.240   Applicant obligations
   
17.138.250   Processing of small residential rooftop solar energy system
applications
   
17.138.260   Application review
   
17.138.270   Inspections
Article III: Standards for Protected Residential Uses
   
17.138.310   Purpose
   
17.138.320   Low-barrier navigation centers
   
17.138.330   Residential care
   
17.138.340   Supportive housing
   
17.138.350   Transitional housing
Article IV: Design Standards for Multi-Family Housing Developments
   
17.138.410   Purpose
   
17.138.420   Required side and rear setbacks for dwelling units
   
17.138.430   Building mass and scale
   
17.138.440   Building materials and lighting
   
17.138.450   Pedestrian orientation and accessible pedestrian facilities on
designated streets
   
17.138.460   Parking
   
17.138.470   Landscaping
   
17.138.480   Buffering and screening
Article V: Development Standards for Manufactured
Housing and Tiny Houses
   
17.138.500   Purpose
   
17.138.510   Manufactured housing
   
17.138.520   Tiny houses
Article VI: Vegetation Management in the Wildland
Urban Fire Hazard Interface Zone
   
17.138.600   Purpose
   
17.138.610   Vegetation management plan required
   
17.138.620   Guidelines and checklists
ARTICLE I: EMERGENCY HOMELESS SHELTERS
§ 17.138.010 EMERGENCY HOMELESS SHELTER STANDARDS.
   Each emergency homeless shelter shall comply with the following standards:
   (A)   Number of beds. An individual emergency homeless shelter shall have no
more than 20 beds.
   (B)   Off-street parking. An emergency homeless shelter shall comply with
all applicable provisions of the off-street parking and loading provisions
applicable to the zoning district in which the shelter is located.
   (C)   Entrance lobby/intake area. The intake area of an emergency homeless
shelter shall be a minimum of 100 square feet, located entirely within the
building. The entrance to the intake area shall not be located directly facing
a public street. Hours of client intake shall be posted. Clients shall not be
allowed to form a queue outside the facility.
   (D)   On-site management. In order to ensure the operation and maintenance
of the property upon which an emergency shelter is operated, the operator of an
emergency homeless shelter shall submit a management plan to the Planning
Director that includes the following information: the operator’s qualifications
to operate the emergency shelter; the identification of the on-site staff
person designated as a neighborhood liaison to respond to, and address, any
questions or concerns from surrounding residents regarding facility operations;
the operator’s security measures to protect shelter residents and neighboring
land uses (which measures must be objectively sufficient to provide such
security); a list of services offered by the shelter to assist emergency
shelter residents with obtaining permanent shelter; and a method of screening
emergency shelter residents to ensure compatibility with services provided at
or through the emergency shelter prior to admittance to the shelter.
   (E)   Once the town’s local need for providing emergency homeless shelters
is satisfied (based on the most current homeless census data), a conditional
use permit is required for any additional beds or emergency homeless shelters
in any district.
   (F)   Length of stay. No individual or family shall reside in an emergency
homeless shelter for more than 180 consecutive days. A minimum of 60 days shall
be required between stays. The operator of the emergency homeless shelter shall
maintain adequate documentation to demonstrate compliance with this provision.
   (G)   External lighting. The emergency homeless shelter shall provide
external lighting in accordance with California Building Code in order to
maintain a safe and secure environment. Exterior lighting shall be shielded and
directed towards the ground and away from surrounding properties.
   (H)   On-site security.
      (1)   Security measures shall be sufficient to protect clients and
neighbors. Onsite security shall be provided during the hours when the
emergency homeless shelter is in operation and at all times when clients are
present on site.
      (2)   In the event that at least five external, verified complaints
concerning unlawful activities at the facility have been received over a 30-day
period by the police department, the facility shall be required to provide
additional on-site security staff to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police
and the Director of Planning and Building Services.
   (I)   Town, county and state requirements. An emergency homeless shelter
shall obtain and maintain in good standing required licenses, permits, and
approvals from Town, county and state agencies or departments and demonstrate
compliance with applicable building and fire codes. An emergency homeless
shelter shall comply with all county and state health and safety requirements
for food, medical and other supportive services provided on site.
   (J)   Hours of operation. An operational emergency homeless shelter shall
remain open 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
   (K)   Smoking ordinance. Emergency homeless shelters shall comply with the
provisions of §
8.44.070 of Title 8 of this code (Prohibition of Smoking in Certain Unenclosed
Public Places).
   (L)   Design review. New construction and/or significant exterior
alterations to an existing site or building are subject to design review by the
Planning Commission to ensure substantial conformance with the town’s design
guidelines.
   (M)   Emergency homeless shelter fees. Prior to issuance of a building
permit for any emergency homeless shelter, any fees or exactions authorized by
law, that are applicable to residential development, and that are determined by
the town to be essential to provide necessary public services and facilities
for the emergency homeless shelter, shall be paid by the operator of the
emergency shelter to the town and/or to other applicable public agencies. In
the event that the operation of the facility results in a need for additional
police and public safety services or resources to ensure the public health,
safety and welfare of the community, the operator may be required to reimburse
the town for any documented costs incurred for providing such additional
services and/or resources.
(Ord. 788, passed 5-6-2015; Am. Ord. 799, passed 2-3-2016)
ARTICLE II: SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR AND RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 17.138.200 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the subchapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar
permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter
521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small
residential rooftop solar energy systems. The Article encourages the use of
solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property
owners and the Town, and expanding the ability of property owners to install
solar energy systems. The subchapter allows the town to achieve these goals
while protecting the public health and safety.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.210 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL. The submission of materials via electronic mail.
   SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. In accordance with Cal. Gov’t
Code § 65850.5, a solar energy system that meets all of the following:
      (1)   Is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate
rating or 30 kilowatts thermal;
      (2)   Conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and
other building codes as adopted or amended by the town, and all state and Town
health and safety standards;
      (3)   Conforms to all applicable safety and performance standards
established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters
Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission
regarding safety and reliability;
      (4)   Is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling; and
      (5)   The panel or module array does not exceed the maximum legal
building height as defined by the town.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM. As defined in Cal. Civil Code § 801.5(a)(1) and (2), as
such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from
time to time.
   SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT. A significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health
or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.220 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter applies to the permitting of all small residential
rooftop solar energy systems in the Town of Fairfax.
   (B)   Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or
permitted prior to the effective date of this subchapter are not subject to the
requirements of this subchapter unless physical modifications or alterations
are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small
rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine
operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.230 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS.
   A small residential rooftop solar energy system, as defined in this
subchapter, shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   All small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall meet
applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state,
the town, and the Ross Valley Fire District.
   (B)   Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and
for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be
certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing
and Mechanical Code.
   (C)   Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all
applicable safety and performance standards established by the California
Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and
accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and
reliability.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.240 APPLICANT OBLIGATIONS.
   Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:
   (A)   Verify, to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction, through the use of
standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the
small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to
transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system
to the building foundation; and
   (B)   At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable
satisfaction, using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing
electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as
well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the
existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic
electrical loads.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.250 PROCESSING OF SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM
APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy
system application shall be made available on the publicly accessible town
website.
   (B)   Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents
shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system
permit applicants.
   (C)   An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms,
applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.
   (D)   The town shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary expedited
review process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems, which shall
include standard plan(s) and checklist(s). The checklist(s) shall set forth all
requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems must
comply with to be eligible for expedited review. These materials may be adopted
or amended by Resolution of the Town Council.
   (E)   The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard
plan(s), and checklist(s) shall
substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including
the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the
California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of
Planning and Research.
   (F)   All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop
solar energy systems must comply with Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65850.55, 66015, and
66016, as well as Cal. Health and Safety Code § 17951.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.260 APPLICATION REVIEW.
   (A)   The Planning and Building Department shall adopt an administrative,
nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems subject to this subchapter.
   (B)   An application that town staff determines satisfies the information
requirements contained in the town’s checklist(s) for expedited small
residential rooftop solar system processing, including complete supporting
documents, shall be deemed complete.
   (C)   If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or
documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be
sent to the applicant for resubmission.
   (D)   After town staff deems an application complete, Town staff shall
review the application to determine whether the application meets local, state,
and federal health and safety requirements.
   (E)   The Planning and Building Department shall issue a building permit or
other nondiscretionary permit the same day for over-the-counter applications or
within one to three business days for electronic applications of receipt of a
complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and
standard plan, as well as all local, state, and federal health and safety
requirements.
   (F)   The Building Official may require an applicant to apply for a use
permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar
energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and
safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Fairfax Town Code to the
contrary, the Building Official is authorized to issue use permits for small
residential rooftop solar energy systems. A public hearing on the application
for the use permit shall be held and notice of the same shall be provided as
set forth in §
17.032.050 of the Town Code.
      (2)   If a use permit is required, the Building Official may deny an
application for the use permit only if the Building Official makes written
findings, based upon substantial evidence in the record, that the proposed
installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety
and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse
impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the
potential feasible alternative for satisfactorily mitigating or avoiding the
adverse impact. Any such decision may be appealed to the Planning Commission.
         (a)   A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective
method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the town on another similarly
situated application in a prior successful application for a permit.
         (b)   The town shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected
method, condition, or mitigation does not significantly increase the cost of
the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance in excess of the
following:
            1.   For solar domestic water heating systems or solar swimming
pool heating systems: an amount exceeding 10% of the cost of the system, but in
no case more than $1,000, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy
system by an amount exceeding 10%, as originally specified and proposed.
            2.   For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed $1,000 over
the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system
efficiency of an amount exceeding 10% as originally specified and proposed.
      (3)   The town shall not condition approval of an application on the
approval of an association, as defined in Cal. Civil Code § 4080. Any condition
imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse
impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
§ 17.138.270 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the Planning
and Building Department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems
eligible for expedited review.
   (B)   The inspection shall be done in a timely manner.
   (C)   If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a
subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 794, passed 10-7-2015)
ARTICLE III: STANDARDS FOR PROTECTED RESIDENTIAL USES
§ 17.138.310 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish objective standards for specific
residential uses and activities that are permitted in several zoning districts
to ensure that protection required by state and federal law is provided. These
provisions are intended to minimize the impacts of these uses and activities on
surrounding properties and the town at large and to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of their occupants and of the general public.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.320 LOW-BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS.
   Low barrier navigation centers (LBNCs) shall be located, developed, and
operated in compliance with the development standards of the zone where they
are located and with the following operational requirements; they are then
allowed by right with a zoning permit in areas zoned for multi-family and
residential mixed use development.
   (A)   LBNCs shall comply with the requirements of Cal. Gov't Code § 65660 as
follows:
      (1)   LBNCs shall offer services to connect people to permanent housing
through a services plan that identifies services staffing.
      (2)   LBNCs shall be linked to a coordinated entry system, so that staff
who co-locate in the facility may conduct assessments and provide services to
connect people to permanent housing. In this context, a “coordinated entry
system” means a centralized or coordinated assessment system developed pursuant
to § 576.400(d) or § 578.7(a)(8), as applicable, of Title 24 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as amended, and any related requirements, intended to
coordinate participant intake, assessment, and referrals.
      (3)   LBNCs shall comply with Chapter 6.5 (commencing with § 8255) of
Division 8 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code.
      (4)   LBNCs shall have a working system for entering information
regarding client stays, client demographics, client income, and exit
destination through the local Homeless Management Information System, as
defined by § 578.3 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   (B)   The time periods for determining whether an LBNC application is
complete and making a decision on a proposed LBNC shall be those set for in Cal
Gov't. Code § 65664.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.330 RESIDENTIAL CARE.
   General residential care facilities shall be located, developed, and
operated in compliance with the following standards, where allowed by the land
use regulations in
Chapters 17.076,
17.080,
17.084,
17.088, and
17.090:
   (A)   Minimum distance from any other residential care facility: 300 feet.
   (B)   At least 20 square feet of common open space on-site shall be provided
for each person who resides in the facility. Common open space shall include
landscaped areas and walks and other amenities, such as, patios, swimming
pools, barbeque areas, or other such improvements as are appropriate to enhance
the outdoor environment of the residential care facility for its residents and
visitors. Landscaped courtyard entries that are oriented towards the public
street which create a welcoming entry feature are also considered common areas.
All areas not improved with buildings, parking, vehicular accessways, trash
enclosures, and similar items shall be developed as common areas with the types
of attributes described above.
      (1)   Minimum horizontal dimension: 15 feet
      (2)   Usability: a surface shall be provided that provides for convenient
use for outdoor living and/or recreation.
   (C)   At least 15 percent of the common open space shall be shaded for
seating areas. Such shading may be provided by canopy trees or shade
structures.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.340 SUPPORTIVE HOUSING.
   Supportive housing shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance
with the following standards, where allowed by the land use regulations in
Chapters 17.076,
17.080,
17.084,
17.088, and
17.090:
   (A)   Supportive housing shall only be subject to the development standards
that apply to other residential uses in the zone where such housing is
proposed. The maximum number of allowable dwelling units or guest rooms for
supportive housing shall be the same as the number allowed for residential
development projects in the zone where the supportive housing project is
proposed unless a density bonus is granted under
Chapter 17.050 or the land use regulations for specific zone specify another
limit.
   (B)   Supportive housing may be provided in a multiple-unit structure or
group residential facility.
   (C)   Only a zoning permit and design review is required for supportive
housing projects.
   (D)   Applicants shall comply with all federal and California state
licensing requirements and applicable building codes and fire codes, including
maximum occupancy restrictions. No limits shall be established on the length of
stay.
   (E)   Supportive housing facilities shall have the minimum amount of living
space that meets the standards for an efficiency unit, shower and toilet
facilities, laundry facilities, and secure storage areas for intended
residents.
   (F)   Recreation rooms at least 600 square feet in area for a development of
16 or more dwelling units or guest rooms, or at least 400 square feet in area
for a development of fewer than 16 dwelling units or guest rooms, may qualify
as common open space, but shall not qualify for more than 40 percent of the
total required open space.
   (G)   At least 90 square feet of space shall be provided as office space for
on-site supportive services, which may include counseling, access to social
services, medical and mental health care, housing and employment opportunities.
Supportive services provided on-site are considered an accessory use and not
subject to any additional standards or permitting requirements.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.350 TRANSITIONAL HOUSING.
   Transitional housing shall be located, developed, and operated in compliance
with the following standards, where allowed by the land use regulations in
Chapters
17.076,
17.080,
17.084,
17.088, and
17.090:
   (A)   Transitional housing shall only be subject to the development
standards that apply to other residential uses in the zone where such housing
is proposed. The maximum number of allowable dwelling units for transitional
housing shall be the same as number allowed for residential development
projects in the zone where the transitional housing project is proposed unless
a density bonus is granted under
Chapter 17.050 or the land or the land use regulations for specific zone
specify another limit.
   (B)   Transitional housing may be provided in a variety of rental housing
types (e.g., multiple-unit dwelling, single-room occupancy, group residential,
or single unit dwelling).
   (C)   Transitional housing providing accommodations for six or fewer
individuals shall be deemed a single-family use; only a zoning permit and
design review is required.
   (D)   Transitional housing providing accommodations for more than six
individuals also is a permitted use in zones where multi-family and mixed use
development is allowed and shall require a zoning permit and design review.
   (E)   No individual or family shall reside in transitional housing for more
than 24 months. A minimum of 60 days shall be required between stays. The
operator of the transitional housing shall maintain adequate documentation to
demonstrate compliance with this provision.
   (F)   Applicants shall comply with all federal and California state
licensing requirements and applicable building codes and fire codes, including
maximum occupancy restrictions.
   (G)   Transitional housing facilities shall have the minimum amount of
living space that meets the standards for an efficiency unit, shower and toilet
facilities, laundry facilities, and secure storage areas for intended
residents.
   (H)   Transitional housing may include office space for on-site supportive
services, such as counseling, access to social services, medical and mental
health care, housing and employment opportunities. On-site supportive services
are considered an accessory use and not subject to any additional standards or
permitting requirements.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
ARTICLE IV: DESIGN STANDARDS FOR MULTI-FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
§ 17.138.410 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish objective development standards
for multi-family housing to determine compliance with design criteria. These
standards are intended to implement the General Plan and ensure that the
desired character and land use compatibility for multi-family housing
developments are achieved.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.420 REQUIRED SIDE AND REAR SETBACKS FOR DWELLING UNITS.
   In order to provide light and air for multi-family living units and
additional separation for rooms that contain areas that require additional
privacy considerations, the following minimum setbacks shall apply to any
building wall containing windows and facing an interior side or rear yard. The
required setbacks apply to that portion of the building wall containing and
extending three feet on either side of any window.
   (A)   For any wall containing living room or other primary room windows, a
setback of at least 15 feet shall be provided.
   (B)   For any wall containing sleeping room windows, a setback of at least
ten feet shall be provided.
   (C)   For all other walls containing windows, a setback of at least five
feet shall be provided.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.430 BUILDING MASS AND SCALE.
   (A)   To reduce upper-story building mass, floorplates for the third story
and above shall not exceed 80 percent of the ground-floor floorplate. The
Planning Director may waive this requirement under the authority established in
Chapter 17.044 upon finding the architectural articulation of exterior walls
and a sloped roof modulates the visual mass of the top of the building and
avoids the appearance of a box-like structure.
   (B)   Buildings that are more than 150 feet in length shall include a
minimum two-foot vertical variation in height for at least 50 feet.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.440 BUILDING MATERIALS AND LIGHTING.
   (A)   A diversity of building materials is allowed provided they are
compatible with existing building materials used in the surrounding
neighborhood and in high and very-high wildfire hazard areas are fire-
resistant. These include wood, composite wood, fiber cement, metal, brick,
stone, and stucco. For roofing, asphalt shingles, standing seam metal,
terracotta clay barrel tiles and slate are allowed.
   (B)   Mirrored glass, stony reflective metal, unfinished galvanized metal
siding, and plain concrete block are prohibited for use as exterior building
materials.
   (C)   No barbed wire or razor wire shall be used for fencing or screening.
   (D)   All outdoor lighting except for holiday lighting shall be fully-
shielded so as to project against glare and direct light where needed. All
entries shall be lighted with low- intensity fixtures to ensure the safety of
persons and the security of the building.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.450 PEDESTRIAN ORIENTATION AND ACCESSIBLE PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES ON
DESIGNATED STREETS.
   Along Bolinas Road, Broadway, School Street, and Sir Francis Drake
Boulevard, all housing development on sites over one acre in size shall
incorporate such features as plazas, interior walkways, canopies, arcades,
courtyards, ornamental gates, trellises, lighting, plant materials, seating,
fountains, or other similar features, as appropriate, to support and enhance
pedestrian spaces.
   (A)   Outdoor pedestrian space shall be landscaped and shall include
appropriate street furniture to encourage pedestrian activity.
   (B)   Clearly marked pedestrian connections shall be provided between
parking areas and buildings.
   (C)   All sidewalks, crosswalks, courts, plazas and residential buildings
shall be designed to be safe, accessible, and convenient for individuals of all
abilities, whether traveling by foot, wheelchair, or other mobility aid.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.460 PARKING.
   (A)   Parking areas are prohibited between the building and primary street
edge. On-site parking shall be in the rear half of the site or within a parking
structure.
   (B)   Multi-story parking structures within 25 feet of a street frontage
shall be lined with foundation landscaping at the ground floor.
   (C)   At least ten percent of the parking spaces shall be designed to meet
the standards for electric vehicle (EV) charging spaces established in the
California Building Code and the California Green Building Standards Code for
new multi-family dwellings, which are incorporated by reference.
   (D)   Building siting and parking design shall maximize opportunities for
shared parking, access entries, and driveways in order to minimize the number
of curb cuts and thus limit possible conflict between pedestrians and
automobiles.
   (E)   Whenever possible, vehicle access shall be provided from side streets
and alleys to limit the number of driveways along arterial streets.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.470 LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Landscaping may consist of a combination of ground cover materials,
shrubs, and trees. Ground cover may include grasses, shrubs, perennials, vines,
or other herbaceous or non-herbaceous plants. Ground cover also includes mulch,
such as gravel, rock, cinder, bark, or other permeable materials, provided that
such materials are fire-resistant. Landscaping may also include incidental
features, such as stepping-stones, site furniture, water features, art, or
other ornamental features placed within a landscaped setting.
   (B)   A minimum of 15 percent of the site shall be landscaped, consisting of
ground cover plant materials, shrubs, and trees.
      (1)   In order to conserve water, not more than 50 percent of the
landscaped area may be turf.
      (2)   One tree is required for every 1,000 square feet of lot area.
      (3)   Waivers of these standards may be requested under
Chapter 17.044.
   (C)   Any plant that is not specifically prohibited may be selected for
landscaping. Criteria for selection of plants shall include:
      (1)   Protection and preservation of native species and natural
vegetation;
      (2)   Fire-resistance;
      (3)   Drought-tolerance;
      (4)   Local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance; and
      (5)   Selection of trees based on size at maturity as appropriate for the
planting area.
   (D)   A landscape documentation package shall be provided with the
development application that complies with the standards of the “Model Water
Efficient Landscape Ordinance” (MWELO) adopted by the Cal. Dept. of Water
Resources in Chapter 2.7 of Div. 2 of Title 23 of the Cal. Code of Regulations,
which is hereby adopted by reference and shall apply the MWELO to all new
residential development projects with 500 square feet or more of landscape
area. If the total landscaped area is 2,500 square feet or less, an applicant
may use the prescriptive compliance option provided in Appendix D of the MWELO
to streamline the review process. Under this option, turf shall not exceed 25
percent of the landscape area.
   (E)   To conserve water, the town has set a performance requirement that
estimated total water use for landscape plans subject to the MWELO shall be at
least ten percent lower than the maximum applied water allowance established by
the MWELO unless a waiver is granted under
Chapter 17.044.
   (F)   A signed certificate of compliance, in the form required by the
Planning Director, shall be submitted to the town upon completion of a
landscape installation. The Director shall approve or deny the certificate
within ten days of receipt. If the certificate is denied, the Director shall
notify the applicant of the deficiencies and the appeal procedures. A landscape
irrigation audit conducted by a third party certified by the town also may be
required to be submitted with the certificate of compliance.
   (G)   Along street frontages, at least 50 percent of the required setback
shall be landscaped.
   (H)   All landscaping shall comply with the water conservation and dry year
water use use reduction program and related water conservation measures of the
Marin Municipal Water District (MMWD) in Chapter 13.02 of the MMWD Code.
   (I)   Within the Wildland-Urban Interface zone, all landscaping is subject
to vegetation management; see Article VI (§§
17.138.600 through
17.138.620) of this chapter for details.
   (J)   Street trees shall be included along all street frontages with multi-
family housing development. Trees shall be selected shall be approved by the
Planning Director prior to installation. Trees selected shall not include trees
listed in the Town of Fairfax Municipal Code,
Chapter 8.36 Trees that are “Undesirable Trees Species”.
   (K)   Where pedestrian paths or walkways cross parking areas or driveways,
the paths shall incorporate landscaping and decorative paving to define the
pedestrian space. Walkways shall be hard-surfaced and at least four feet wide.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.480 BUFFERING AND SCREENING.
   (A)   A ten-foot wide landscaped buffer yard shall be provided wherever a
multi-family housing development abuts a single-family residential use. This
buffer shall include for each 100 lineal feet or fraction thereof at least two
canopy trees that will be at least 40 feet high at maturity or three canopy
trees with a lower height at maturity and six shrubs with a mature height of
two feet or more. If an equivalent landscape buffer exists on the adjacent lot,
the width of the required buffer may be reduced by 50 percent.
   (B)   All exterior mechanical equipment, whether on a roof, on the side of a
structure, or located on the ground, shall be screened from public view.
Exterior mechanical equipment to be screened includes, without limitation,
heating, ventilation, air conditioning, refrigeration equipment, plumbing
lines, ductwork, transformers, smoke exhaust fans, water meters, backflow
preventers, service entry section, and similar utility devices.
   (C)   Screening shall be architecturally integrated into the main structure
with regard to materials, color, shape, and size to appear as an integral part
of the building or structure.
   (D)   Equipment shall be screened on all sides, and screening materials
shall be opaque. The use of wood, expanded metal lath, and chain link for the
purpose of screening is prohibited.
   (E)   When screening with plants, evergreen types of vegetation shall be
planted and maintained. Plant material sizes and types shall be selected and
installed so that, at the time of building occupancy, such plants effectively
screen their respective equipment.
   (F)   Whenever feasible, roof-mounted equipment screening shall be
constructed as an encompassing monolithic unit or a series of architecturally
similar screening units on large roofs, rather than as several individual
screens (i.e., multiple equipment screens, or “hats,” surrounding individual
elements will not be permitted). The height of the screening element shall
equal or exceed the height of the structure's tallest piece of installed
equipment.
   (G)   Ground-mounted equipment that faces a street shall be screened to a
height of 12 inches above the equipment, unless such screening conflicts with
utility access, in which case reasonable accommodation shall be allowed.
Acceptable screening devices consist of decorative walls and/or berms (3:
1 maximum slope) with supplemental plant materials, including trees, shrubs,
and groundcovers. For screen walls that are three feet high or lower,
vegetative materials may be substituted for 50 percent of the screening device.
This requirement does not apply to incidental equipment in the interior of a
lot that is not visible from a public street.
   (H)   Wall-mounted equipment, including, without limitation, electrical
meters, electrical distribution cabinets, service entry sections, and valves
and cabinets that face a public street and are not recessed and/or separated
from the street by intervening building(s) or walls or gates, shall be
screened. Screening devices shall incorporate elements of the building design
(e.g. shape, color, texture and material). For screen walls that are three feet
in height or lower, vegetative materials may be substituted for 50 percent of
the screening device. This requirement does not apply to fire-related elements.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
ARTICLE V: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND TINY HOUSES
§ 17.138.500 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish objective development standards
for manufactured housing and tiny houses. These standards are intended to
implement the General Plan and ensure land use compatibility for these housing
types, consistent with federal and State law.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.510 MANUFACTURED HOUSING.
   Manufactured homes may be located, developed, and operated in compliance
with the following standards. Manufactured homes are permitted by right
wherever single family dwelling are allowed under the provisions of
Chapters 17.076,
17.080,
17.084,
17.116, and
17.124, provided that all of the development standards that apply to a single
family dwelling are met.
   (A)   A manufactured home shall be certified under the standards set forth
in the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1976, as amended, at the time of any application for placement of such
manufactured home.
   (B)   The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation in
accordance with the standards set forth in the town’s construction codes.
   (C)   No more than ten years may elapse between the date of the manufacture
of the manufactured home and the date of the application for issuance of a
permit to install a home on a lot in the town.
   (D)   Each manufactured home shall be provided permanent hookups for
electricity, gas, water, and sewer connections in the same manner applicable to
permanent buildings. Gas shutoff valves, meters, and regulators shall not be
located beneath the manufactured home, in compliance with the requirements of
the town's construction codes for comparable residential structures.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.520 TINY HOUSES.
   Tiny houses may be located, developed, and operated in compliance with the
following standards. Manufactured homes and tiny houses are permitted by right
wherever single family dwelling are allowed under the provisions of
Chapters 17.076,
17.080,
17.084,
17.116, and
17.124, provided that all of the development standards that apply to a single
family dwelling are met.
   (A)   Maximum floor area: 400 square feet, excluding loft area.
   (B)   Minimum ceiling height: six ft. eight inches (not required for lofts).
   (C)   Minimum dimensions for lofts (defined as a floor level located more
than 30 inches above the main floor used as a living or sleeping space): five
feet in any horizontal dimension and 35 square feet in floor area. Portions of
a loft with a sloped ceiling measuring less than three feet above the finished
floor of the loft shall not be considered as contributing to the minimum floor
area for a loft. No loft shall exceed 150 square feet in floor area.
   (D)   Construction standards. A tiny house shall comply with the standards
for construction, loft access and egress, energy conservation, landings and
landing platforms, handrails, stairway guards, ladders, and emergency escape
and rescue opening platforms established in Appendix Q (Tiny Houses) of the
International Residential Code as amended, which are hereby incorporated by
reference.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
ARTICLE VI: VEGETATION MANAGEMENT  IN THE WILDLAND URBAN FIRE HAZARD INTERFACE
ZONE
§ 17.138.600 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to supplement amendments of the International
Wildland Urban Interface Code (IWUIC), as adopted by the town in §
8.04.100, to ensure adequate fire protection for housing development.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.610 VEGETATION MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIRED.
   A vegetation management plan (VMP) meeting the required of § 406 of the
IWUIC, as adopted by the town, shall be submitted to the Planning Director for
review and approval as part of any application for housing development in the
Wildland Urban Interface Zone. In addition to the requirements of § 406, the
VMP shall include:
   (A)   A copy of the site plan with all existing and proposed planting
identified, including whether the plants are fire-resistant or fire-prone
according to classifications available from FireSafe Marin.
   (B)   Methods and timetables for controlling, changing, or modifying plant
materials on the site to create defensible space, as required by § 603 of the
IWUIC and Cal. Gov't Code § 51182.1 and to reduce fire hazards as required by §
8.06.011.
      (1)   Trees are allowed within the defensible space, provided the
horizontal distance between crowns of adjacent trees and crowns of trees and
structures, overhead electrical facilities or unmodified fuel is not less than
ten feet. Deadwood and litter shall be regularly removed from trees.
      (2)   Where ornamental vegetative fuels or cultivated ground cover, such
as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants are used as ground cover,
they are allowed to be within the designated defensible space, provided they do
not form a means of transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.138.620 GUIDELINES AND CHECKLISTS.
   The Planning Director shall maintain and make available to applicants on
request fire hazard reduction guidelines and checklists for defensible space
zones around residences based on information available from FireSafe Marin,
Ross Valley Fire Department, and other public agencies.
(Ord. 885, passed 11-1-2023)
CHAPTER 17.140: AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Section
   
17.140.010   Purpose and intent
   
17.140.020   Definitions
   
17.140.030   Affordable housing requirements
   
17.140.040   Exemptions
   
17.140.050   Duration of affordability covenants
   
17.140.060   Alternative means
   
17.140.070   Development standards of inclusionary units
   
17.140.080   Inclusionary housing plan
   
17.140.090   Requirements for for-sale inclusionary units
   
17.140.100   Occupancy of rental units
   
17.140.110   Affordable housing in-lieu fees
   
17.140.120   Commercial/nonresidential linkage fees
   
17.140.130   Affordable Housing Fund
   
17.140.140   Waiver of affordable housing requirements or commercial/
nonresidential linkage fees
   
17.140.150   Enforcement
   
17.140.160   Administration
§ 17.140.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that new residential and
nonresidential development projects contribute to the availability and
attainment of decent, affordable housing to a broad range of households with
varying income levels throughout the Town of Fairfax.
   (B)   These requirements implement the town's housing element by assisting
in meeting the town's regional housing needs allocations, providing funding to
facilitate affordable housing development, and affirmatively furthering fair
housing by ensuring that affordable housing is constructed in all parts of the
town.
   (C)   The Town Council desires to provide and maintain affordable housing
opportunities through an affordable housing in-lieu fee, the funds of which
will be deposited into the Affordable Housing Fund to be used in the
development of affordable housing and related programs in the town. The
commercial/nonresidential linkage fee requirements will assist in alleviating
the impacts of the demand for new affordable housing created by new
nonresidential developments.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.020 DEFINITIONS.
   See
Chapter 17.008 (Definitions) for terms related to this chapter.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.030 AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS.
   Residential development projects that include three or more dwelling units
shall include the construction of inclusionary units in accordance with this
chapter, unless an alternative means of compliance is permitted in accordance
with this chapter.
   (A)   Inclusionary requirements for for-sale dwelling units. Residential
development projects that include for-sale dwelling units shall provide
inclusionary units through one of the following means:
      (1)   For-sale residential development projects shall include deed
restricted, for-sale moderate-income units equal to 20 percent of the total
number of dwelling units in the project. The developer may, at its discretion,
provide very low-income units or low-income units instead of moderate-income
units.
      (2)   As an alternative to developing for-sale inclusionary units within
the residential development project as set forth above, for-sale residential
development projects may satisfy the requirements of this chapter by developing
rental low-income units included within the residential development equal to 20
percent of the total number of for-sale and rental units included in the
residential development. The developer may create a separate legal parcel
within the residential development project upon which the rental low-income
units may be located. The developer may, at its discretion, provide very low-
income units instead of low-income units.
   (B)   Inclusionary requirements for rental units. Residential development
projects that are comprised of rental units shall provide low-income
inclusionary units included within the project equal to 15 percent of the total
number of rental units in the residential development. The developer may, at
its discretion, provide rental very low-income units instead of low-income
units.
   (C)   Residential development projects with a combination of for-sale and
rental dwelling units. When a project includes a combination of for-sale and
rental units, the number and income levels for inclusionary units required for
the project shall be calculated for each category of dwelling units (i.e., for-
sale and rental) individually, and combined to comprise the residential
development project's total inclusionary housing requirement pursuant to this
chapter.
   (D)   Density bonus units. For purposes of calculating the number of
inclusionary units required, any additional units authorized as density bonus
units will not be counted in determining the required number of inclusionary
units.
   (E)   Fractional units. If in computing the total number of inclusionary
units required in a residential development project, there is a fractional unit
required, the applicant shall pay a housing in-lieu fee in the amount
determined in accordance with §
17.140.120 of this chapter, equal to the amount calculated for that fractional
unit on a per dwelling unit basis, unless the applicant elects to round up to
the nearest whole number of units and provide that unit.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
  § 17.140.040 EXEMPTIONS.
     The requirements of this chapter do not apply to:
   (A)   The reconstruction of any structures that have been destroyed by fire,
flood, earthquake or other act of nature provided that the reconstruction of
the site does not increase the number of residential units by three or more.
   (B)   Residential building additions, repairs or remodels; provided that
such work does not increase the number of existing units by three or more.
   (C)   Residential development projects that have been deemed complete by the
town in accordance with Government Code § 65589.5 or § 65943 as of the
effective date of this chapter.
   (D)   Any accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory dwelling unit approved
by the town.
   (E)   Any residential development project exempted by state law as may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.050 DURATION OF AFFORDABILITY COVENANTS.  
   (A)   For-sale inclusionary units produced pursuant to this chapter shall be
legally restricted to sale to and occupancy by households of the income levels
for which the units were designated for a single cumulative term of 55 years.
During that term, the for-sale inclusionary units may only be sold and resold
to moderate or low-income households at an affordable sales price for moderate
income households.
   (B)   Rental units produced pursuant to this chapter shall be legally
restricted to rental to and occupancy by households in the income level for
which the inclusionary units are developed for a term of not less than 55
years. At the end of the 55-year term, the restrictions on rental of the
inclusionary units may only be removed in the event that the property upon
which the rental inclusionary unit or units are located is rezoned and used for
a non-residential use.
   (C)   To ensure compliance with the durational requirement, affordable
housing agreements, and resale restriction agreements for for-sale inclusionary
units, shall be recorded in the chain of title for every inclusionary unit.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.060 ALTERNATIVE MEANS.
   The following are alternative means of fulfilling inclusionary housing
obligations:
   (A)   Payment of housing in-lieu fee. As an alternative to constructing
inclusionary units as required by this chapter, all or a portion of the
inclusionary housing requirement may be fulfilled through the payment of a
housing in-lieu fee pursuant to an in-lieu fee schedule adopted by the town
pursuant to this chapter, subject to the following:
      (1)   For-sale and rental units may pay a housing in-lieu fee.
      (2)   The housing in-lieu fee shall be paid at the time that the first
building permit is obtained for the residential development.
      (3)   All in-lieu fees collected under this chapter shall be deposited in
the Inclusionary Housing Fund established pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Off-site development of affordable units. As an alternative to
constructing inclusionary units on site, all or a portion of the inclusionary
housing requirement may be fulfilled through the offsite construction of the
unit pursuant to this chapter, subject to the following:
      (1)   Off-site development of the required affordable units is permitted
provided the off-site units are located within one-half mile of the market-rate
development that is the subject of the inclusionary housing requirement.
      (2)   The off-site units shall not create an over-concentration of deed-
restricted affordable dwelling units in any one neighborhood. For purposes of
this chapter, “over concentration” is defined as more than 50 deed restricted
very low or low-income dwelling units within one-quarter mile of the site of
the proposed inclusionary units, or more than 200 of such units within one-half
mile of the site of the proposed inclusionary units.
   (C)   Land dedication. As an alternative to constructing inclusionary units
as required by this chapter, all or a portion of the inclusionary housing
requirement may be fulfilled through the dedication of land to the town or a
non-profit at no cost, subject to the following:
      (1)   The land dedicated shall be zoned to allow residential use;
      (2)   The land shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required
units;
      (3)   The applicant shall provide evidence satisfactory to the town that
the property does not contain any hazardous materials at the time of
conveyance; shall disclose whether any hazardous materials were previously
found on the property; and if hazardous materials were previously remediated
from the property, the applicant shall provide evidence satisfactory to the
town that such hazardous materials were remediated in accordance with all
applicable laws and regulations;
      (4)   The land shall be fully improved with access infrastructure,
adjacent utilities, and grading; and
      (5)   A non-profit shall enter into an agreement with the town to
construct the units within an agreed upon time period and the units constructed
shall be subject to the affordability covenant as set forth in §
17.140.050.
   (D)   The alternative means of compliance set forth herein are intended to
implement the town's authority to promote the development of affordable
housing, in accordance with Cal. Gov’t Code § 65850(g), and shall not be
considered or construed as an ad hoc exaction, a mandated fee required to
develop a specific property, or a fee imposed to offset the development impacts
of a specific project.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
 § 17.140.070 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS OF INCLUSIONARY UNITS.
   Unless otherwise specified by the Town Council, inclusionary units shall be
developed in a manner consistent with the following requirements:
   (A)   For-sale and rental inclusionary units.
      (1)   Inclusionary units shall be reasonably dispersed throughout a
residential development and not clustered in a specific portion of the
development, and the location of the inclusionary units within a residential
development shall be designated before issuance of the first building permit
for the residential development.
      (2)   Inclusionary units shall be built concurrently with the market rate
units in the residential development. The inclusionary units may be constructed
in phases if the market rate units are constructed in phases, provided that the
percentage of inclusionary units developed in each phase shall be equivalent to
or greater than the total percentage of inclusionary units to be developed as
part of the residential development until such time that all the inclusionary
units have been built.
      (3)   Inclusionary units shall be comparable in infrastructure (including
sewer, water and other utilities), construction quality and exterior design to
the market-rate units.
      (4)   The bedroom mix for the inclusionary units shall be proportional to
the bedroom mix of the market rate units, but the inclusionary units may be
smaller in square footage than the market rate units.
      (5)   The interior finishes and features for the inclusionary units shall
be comparable to the base level interior finishes for the market-rate units,
and the appliance packages in the inclusionary units shall be the same as the
appliance packages provided in the base level market rate units.
      (6)   Residents and tenants of Inclusionary Units located within the
Residential Development shall be provided the same rights and access to common
amenities in the development project as residents and tenants occupying market-
rate units.
   (B)   Off-site inclusionary units.
      (1)   The off-site inclusionary units shall be constructed concurrently
with the market rate units in the residential development that triggered the
requirements for the inclusionary units. if the market rate units are
constructed in phases, then the off-site inclusionary units shall be
constructed prior to or concurrently with the first phase of the market rate
residential development. Construction of the second phase of the market rate
units shall not commence until the required off-site inclusionary units are
completed.
      (2)   Off-site inclusionary units shall be comparable in infrastructure
(including sewer, water and other utilities), construction quality and exterior
design to the market-rate units.
      (3)   The bedroom mix for the off-site inclusionary units shall be
proportional to the bedroom mix of the market rate units, but the off-site
inclusionary units may be smaller in square footage than the market rate units.
      (4)   The interior finishes and features for the off-site inclusionary
units shall be comparable to the base level interior finishes for the market-
rate units, and the appliance packages in the off-site inclusionary units shall
be the same as the appliance packages provided in the base level market rate
units.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.080 INCLUSIONARY HOUSING PLAN.
   (A)   No residential development subject to this chapter shall be approved
or deemed approved without approval of an inclusionary housing plan as provided
herein.
   (B)   Submittal of inclusionary housing plan. The applicant for a
residential project subject to this chapter shall submit an inclusionary
housing plan in conjunction with its application for discretionary approvals
required of the town for the residential development, or if no discretionary
approvals are required, in conjunction with the application for the first
ministerial permit or approval required for the residential development. The
inclusionary housing plan shall be in a form as required by the town and shall
include the following information as applicable based on the applicant's method
of compliance with this chapter:
      (1)   Whether the residential development is for-sale or rental;
      (2)   How the inclusionary housing requirement will be satisfied pursuant
to this chapter;
      (3)   The number, unit type, tenure, number of bedrooms, approximate
location, size and design, construction and completion schedule of all
inclusionary units;
      (4)   For off-site development of inclusionary units, such information as
is required to demonstrate compliance with §
17.140.070;
      (5)   Phasing of inclusionary units in relation to market rate units;
      (6)   The amount of in-lieu fees to be paid by applicant, if applicable.
      (7)   Provide a plan for collecting sufficient reserves for the ongoing
repair and maintenance of below-market rate rental units which shall not
compromise the affordability of the below-market rate rental units.
      (8)   Any other information reasonably requested by the Town Manager to
assist with evaluation of the plan under the requirements of this chapter.
      (9)   Acknowledgement that an instrument as specified by the town
restricting the inclusionary unit(s) as affordable shall be recorded against
every inclusionary unit for required affordability for 55 years and that a
recordable affordable housing agreement shall be entered into by the applicant
and any other necessary party, and/or that all required in-lieu fees shall be
paid at the time set forth in this chapter.
   (C)   Approval of inclusionary housing plan.
      (1)   In the event that the residential development project requires
discretionary approvals in order to be developed, the inclusionary housing plan
shall be considered with the application for such inclusionary approvals by the
entity responsible for reviewing such discretionary approvals and may be
appealed in accordance with the appeals procedures established for such
approvals.
      (2)   In the event that the residential development project does not
require discretionary approvals in order to be developed, the inclusionary
housing plan shall be considered by the Town Manager and shall be approved
prior to the issuance of any ministerial permits required for the project. The
Town Manager's decision is final unless a written appeal is filed with the Town
Clerk's office within ten days from the date of issuance of the Town Manager's
decision under this title. In the event of an appeal, the Town Council's
decision shall be final.
       (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event the applicant desires
to comply with this chapter by means of a method that specifically requires
Town Council approval pursuant to this title, the inclusionary housing plan
shall be considered by the Town Council either prior to or concurrently with
consideration by the required decision-making body for the approvals required
for the residential development project.
   (D)   The forms of the affordable housing agreement and any related
declarations, resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and other documents
authorized by this chapter shall be in a general form as prescribed by the town
and shall be approved by the Town Manager and approved as to form by the Town
Attorney prior to being executed with respect to any residential development
project subject to this chapter.
   (E)   Recording of affordable housing agreements. 
      (1)   An affordable housing agreement in a form approved by the town
shall be recorded against inclusionary units or the residential development
project in its entirety, as deemed appropriate by the Town Manager in
consultation with the Town Attorney, prior to the issuance of any building
permit for the residential development. the affordable housing agreement shall
ensure that the applicant develops the required inclusionary housing units and
complies with all other terms of the approved inclusionary housing plan and
this chapter.
      (2)   Resale restrictions, deeds of trust, and/or other documents as
deemed necessary or appropriate by the Town Manager shall be recorded against
for-sale inclusionary units for required affordability for 55 years to ensure
the continued affordability of the for-sale inclusionary units in compliance
with this chapter.
   (F)   Building permits: The Town shall not issue a building permit for a
residential development project subject to the requirements of this chapter
without an affordable housing agreement executed by the owner, the applicant
(if not the owner) and the Town Manager, and approved as to form by the Town
Attorney, and recorded against the property, or payment of in-lieu fees in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.090 REQUIREMENTS FOR FOR-SALE INCLUSIONARY UNITS.
   (A)   Initial sales price and resale. The initial sales price and resale
price of the for sale inclusionary unit will be at an affordable sales price
that will ensure that the purchaser of the inclusionary unit will pay an
affordable housing cost for the unit. The town shall, from time to time, set a
benchmark mortgage interest rate and an assumed home buyer down payment amount
to be used to calculate the affordable sales price. The Town Manager may
establish and adjust such benchmark mortgage interest rates, establish an
assumed home buyer down payment amount, along with a range of allowable home
buyer down payments pursuant to the delegated authority set forth in §
17.140.160. Such standards shall be in writing and available to the public upon
request.
   (B)   Transfer. A resale restriction agreement will be entered into on each
change of ownership of for-sale inclusionary units, to maintain the household
income restriction on the inclusionary unit prior to the expiration of the
affordability period established pursuant to § 17.140.050.
   (C)   Owner occupancy required. All for-sale inclusionary units are subject
to the following regulations:
      (1)   Principal residence. The purchaser of the inclusionary unit shall
use and occupy the inclusionary unit as purchaser's principal place of
residence.
      (2)   No rental. Owner is expressly prohibited from leasing or renting
the inclusionary unit unless the town has given its prior written consent to
such lease or rental on the basis of a demonstrated hardship by the owner.
      (3)   Annual report. The town from time to time may require certification
of continuing occupancy of the inclusionary unit by owner, which shall be
verified by owner to the reasonable satisfaction of the town by means of a
written report by owner to the town setting forth the income and family size of
the occupants of the inclusionary unit. Such report shall be submitted to the
town annually. Owner shall not be deemed to be in default of the affordable
agreement and this program for any failure to deliver such annual report until
30 days after receipt by owner of written notice from the town requesting such
report. The town shall have the option of establishing the type of form to be
used for the report.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.100 OCCUPANCY OF RENTAL UNITS.
   (A)   Occupancy of rental units. Unless determined otherwise by the Town
Council, all rental inclusionary units required by this chapter shall be only
rented to households in the appropriate income category for the inclusionary
units.
   (B)   Use and occupancy of rental inclusionary units. The applicant shall
designate and offer rental inclusionary units for rent to households in the
appropriate income category, based on the approved inclusionary housing plan.
   (C)   Establishment of rental rates. The maximum allowable rent of
inclusionary units will be the affordable rent as defined herein, based on the
applicable income levels for the inclusionary units, and shall be confirmed by
the town on an annual basis.
   (D)   Annual report. The owner shall submit an annual report summarizing the
occupancy of each rental inclusionary unit for the year. The town may require
additional information if deemed necessary. The owner shall obtain and review
documents that demonstrate the prospective renter's total income, such as
income tax returns or W-2s for the previous calendar year, and submit such
information on a form approved by the town.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.110 AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN-LIEU FEES.  
   (A)   Affordable housing in-lieu fees are hereby established for residential
development projects and mixed use projects with a residential component. The
amount of said fees shall be established by Town Council Resolution, as may be
amended from time to time. The amount of fees shall not exceed the cost of
mitigating the impact residential development projects on the need for
affordable housing in the Town of Fairfax.
   (B)   All such fees shall be deposited in the affordable housing fund
described in §
17.140.130 herein.
   (C)   Payment of fees shall be due prior to the issuance of the first
building permit for the project. Fees shall be calculated based on the fee
schedule in effect at the time the building permit is issued, unless state law
specifies that the town shall use a fee schedule in effect at an earlier date.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.120 COMMERCIAL/NONRESIDENTIAL LINKAGE FEES.  
   (A)   Affordable Housing commercial/ nonresidential linkage fees (fees) are
hereby established for commercial/nonresidential development projects. The
amount of said fees shall be established by Town Council Resolution, as may be
amended from time to time. The amount of fees shall not exceed the cost of
mitigating the impact of commercial/nonresidential development projects on the
need for affordable housing in the Town of Fairfax.
   (B)   All such fees shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Fund
described in §
17.140.110 herein.
   (C)   Payment of fees shall be due prior to the issuance of the first
building permit for the project. Fees shall be calculated based on the fee
schedule in effect at the time the building permit is issued, unless state law
specifies that the town shall use a fee schedule in effect at an earlier date.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following commercial development projects are exempt
from the provisions of this section:
      (1)   Projects adding less than 5,000 square feet of net new square
footage.
      (2)   Town buildings and facilities and those public facilities entitled
to an exemption under law.
      (3)   Projects that have established a vested right not to be subject to
this section.
      (4)   The Town Council waives the commercial/nonresidential linkage fee
pursuant to §
17.140.130.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.130 AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUND. 
   An Affordable Housing Fund is hereby established to receive all housing
impact and other applicable fees and funds.
   (A)   All applicable affordable housing in-lieu fees and nonresidential/
commercial linkage fees collected shall be deposited into the Affordable
Housing Fund. The monies deposited in the Affordable Housing Fund, with any
interest earned, shall be used solely to increase and improve the supply of
housing affordable to moderate, low, and very low-income households, consistent
with the goals and policies contained in the town's housing element and
affordable housing requirements and policies.
   (B)   The Affordable Housing Fund shall be administered by the Planning
Director and the Finance Director who may develop procedures to implement said
fund consistent with the requirements of this chapter and subject to any
adopted budget of the town and generally acceptable accounting and procurement
processes.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
 § 17.140.140 WAIVER OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIREMENTS OR COMMERCIAL/
NONRESIDENTIAL LINKAGE FEES.
   (A)   Request for waivers of affordable housing requirements or commercial/
nonresidential linkage fees shall be made concurrent with application
submittal. As part of an application for the first approval of a residential or
commercial development, a builder may request that the requirements of this
chapter be reduced, adjusted, or waived based upon a showing that applying the
requirements of this chapter would result in an unconstitutional taking of
property or would result in any other unconstitutional result. The applicant
shall set forth in detail the factual and legal basis for the claim, including
all supporting technical documentation, and shall bear the burden of presenting
the requisite evidence to demonstrate the alleged unconstitutional result.
   (B)   The Town Council, based upon legal advice provided by or at the behest
of the Town Attorney, may approve a reduction, adjustment, or waiver of the
affordable housing requirement or commercial/nonresidential linkage fee if the
Town Council determines that applying the requirements of this chapter would
effectuate an unconstitutional taking of property or otherwise have an
unconstitutional application to the property. The reduction, adjustment, or
waiver may be approved only to the extent necessary to avoid an
unconstitutional result after adoption of written findings, based on legal
analysis and the evidence. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted,
any change in the residential development or commercial and/or nonresidential
project shall invalidate the reduction, adjustment, or waiver, and a new
application shall be required for a reduction, adjustment, or waiver.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
 § 17.140.150 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Town Attorney is authorized to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and all affordable housing agreements, resale restrictions, deed of
trust, and other requirements placed on inclusionary units by civil action and
any other proceeding or method permitted by law. The Town Attorney may, at its
discretion, take such enforcement action as is authorized under this code, as
well as any other action authorized by law or by any regulatory document,
restriction, or agreement executed under this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful, a public nuisance, and a misdemeanor for any
person/entity to sell or rent an affordable unit at a price or rent exceeding
the maximum allowed under this chapter and implementing regulations, or to a
household not qualified hereunder. Such person/entity shall be subject to a
fine of $500 per month plus restitution of the amount charged that exceeded the
maximum allowed under this chapter from the date of original noncompliance
until the affordable unit is in compliance with this chapter and implementing
regulations. Fine monies collected that exceed the cost of enforcement shall be
deposited into the Affordable Housing Fund.
   (C)   The remedies provided herein are nonexclusive and cumulative and shall
not preclude the town from any other remedy or relief to which it is entitled
under law or equity.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
§ 17.140.160 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby given authority to initiate any
administrative procedures or implementation guidelines as may be necessary to
implement and carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter. Further, the
Town Manager may, in the implementation of this program, develop application
forms and submittal requirements reasonably related to the implementation of
this chapter.
   (B)   Forms or materials needed for implementation of this chapter may be
introduced and utilized by the town as the Town Manager deems may be necessary
or desirable. All form changes or administrative procedures initiated by the
Town Manager, and all administrative determinations or exercises of delegated
authority by the Town Manager, shall be carried out in a manner consistent
with, and reasonably related to, the purposes and intent of this chapter, the
housing element and all other elements of the town's general plan, and the
furtherance of state and local housing policies and goals, while respecting at
all times the rights of property owners and applicants.
   (C)   The Town Council may adopt and may amend from time to time by
resolution, implementing affordable housing requirements and program
regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the housing
element for the purpose of carrying out the administration of this chapter. a
copy of the affordable housing requirements and program regulations adopted by
the Town Council shall be on file with the Town Clerk's office and made
available for public examination and posted on the town's website. The
affordable housing requirements and program regulations shall set forth
affordable housing requirements, affordable housing in-lieu fee requirements,
and commercial/nonresidential linkage fee requirements. The Planning Director
or designee is responsible for administering this chapter. As part of this
administration, the Director may perform the following tasks including, but not
limited to: interpret the provisions of this chapter and the affordable housing
requirements and program regulation and establish operational and procedural
requirements such as tenant eligibility, application processes, waitlist
management, and income verification requirements.
(Ord. 884, passed 11-1-2023)
TITLE 18: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
   Chapter
      
18.04.   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
CHAPTER 18.04: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Section
   
18.04.010   Authority
   
18.04.020   Purpose
   
18.04.030   General plan consistency
   
18.04.040   Discretion of Town Council
   
18.04.050   Qualification as applicant
   
18.04.060   Application
   
18.04.070   Other entitlements required
   
18.04.080   Planning Commission hearing
   
18.04.090   Town Council hearing
   
18.04.100   Amendment or cancellation
   
18.04.110   Recordation of development agreement
   
18.04.120   Periodic review of development agreement
§ 18.04.010 AUTHORITY.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted under the authority of
Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 65864 through 65869.5.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.010) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.020 PURPOSE.
   Development agreements approved pursuant to this title are to insure to the
applicant for a development project that, upon approval of the project, the
applicant may proceed in accordance with existing policies, rules and
regulations and conditions that were applicable at the time of project
approval. Development agreements will also insure that all conditions of
approval, including the construction of off site improvements made necessary by
the project, will proceed in an orderly and economical fashion to the benefit
of the town.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.020) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.030 GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY.
   All development agreements shall be consistent with the general plan and
zoning regulations of the Town of Fairfax.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.030) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.040 DISCRETION OF TOWN COUNCIL.
   The Town Council reserves the sole right and discretion to determine whether
a development agreement is appropriate and in the best interests of the town
for a specific development project.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.040) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.050 QUALIFICATION AS APPLICANT.
   Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a
development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person, including any
authorized agent, who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property
which is the subject of the proposed development agreement, provided that in
all instances the owner of the fee title of the real property shall join in the
application. The town may require an applicant to submit proof of the
applicant’s interest in the real property and of the authority of any agent to
act for the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.050) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.060 APPLICATION.
   (A)   (1)   Any person wishing to enter into a development agreement must
file an application for approval of a development agreement with the Planning
Director.
      (2)   The form of the application shall be as established by the Planning
Director.
   (B)   An application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable filing fee in
an amount fixed from time to time by resolution of the Town Council.
   (C)   Each application shall be accompanied by a proposed development
agreement which, at a minimum, shall specify the duration of the agreement, the
permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum
height and size of proposed buildings, provisions for reservation or dedication
of land for public purposes, time for commencement of construction of the
proposed project and of any phases thereof, if the project is to be developed
in phases.
   (D)   Prior to the filing thereof, the application shall be presented to the
Planning Director for review in order that he or she may determine whether the
nature of the proposed project requires that the application or the proposed
development agreement contain additional information and materials. When the
Planning Director finds that the application is complete, he or she shall
accept it for filing.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.060) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.070 OTHER ENTITLEMENTS REQUIRED.
   Where the proposed project requires the issuance of a use permit, a
variance, rezoning or any other discretionary permit or entitlement, the
applicant shall either apply for and obtain such discretionary permits or
entitlements prior to, or concurrently with, approval of the development
agreement, or approval of the development agreement shall be conditioned upon
issuance of the discretionary permits and entitlements.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.070) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.080 PLANNING COMMISSION HEARING.
   (A)   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
development agreement.
   (B)   Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the form and manner
required by §
17.008.020 of this code. After the public hearing, which may be held in
conjunction with the hearings on any other required discretionary permits or
entitlements, the Planning Commission shall make its recommendation, in
writing, to the Town Council.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall recommend approval of the development
agreement only if the Planning Commission finds that the proposed development
agreement:
      (1)   Is consistent with the objectives, policies, general land uses and
programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan;
      (2)   Is compatible with the uses authorized in, and the regulations
prescribed for, the zoning district in which the real property is located;
      (3)   Will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general
welfare; and
      (4)   Will provide sufficient benefit to the town to justify entering
into the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.080) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.090 TOWN COUNCIL HEARING.
   (A)   The Town Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed
development agreement. Notice of the public hearing shall be given for the time
and in the manner provided by §
17.008.020 of this code. The public hearing may be held concurrently with the
public hearings on any other required discretionary permits or entitlements.
The Town Council shall not approve the development agreement unless it makes
the findings contained in §
18.04.080 to support its action. If the Town Council approves the development
agreement it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance.
   (B)   The town may enter into the development agreement after the effective
date of the ordinance approving the same.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.090) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.100 AMENDMENT OR CANCELLATION.
   A development agreement may be amended or canceled, in whole or in part, by
mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest.
Any proposal to cancel or modify a development agreement shall be heard and
determined in accordance with the same procedures specified herein for approval
of a development agreement.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.100) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.110 RECORDATION OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   No later than ten days after the town enters into a development agreement,
the Town Clerk shall record with the Marin County Recorder a copy of the
agreement which shall describe the land subject thereto. If the parties to the
agreement amend or cancel the agreement, or if the town terminates or modifies
the agreement for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with its
terms, the Town Clerk shall record notice of the action with the Marin County
Recorder.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.110) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
§ 18.04.120 PERIODIC REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   The Planning Director shall review a development agreement at least once
every 12 months from the date the agreement is executed. Upon each such review,
the applicant shall be required to demonstrate good faith compliance with the
terms of the agreement. The Planning Director shall render a report of his or
her review to the Town Council. The Town Council shall consider the report
after giving to the applicant ten days written notice. If, as a result of the
review, the Town Council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial
evidence, that the applicant or successor in interest has not complied in good
faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the Town Council may
terminate or modify the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 18.02.120) (Ord. 629, passed - -1994)
TITLE 19: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
   Chapter
      
19.04.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
CHAPTER 19.04: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
   
19.04.010      Purpose
   
19.04.020      Definitions
   
19.04.030      Applicability
   
19.04.040      Wireless telecommunications facility permit required
   
19.04.050      Application for permit
   
19.04.060      Location and configuration preferences
   
19.04.070      Design and development standards for all facilities
   
19.04.080      Additional design and development standards for facilities
outside the public right-of-way
   
19.04.090      Additional design and development standards for facilities in
the public right-of-way
   
19.04.100      Conditions of approval for all facilities
   
19.04.110      Additional conditions of approval for facilities in the public
right-of-way
   
19.04.120      Findings
   
19.04.130      Exceptions
   
19.04.140      Eligible facilities requests
   
19.04.150      Wireless telecommunications collocation facilities covered under
Cal. Government Code § 65850.6
   
19.04.160      Business license
   
19.04.170      Emergency deployment
   
19.04.180      Operation and maintenance standards
   
19.04.190      No dangerous conditions or obstructions allowed
   
19.04.200      Permit expiration
   
19.04.210      Cessation of use or abandonment
   
19.04.220      Removal and restoration, permit expiration, revocation or
abandonment
   
19.04.230      Authorization for departmental forms, rules, and other
regulations
   
19.04.240      Appeals
   
19.04.250      Effect on other ordinances
§ 19.04.010 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and
comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development,
siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless
telecommunications facilities in the Town of Fairfax to avoid visual impacts to
the downtown, scenic corridors, residential and visually distinctive areas; to
avoid impact to listed and candidate endangered species including habitats; and
to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of standards for the orderly
development of telecommunications facilities and installation of antennas.
These regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to
assess and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while
reducing the impacts associated with wireless telecommunications Facilities.
This chapter provides standards necessary to: (1) preserve and promote
harmonious land uses and the public right-of-way in the town; (2) promote and
protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources, and the
aesthetic quality of the town consistent with the goals, objectives, and
policies of the General Plan; (3) provide for the orderly, managed, and
efficient development of wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance
with the state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and (4) encourage new
technology in the provision of wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   This chapter is not intended to, nor shall it be interpreted or
applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service
provider's ability to provide personal wireless services; (2) prohibit or
effectively prohibit any entity's ability to provide any interstate or
intrastate telecommunications service, subject to any competitively neutral and
nondiscriminatory rules or regulation for rights-of-way management; (3)
unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally-equivalent services;
(4) deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify personal
wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio
frequency emissions to the extent that such wireless facilities comply with the
FCC's regulations concerning such emissions; or (5) prohibit any collocation or
modification that the town may not deny under federal or state law.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.020 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following defined terms shall have the
meaning set forth in this section, unless otherwise defined or the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY EQUIPMENT. Any equipment associated with the installation of a
wireless telecommunications facility, including, but not limited to, cabling,
generators, air conditioning units, electrical panels, equipment shelters,
equipment cabinets, equipment buildings, pedestals, meters, vaults, splice
boxes, and surface location markers.
   ANTENNA. That part of a wireless telecommunications facility designed to
radiate or receive radio frequency signals or electromagnetic waves for the
provision of services, including, but not limited to, cellular, paging,
personal communications services (PCS) and microwave communications. Such
devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as panel
antenna, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes; omnidirectional antennas;
wireless access points (Wi-Fi); and strand-mounted wireless access points. This
definition does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur
radio use, or satellite dishes designed for residential or household purposes.
   BASE STATION. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(1), as
may be amended, which currently defines that term as a structure or equipment
at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term
does not encompass a tower as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(9) or any
equipment associated with a tower. The term includes, but is not limited to,
equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private,
broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services
and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul. The term includes, but
is not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small-
cell networks). The term includes any structure other than a tower that, at the
time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under
this chapter, supports or houses equipment described in 47 C.F.R. §1.6100(b)(1)
(i)-(ii) that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or
siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even
if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing
such support. The term does not include any structure that, at the time the
relevant application is filed with the state or local government under this
chapter, does not support or house equipment described in 47 C.F.R. §1.6100(b)
(1)(i)-(ii).
   BUILDING-MOUNTED. Mounted to the side or façade, but not the roof, of a
building or another structure such as a water tank, pump station, church
steeple, freestanding sign, or similar structure.
   COLLOCATION. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(2), as
may be amended, which currently defines that term as the mounting or
installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the
purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications
purposes.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. §
1.6100(b)(3), as may be amended, which currently defines that term as any
request for modification of an existing tower or base station that does not
substantially change the physical dimensions of such tower or base station,
involving: (i) collocation of new transmission equipment; (ii) removal of
transmission equipment; or (iii) replacement of transmission equipment.
   ELIGIBLE SUPPORT STRUCTURE. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. §
1.6100(b)(4), as may be amended, which currently defines that term as any tower
or base station as defined in this section; provided that it is existing at the
time the relevant application is filed with the state or local government under
this chapter.
   EXISTING. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(4), as may
be amended, which currently provides that a constructed tower or base station
is existing for purposes of the FCC's §6409(a) regulations if it has been
reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under
another state or local regulatory review process; provided that, a tower that
has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it
was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this
definition.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor
agency.
   LISTED SPECIES. Any species, endangered, threatened or rare species as
listed by the Department of Fish and Wildlife (Cal. Fish and Game Code §§2 050
et seq.), the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (Endangered Species Act,
16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 et seq.) or the National Marine Fisheries Service (re:
anadromous fish), or locally designated, such as heritage trees, and natural
communities, including wetland habitat or wildlife dispersal or migration
corridors.
   MODIFICATION. Any change to an existing wireless telecommunications facility
that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, modification,
alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation,
including, but not limited to, a change in size, shape, color, visual design,
or exterior material. MODIFICATION does not include repair, replacement, or
maintenance if those actions do not involve a change to the existing facility
involving any of the following: collocation, expansion, modification,
alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation.
   MONOPOLE. A wireless communication facility support structure which consists
of a self-supported monopolar structure, usually rounded, erected on the ground
to support antennas and connecting appurtenances.
   NON-IONIZING ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION. Electromagnetic radiation primarily
in the visible, infrared and radio frequency portions of the electromagnetic
spectrum).
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITIES. The same as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332
(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as facilities that
provide personal wireless services.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. The same as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(C)
(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access
services.
   POLE. A single shaft of wood, steel, concrete, or other material capable of
supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as
required by provisions of the Fairfax Municipal Code.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public street, public way, public
alley or public place, laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below
it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, under the jurisdiction
of the town.
   REVIEWING AUTHORITY. The person or body who has the authority to review and
either grant or deny a wireless telecommunications facility permit pursuant to
this chapter.
   RF. Radio frequency or electromagnetic waves.
   ROOF-MOUNTED. Mounted directly on the roof of any building or structure,
above the eave line of such building or structure.
   SECTION 6409(a). Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job
Creation Act of 2012, Pub. L. No. 112-96, 126 Stat. 156, codified as 47 U.S.C.
§ 1455(a), as such law may be amended from time to time.
   SECTION 6409(a) APPROVAL. The approval required by § 6409(a).
   SHARED-LOCATION. More than one wireless communications facility comprised of
multiple structures used to support antennas operated by one or more carriers
where the structures are located within proximity to each other.
   SITE. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)(6), as may be
amended, which provides that for towers other than towers in the public rights-
of-way, the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the
tower and any access or utility easements currently related to the site, and,
for other eligible support structures, further restricted to that area in
proximity to the structure and to other transmission equipment already deployed
on the ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100(b)
(7), as may be amended, which currently defines that term differently based on
the particular wireless facility type (tower or base station) and location (in
or outside the public right-of-way). For clarity, this definition organizes the
FCC's criteria and thresholds for a substantial change according to the
wireless facility type and location.
      (1)   For towers outside the public rights-of-way, a SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE
occurs when:
         (a)   The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall
height more than ten percent or the height of one additional antenna array not
to exceed 20 feet (whichever is greater); or
         (b)   The proposed collocation or modification increases the width
more than 20 feet from the edge of the wireless tower or the width of the
wireless tower at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater); or
         (c)   The proposed collocation or modification involves the
installation of more than the standard number of equipment cabinets for the
technology involved, not to exceed four; or
         (d)   The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation
outside the current boundaries of the leased or owned property surrounding the
wireless tower, including any access or utility easements currently related to
the site.
      (1)   For towers in the public rights-of-way and for all base stations, a
substantial change occurs when:
         (a)   The proposed collocation or modification increases the overall
height more than ten percent or ten feet (whichever is greater); or
         (b)   The proposed collocation or modification increases the width
more than six feet from the edge of the wireless tower or base station; or
         (c)   The proposed collocation or modification involves the
installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground when there are no
existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets; or
         (d)   The proposed collocation or modification involves the
installation of any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets that are ten percent
larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets;
or
         (e)   The proposed collocation or modification involves excavation
outside the area in proximity to the structure and other transmission equipment
already deployed on the ground.
      (3)   In addition, for all towers and base stations wherever located, a
substantial change occurs when:
         (a)   The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the
existing concealment elements of the support structure as determined by the
Zoning Administrator; or
         (b)   The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior
condition of approval, provided however that the collocation need not comply
with any prior condition of approval related to height, width, equipment
cabinets or excavation that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a
substantial change described in this section.
The thresholds for a substantial change outlined above are disjunctive. The
failure to meet any one or more of the applicable thresholds means that a
substantial change would occur. The thresholds for height increases are
cumulative limits. For sites with horizontally separated deployments, the
cumulative limit is measured from the originally-permitted support structure
without regard to any increases in size due to wireless equipment not included
in the original design. For sites with vertically separated deployments, the
cumulative limit is measured from the permitted site dimensions as they existed
on February 22, 2012—the date that Congress passed § 6409(a).
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER or TOWER. A freestanding mast, pole, guyed tower,
lattice tower, free standing tower or other structure designed and primarily
used to support wireless telecommunications facility antennas. For the purposes
of "Eligible Facilities Requests", the term TOWER means the same as defined by
the FCC in 47 C.F.R.  § 1.6100(b)(9), as may be amended, which currently
defines that as any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of
supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated
facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless
communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and
public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed
wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site.
   TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6100
(b)(8), as may be amended, which currently defines that term as equipment that
facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless
communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers,
antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.
The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services,
including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services,
as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as
microwave backhaul.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or tower owned by any utility company that is primarily
used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or
other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication
service transmitted over frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Any facility constructed, installed,
or operated for wireless service. WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
includes, but is not limited to, antennas or other types of equipment for the
transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunications towers or similar
structures supporting such equipment, related accessory equipment, equipment
buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. WIRELESS
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY does not mean any of the following:
      (1)    A ground-, building- or tower-mounted antenna facility operated by
a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur Radio
Service that qualifies as an amateur station as defined by the FCC, 47 C.F.R.
Part 97, of the Commission's Rules, or its successor regulation, provided that
the antenna does not exceed 30 feet above grade and is subject to the allowable
setbacks pursuant to Title 17.
      (2)   A single ground- or building-mounted receive-only radio or
television antenna facility, for the sole use of the owner or tenant occupying
a parcel on which the antenna is located, that is subject to the FCC Over-The-
Air-Reception Devices rule, 47 C.F.R. §1.4000, or any successor regulation,
including, but not limited to, TV antennas used to receive television broadcast
signals and wireless cable antennas. The antenna is not to exceed 30 feet above
grade and must be subject to the allowable setbacks pursuant to Title 17.
      (3)   A single ground-, pole- or building- mounted receive-only radio or
television satellite dish antenna, not to exceed 48 inches in diameter, for the
sole use of the owner or tenant occupying a parcel on which the antenna is
located; satellite dish antenna height not to exceed the height of the roof
ridge of the host structure; (All such applications shall be subject to
regulations pursuant to Title 17.)
      (4)   Portable radios and devices including, but not limited to, hand-
held, vehicular, or other portable receivers, transmitters or transceivers,
cellular phones, CB radios, emergency services radio, and other similar
portable devices as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   Wireless telecommunications facilities owned and operated by any
government agency.
      (6)   Wireless telecommunications facilities owned and operated by any
emergency medical care provider.
      (7)   Mobile services providing public information coverage of news
events of a temporary nature.
      (8)   Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from the
Fairfax Municipal Code by federal law or state law.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The town's Planning and Building Services Director or
his or her designee.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.030 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter applies to all wireless telecommunications facilities as
follows:
      (1)   All facilities for which applications were pending prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall be subject to and comply with all
provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   All facilities, notwithstanding the date approved, shall be subject
immediately to the provisions of this chapter governing the operation and
maintenance, cessation of use and abandonment, removal and restoration of
wireless telecommunications facilities and wireless telecommunications
collocation facilities and the prohibition of dangerous conditions or
obstructions by such facilities; provided, however, that in the event a
condition of approval conflicts with a provision of this chapter, the condition
of approval shall control unless and until the permit is amended or revoked.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Fairfax Municipal Code to the
contrary, provisions governing the installation of a public utility structure
or facility shall not apply to wireless telecommunications facilities. Title 19
shall govern all applications for wireless telecommunications facilities.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.040 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No wireless telecommunications facility shall be located or
modified within the town on any property, including the public right-of-way,
without compliance with this chapter.
      (2)   Excluding eligible facilities request applications, applications
for wireless facilities shall require a use permit subject to the requirements
of this chapter, to be acted upon by the Planning Commission pursuant to
Chapter
17.032, and other permits as set forth in the table below, in addition to any
other permit required pursuant to the Fairfax Municipal Code. Eligible
facilities request applications shall be processed according to the
requirements of §
19.04.140.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a conditional
use permit shall be required for a facility when an exception is requested.
Subject to any applicable limitations in federal or state law, nothing in this
chapter is intended to limit the approval authority's ability to conditionally
approve or deny without prejudice any application for a use permit as may be
necessary or appropriate to protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare, and to advance the goals or policies in the Fairfax Municipal Code or
the General Plan.
 
                                                                               Public
                                             Private Property                  Right-of-
                                                                               Way3
                                             RS, RD, RM,
                                             PDD, UR                           Non-
Description of Wireless Facility             Residential                       Residential
                                             Zoning      OA and PD All Other   Zoning
                                             Districts   Zoning    Zoning      Districts
                                             and CR      District  Districts   except for
                                             Commercial                        OA, PD, and
                                             Zoning                            CR
                                             District
Roof-mounted facility, building-mounted                            Conditional Conditional
facility, or facility mounted on an existing Not         Not       Use Permit/ Use Permit/
pole                                         Permitted   Permitted Design      Design
                                                                   Review      Review
                                                                   Conditional Conditional
Facility mounted on a replacement pole or    Not         Not       Use Permit/ Use Permit/
new telecommunications tower                 Permitted   Permitted Design      Design
                                                                   Review      Review
                                                                   Conditional Conditional
New wireless telecommunications collocation  Not         Not       Use Permit/ Use Permit/
facility                                     Permitted   Permitted Design      Design
                                                                   Review      Review
Eligible facilities request1 or application  Permitted   Not       Permitted   Permitted
pursuant to Cal. Government Code § 65850.62             Permitted
1   See requirements of section
19.04.140.
2   See requirements of section
19.04.150.
3   For any public right-of-way on the boundary between zoning districts, the zone
applicable to the location of a wireless telecommunication facility shall be determined
based upon the closest district adjacent to the facility's location. The centerline of the
public right-of-way will be used as the boundary between districts.
   (B)   Non-exclusive grant; no warranty. No approval granted under this
chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to
occupy or use the public right-of-way of the town for delivery of
telecommunications services or any other purposes. Further, no approval shall
be construed as any warranty of title.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.050 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Application content. All applications for a permit required by this
chapter must be made in writing on such form as the Zoning Administrator
prescribes. The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirements for submittal
of any information described herein only when determined that it is
inapplicable based on project-specific factors, and documentation is provided
to that effect. For permit applications other than eligible facilities requests
(which are addressed in §
19.04.140), the form shall include the following information, in addition to
all other information determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator or the
town as part of an application for a conditional use permit, variance, and
design review:
      (1)   Full name and contact information for the facility owner, facility
operator, agent (if any), and property owner, and related letter(s) of
authorization.
      (2)   The type of facility, including a full written description of the
proposed facility, its purpose, technical specifications, and an assessment of
any fire hazard a proposed installation presents to surrounding vegetation and
structures;
      (3)   A detailed site and engineering plan of the proposed facility
containing the exact proposed location of the facility, created by a qualified
licensed engineer and in accordance with requirements set by the Zoning
Administrator. The site and engineering plan shall display the dimensions of
each proposed facility, including its height from the ground level. Applicants
must demonstrate that facilities have been designed to attain the minimum
height required from a technological standpoint for the proposed site. The site
and engineering plans shall show the proposed facility from each cardinal
direction. The site and engineering plan shall also include technical
information, including, but not limited to visual analysis, alternative sites
analysis, landscape plans, lighting plans, and architectural and engineering
plans. Technical information, including, but not limited to radio frequency
reports, visual analysis, alternative sites analysis, landscape plans, lighting
plans, and architectural and engineering plans shall be prepared by an
appropriate qualified professional acceptable to the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   The visual analysis shall include, but not necessarily be limited
to, a photo montage or photo simulation and story poles erected at the proposed
site (and surrounded by temporary construction fencing) or other similar
technique. The visual analysis shall address visually distinctive areas and
scenic corridors as depicted and described in the Fairfax General Plan, views
from public vantage points and private residences if determined appropriate by
the town. The visual analysis shall also depict cumulative conditions by
including information pertaining to existing, approved and proposed
telecommunications facilities that will or may eventually be constructed at the
site by all carriers based upon permit applications which have been filed with
or approved by the town. The visual analysis may be expanded to include
alternative locations within the proposed service area.
      (5)   Photographs of facility equipment and an accurate visual impact
analysis with photo simulations.
      (6)   Proof of all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the
FCC.
      (7)   A technically sufficient written report certified by a qualified
radio frequency emissions engineer, certifying that the facility, operating by
itself and in combination with other existing or approved facilities which can
be measured at the proposed facility site, is in compliance with such FCC
standards. Measurements for radio frequency emissions shall be based on all
proposed, approved and existing facilities operating at maximum power densities
at all relevant frequencies being used. Posting of a financial security may be
required as a condition of approval to pay the cost for preparation of radio
frequency reports evaluating the conformance of approved and operative
facilities with applicable health standards adopted by the FCC. The carrier may
post a single financial security in an amount not to exceed $25,000 and indexed
to the annual construction index hereafter, to satisfy radio frequency
performance reports for build-out of the carrier's network facilities plan.
      (8)   If the application is for a facility that will be located within
the public right-of-way, the applicant shall certify that it is a telephone
corporation or state the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way,
and provide a copy of its certificate of public convenience and necessity
(CPCN), if a CPCN has been issued by the California Public Utilities
Commission.
      (9)   A written description identifying the geographic service area for
the subject installation, accompanied by a plan and maps showing anticipated
future installations and modifications for the following two years.
      (10)   A written report that analyzes acoustic levels for the proposed
wireless telecommunications facility and all associated equipment, including,
without limitation, all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary
backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators in order to
demonstrate compliance with
Chapter 8.20 (Noise Control). The acoustic analysis must be prepared and
certified by a qualified engineer and include an analysis of the manufacturer
specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed
equipment relative to all adjacent property lines. In lieu of a written report,
the applicant may submit evidence from the equipment manufacturer that the
ambient noise emitted from all the proposed equipment will not, both
individually and cumulatively, exceed the applicable limits.
      (11)   If the applicant claims it requires an exception to the
requirements of this chapter, all information and studies necessary for the
town to evaluate that claim.
      (12)   An application and processing fee and a deposit for a consultant
review as set forth in division (B) of this section.
      (13)   A copy of any land use easement or restriction (access, open
space, public utility and the like) which encumbers the proposed facility site,
as well as a copy of the proposed site's title report.
      (14)   A detailed lighting plan including the location and type of all
exterior lighting fixtures.
      (15)   Public notification. Proof that the applicant has provided public
notification, at its own cost, via mail to all property owners and occupants
within a radius of 300 feet from its proposed facilities. Information regarding
the application shall be displayed on the outside of the envelope.
      (16)   Any other studies or information determined necessary by the
Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   Independent expert. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to retain
on behalf of the town an independent, qualified consultant to review any
application for a permit for a wireless telecommunications facility. The cost
of this review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit pursuant to an
adopted fee schedule resolution. Such fee resolution may include the contract
price of a third party consultant and the town's overhead costs for staff time
expended on administration of the consultant contract. The independent
consultant shall have maximum latitude as to how and when monitoring is done.
The consultant may review the technical aspects of the application, including,
but not limited to, the following matters:
      (1)   The accuracy, adequacy, and completeness of submissions;
      (2)   Compliance with applicable radio frequency emission standards and
applicable electrical codes and fire codes and best practices for fire and
electrical safety;
      (3)   Whether any requested exception is justified;
      (4)   An engineering and seismic assessment of the proposed installation
to ensure that the proposed location is structurally adequate to support the
proposed installation, and that the installation will meet the seismic
standards set forth for "Risk Category IV" for "essential facilities" as set
forth in the California Building Code (CBC), and that it is adequately
engineered to withstand the maximum wind loads that could be reasonably
anticipated for the location. For installations on utility poles, the
assessment would be based on conformance to CPUC standards;
      (5)   An assessment of any fire hazard a proposed installation presents
to surrounding vegetation and structures;
      (6)   An assessment of any impact on trees or flora;
      (7)   A technical evaluation of alternative sites, facility designs or
configurations, and coverage analysis; and
      (8)   The validity of conclusions reached or claims made by applicant.
   (C)   Procedures for duly filed applications.
      (1)   Voluntary pre-submittal conference. Before application submittal,
applicants are encouraged (but not required) to schedule and attend a pre-
application meeting with the Zoning Administrator. A pre-submittal conference
is intended to streamline the review process through informal discussion that
includes, without limitation, the appropriate project classification, including
whether the project qualifies for § 6409(a); potential concealment issues (if
applicable); coordination with other town departments responsible for
application review; and application completeness issues. To mitigate
unnecessary delays due to application incompleteness, applicants are encouraged
(but not required) to bring any draft applications or other materials so that
town staff may provide informal feedback about whether such applications or
other materials may be incomplete or unacceptable.
      (2)   Submittal appointment. All applications must be filed with the town
at a pre-scheduled appointment with the Zoning Administrator or his or her
designee. Applicants may generally submit one application per appointment, but
may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever
feasible. Any application received without an appointment, whether delivered
in-person or through any other means, will not be considered duly filed, unless
the applicant received a written exemption from the Zoning Administrator at a
pre-submittal conference.
      (3)   Appointment scheduling procedures. For any event in the submittal
process that requires an appointment, applicants must submit a written request
to the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   Applications deemed denied. To promote efficient review and timely
decisions, the town may deem an application denied without prejudice to the
applicant to re-file as a new application when the applicant fails to tender a
substantive response to the town within 90 calendar days after the town deems
the application incomplete in a written notice to the applicant.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.060 LOCATION AND CONFIGURATION PREFERENCES.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide guidelines to
applicants and the reviewing authority regarding the preferred locations and
configurations for wireless telecommunication facilities in the town, provided
that nothing in this section shall be construed to permit a wireless
telecommunication facility in any location or configuration that is otherwise
prohibited by this chapter.
   (B)   Review of location and configuration. The reviewing authority shall
consider the extent to which a proposed wireless telecommunication facility
complies with these preferences and whether there are feasible alternative
locations or configurations to the proposed facility that are more preferred
under this section.
   (C)   Order of preference – configurations. The order of preference for the
configuration for wireless telecommunication facilities from most preferred to
least preferred is:
      (1)   Collocation with existing facilities outside the public rights-of-
way;
      (2)   Roof-mounted;
      (3)   Building-mounted;
      (4)   Mounted on an existing pole or utility pole;
      (5)   Mounted on a new pole or utility pole that will replace an existing
pole or utility pole; and
      (6)   Mounted on a new telecommunication tower or pole.
   (D)   Order of preference – location. The order of preference for the
location of wireless telecommunications facilities from most preferred to least
preferred is:
      (1)   In the CH zoning district;
      (2)   In the CS zoning district;
      (3)   In the CC zoning district;
      (4)   In the CL zoning district;
      (5)   In the PD zoning district; and
      (6)   In the public right-of-way with the closest adjacent district being
a commercial district.
   (E)   Applications for new wireless communications facilities shall only be
for placement a minimum of 50 feet from all residences and a minimum 300 feet
from child day care centers, schools, playgrounds, parks, ballfields, and
medical facilities unless the applications include information sufficient to
demonstrate:
      (1)   The location and type of preferred sites which exist within the
proposed or technically feasible coverage area is mapped;
      (2)   The preferred location site was not available as shown by the good
faith efforts and measures taken by the carrier to secure the preferred
location sites;
      (3)   Specific reasons why such efforts and measures were unsuccessful;
      (4)   Specific reasons why the location of the proposed facility site is
essential to meet the service demands of the carrier; and
      (5)   Through reports required pursuant to §
19.04.050 demonstrating compliance with current federal health standards.
   (F)   Wireless communications facilities shall be attached or sited adjacent
to existing structures unless the carrier demonstrates to the satisfaction of
the town that no other technically feasible site exists or that construction of
a freestanding facility on or at a distant location from an existing structure
will mitigate adverse effects related to land use compatibility, visual
resources, public safety and other environmental factors addressed by CEQA.
Appropriate types of existing structures may include, but not be limited to:
buildings, water tanks and some telephone/utility poles.
   (G)   Monopoles for wireless communications facilities should not be located
in residential or open space areas unless technical evidence demonstrates to
the satisfaction of the town that no other alternative facility site or type of
antenna support structure is feasible and/or if the use of a monopole for the
proposed facility by itself or in combination with other existing, approved and
proposed facilities will avoid or mitigate adverse effects related to land use
compatibility, visual resources and public safety.
   (H)   Accessory equipment. In order of preference from most preferred to
least preferred, accessory equipment for wireless telecommunication facilities
and wireless telecommunications collocation facilities (excluding antennas and
electric meters) shall be located underground where possible, within a building
or structure, on a screened roof top area or structure, or in a rear yard if
not readily visible from surrounding properties and the roadway, unless the
reviewing authority finds that another location is preferable under the
circumstances of the application. The applicant shall bear the burden of
demonstrating that accessory equipment cannot be placed in the most preferred
location.
   (I)   Collocation and shared-location of wireless telecommunications
facilities should be required when it is feasible and mitigates adverse effects
related to land use compatibility, visual resources, public safety and other
environmental factors addressed by CEQA. Collocation and shared-location sites
should not be required when it creates or significantly increases such adverse
effects and/or technical evidence demonstrates to the satisfaction of the town
that it is not feasible due to service impairment or operational failures. To
ensure adequate and complete consideration of collocation and shared-location
siting of proposed wireless communications facilities, the carrier may be
required to submit to the town a graphic and written analysis which identifies
all technically feasible sites within the coverage area that would accommodate
the proposed service. The analysis shall include:
      (1)   Enough information to provide adequate consideration of technically
feasible alternative sites and/or facility designs that would avoid or minimize
adverse effects related to land use compatibility, visual resources, public
safety and other environmental factors addressed by CEQA;
      (2)   In writing, the specific factors for selection of the proposed
facility site over alternative sites;
      (3)   Facilities which are not proposed to be sited on a collocation or
shared-location site shall provide information substantiating the unfeasibility
of the sites; and
      (4)   The town may require independent peer review of the analysis prior
to making a decision on the permit applications. The analysis should, to the
extent practical, be incorporated with the coverage area map.
   (J)   The town should, to the extent practicable and legal, discourage
leases which convey exclusive (i.e., single user) rights for new wireless
communications facilities to the extent that the leases may preclude
development of a suitable collocation facilities site.
   (K)   The design of collocation sites should promote shared use among
different carriers. To the extent feasible, antenna support and equipment
structures should be designed to consolidate future planned facilities to
eliminate or minimize the visual clutter resulting from multiple
telecommunications structures. Where appropriate, as demonstrated by the
carrier and determined by the town, multiple antenna support structures may be
approved (shared-location) rather than a single larger/higher structure.
Facilities should make available unutilized space for collocation of other
antennas and equipment, including space for competing service carriers.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.070 DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR ALL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Basic requirements. The design and development standards set forth in
this section apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities no matter
where they are located. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be
designed and maintained so as to minimize visual, noise, and other impacts on
the surrounding community and shall be planned, designed, located, and erected
in accordance with the design and development standards in this section.
   (B)   Build-out period. Approvals will automatically expire six months from
the issuance date, unless the permittee obtains all other permits and approvals
required to install, construct and operate the approved wireless facility,
which includes, without limitation, permits required pursuant to Title 15, and
any other permits or approvals required by any federal, state, or local public
agencies with jurisdiction over the subject property, the wireless facility, or
its use and constructs the approved facility. The Zoning Administrator may
grant one written extension to a date certain when the permittee shows good
cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension
submitted at least 30 days prior to the automatic expiration date in this
division (B). No further extensions may be granted but the permittee may
resubmit a complete application, including all application fees for the same or
substantially similar project.
   (C)   General guidelines.
      (1)    The applicant shall employ screening and camouflage design
techniques in the design and placement of wireless telecommunications
facilities in order to ensure that the facility is as visually inconspicuous as
possible, to prevent the facility from dominating and disrupting the
surrounding area, and to hide the facility from predominant views from
surrounding properties, all in a manner that achieves compatibility with the
community.
      (2)   For open space or hillside locations that would be generally viewed
from a distance, innovative design solutions may be appropriate where the
screening potential of a site is low (i.e., disguise facility as a landscape
element, public art and the like).
      (3)   Facilities should not be located on historically or architecturally
significant structures unless the Secretary of Interior's guidelines determine
that facilities can be visually and architecturally integrated with the
structure; historical landscapes shall be avoided.
      (4)   Facilities should be sited to avoid adverse impacts to existing
views from surrounding residences.
   (D)   Traffic safety; roads. All facilities shall be designed and located in
such a manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety. Whenever feasible,
existing roads and parking areas should be used to access, build and service
new telecommunications facilities. Any new access roads or parking areas
constructed shall be shared with subsequent telecommunications facilities and/
or other permitted uses to the extent feasible. New access roads constructed in
open space areas shall have the minimum width and surfacing necessary to meet
fire safety and access requirements, and shall be graded and drained consistent
with Town Code
Chapter 8.32, Urban Runoff Pollution Prevention. The size of new parking areas
shall be limited to the minimum necessary to accommodate vehicles associated
with periodic maintenance of the facility.
   (E)   Antennas. The applicant shall use the least visible antennas possible
to accomplish the coverage objectives. Antenna elements shall be flush mounted,
to the extent reasonably feasible. All antenna mounts shall be designed so as
not to preclude possible future collocation by the same or other operators or
carriers. Antennas shall be situated as to reduce visual impact without
materially compromising their function. Whip antennas need not be screened.
   (F)   Landscaping; vegetation.
      (1)   Where appropriate, facilities shall be installed so as to maintain,
protect, and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees,
foliage, and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional
landscaping shall be planted, irrigated, and maintained where such vegetation
is deemed necessary by the town to provide screening or to block the line of
sight between facilities and adjacent uses.
      (2)   Applications for wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a
landscape plan that shows existing vegetation, indicates any vegetation
proposed for removal or trimming, and identifies proposed planting by type,
size and location. The emphasis of the landscape plan should be to visually
screen the proposed facility and stabilize soils on sloping sites. Introduced
vegetation shall be native, drought tolerant species compatible with the
predominant natural setting of the project area.
      (3)   Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the vicinity of
the proposed facility and associated accessways shall be protected from damage
both during and after construction. Submission of a tree protection plan may be
required to ensure compliance with this requirement.
      (4)   All vegetation disturbed during project construction shall be
replanted with compatible vegetation and soils disturbed by development shall
be reseeded to control erosion.
      (5)   No vegetation shall be removed subsequent to project completion,
except to comply with local and state fire safety regulations, to prevent the
spread of disease as required by the state's Food and Agriculture Department,
or to prevent safety hazards to people and property.
      (6)   The carrier shall enter into a landscape performance and
maintenance agreement with the town to ensure the installation and
establishment of required landscaping. This agreement shall be secured by
financial securities in an amount equal to 150 percent of estimates to cover
the cost of materials and labor for required improvements. The duration of the
landscape maintenance agreement shall be for a minimum period of no less than
one year and may be extended for an additional period of up to two additional
years upon renewal of the permit applications.
      (7)   Antennas and associated structures and equipment shall be painted
to blend with the structures, vegetation, sky or landscape against which they
will be primarily viewed.
      (8)   Wireless telecommunications facilities are not permitted on
ridgelines.
   (G)   Signage. Wireless telecommunications facilities and wireless
telecommunications collocation facilities shall not bear any signs or
advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other signage
required by law or permitted by the town.
   (H)   Lighting. No wireless telecommunications facility may be illuminated,
unless either specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or
other government agency or in association with the illumination of an athletic
field on town or school property. Lightning arresters and beacon lights are not
permitted, unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, FCC or other
applicable regulations for health and safety. Legally-required lightning
arresters and beacons shall be included when calculating the height of
facilities. If lighting is permitted, the following requirements apply to such
lighting:
      (1)   Mechanically-operated, low wattage, hooded and downward directed
exterior lighting shall be permitted for safety purposes only and shall be kept
off, except when maintenance or safety personnel are present at night.
      (2)   Tower lighting required under FAA regulations should, to the
greatest extent feasible, be shielded or directed to minimize light and glare
impacts visible from publicly accessible areas.
      (3)   Nighttime lighting of warning signs required near publicly
accessible facilities must consist of low-wattage fixtures, and must be
directed downward and hooded to mitigate impacts visible from publicly
accessible areas.
   (I)   Noise.
      (1)   Each wireless telecommunications facility and wireless
telecommunications collocation facility shall be operated in such a manner so
as to minimize any possible disruption caused by noise.
      (2)   Normal testing and maintenance activities shall not take place
weekends, holidays or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., excluding
emergency repairs. Normal testing and maintenance activities, which do not
involve the use or operation of telecommunications and maintenance equipment
that is audible from residences and other nearby sensitive receptors, may occur
at all other times.
      (3)   Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power
outages or emergency occurrences, and shall not be tested on weekends,
holidays, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
      (4)   At no time shall equipment noise from any facility exceed an
exterior noise level of 50 dBA at the facility's property line if the facility
is located in a business or commercial zone that permits those uses; provided,
however, that for any such facility located within 500 feet of any property
zoned residential or improved with a residential use, such equipment noise
shall not exceed an exterior noise level of 40 dBA at the property line of any
such residential property. For any facility located within a residential zone,
such equipment noise shall at no time be audible at the property line of any
residentially-improved or residential zoned property.
      (5)   Any equipment, including, but not limited to, air conditioning
units, that may emit noise that would be audible from either beyond three feet
from the facility in the case of a facility located in the right-of-way, or the
facility's property line in the case of other facilities, shall be enclosed or
equipped with noise attenuation devices to the extent necessary to ensure
compliance with applicable noise limitations under the Fairfax Municipal Code.
   (J)   Security. Each wireless telecommunications facility shall be designed
to be resistant to, and minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access,
climbing, vandalism, graffiti, and other conditions that would result in
hazardous situations, visual blight, or attractive nuisances. The reviewing
authority may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing
devices, or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access.
   (K)   Modification. At the time of modification of a wireless
telecommunications facility, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible,
be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise, and other impacts,
including but not limited to undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger,
more visually-intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually-intrusive
facilities.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.080 ADDITIONAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FACILITIES OUTSIDE
THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Basic requirements. Facilities located outside the public right-of-way
are subject to the design and development standards set forth in this section
in addition to all design and development standards that apply to all
facilities.
   (B)   No parking interference. In no event shall the installation of
facilities replace or interfere with parking spaces in such a way as to reduce
the total number of parking spaces below the number that is required.
   (C)    Roof-mounted facilities. Roof-mounted facilities shall be designed
and constructed to be fully concealed or screened in a manner compatible with
the existing architecture of the building the facility is mounted to in color,
texture, and type of material. Screening shall not increase the bulk of the
structure nor alter the character of the structure. Roof-mounted antennas and
associated equipment shall be located as far back from the edge of the roof as
possible to minimize visibility from street level locations. Where appropriate,
construction of a roof-top parapet wall to hide the facility may be required.
To avoid or mitigate the appearance of visual clutter on rooftops, proposed
facilities should, to the extent feasible, be located adjacent to existing
rooftop antennas or equipment, incorporated into rooftop antenna or equipment
enclosures, or otherwise screened from view. In addition, existing rooftop
antennas and equipment should be consolidated where practical and shall be
removed if abandoned.
   (D)   Wall-mounted antennas shall be integrated architecturally with the
style and character of the structure or otherwise made as unobtrusive as
possible. If possible, antennas should be located entirely within an existing
or newly-created architectural feature so as to be completely screened from
view. To the extent feasible, wall-mounted antennas should not be located on
the front, or most prominent facade of a structure, and should be located above
the pedestrian line-of-sight.
   (E)   Facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower.
      (1)   Facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower shall be located
in close proximity to existing above-ground utilities, such as electrical
towers or utility poles (which are not scheduled for removal or under grounding
for at least 18 months after the date of application), light poles, trees of
comparable heights, and in areas where they will not detract from the
appearance of the town.
      (2)   Facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower, including, but
not limited to, the attached antennas, shall be designed to be the minimum
functional height and width required to adequately support the proposed
facility and meet FCC requirements. The applicant shall provide documentation
satisfactory to the Zoning Administrator establishing compliance with this
division (E)(2). In any event, facilities mounted to a telecommunications tower
shall not exceed the applicable height limit for structures in the applicable
zoning district.
      (3)   Aside from the antenna itself, no additional equipment may be
visible. All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility
cables, shall be laid within the interior of the telecommunications tower and
camouflaged or hidden to the fullest extent feasible without jeopardizing the
physical integrity of the tower.
      (4)   Pole installations shall be situated so as to utilize existing
natural or man-made features including topography, vegetation, buildings, or
other structures to provide the greatest amount of visual screening.
      (5)   All antenna components and accessory wireless equipment shall be
treated with exterior coatings of a color and texture to match the predominant
visual background or existing architectural elements so as to visually blend in
with the surrounding development. Subdued colors and non-reflective materials
that blend with surrounding materials and colors shall be used.
      (6)   Poles shall be no greater in diameter or other cross-sectional
dimensions than is necessary for the proper functioning of the facility.
      (7)   If a faux tree is proposed for the pole installation, it shall be
of a type of tree compatible with those existing in the immediate areas of the
installation. If no trees exist within the immediate areas, the applicant shall
create a landscape setting that integrates the faux tree with added species of
a similar height and type. Additional camouflage of the faux tree may be
required depending on the type and design of faux tree proposed.
   (F)   Accessory equipment. All accessory equipment associated with the
operation of any wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully screened
or camouflaged and located so as to minimize their visibility to the greatest
extent possible, utilizing the following methods for the type of installation:
      (1)   Accessory equipment for roof-mounted facilities shall be installed
inside the building to which it is mounted or underground, if feasible. If not
feasible, such accessory equipment may be located on the roof of the building
that the facility is mounted on, provided that both the equipment and screening
materials are painted the color of the building, roof, or surroundings. All
screening materials for roof-mounted facilities shall be of a quality and
design that is architecturally integrated with the design of the building or
structure.
      (2)   Accessory equipment for facilities mounted to a telecommunications
tower shall be visually screened by locating the equipment either within a
nearby building, in an underground vault (with the exception of required
electrical panels), or in another type of enclosed structure, which shall
comply with the development and design standards of the zoning district in
which the accessory equipment is located. Such enclosed structure shall be
architecturally treated and adequately screened from view by landscape
plantings, decorative walls, fencing or other appropriate means, selected so
that the resulting screening will be visually integrated with the architecture
and landscaping of the surroundings.
      (3)    Whenever possible, base stations, equipment cabinets, back-up
generators and other equipment associated with building-mounted antennas should
be installed within the existing building envelope or underground. If this is
not feasible, the equipment shall be painted, screened, fenced, landscaped or
otherwise treated architecturally to minimize its appearance from off-site
locations and to visually blend with the surrounding natural and built
environments. Equipment buildings should be designed in an architectural style
and constructed of exterior building materials that are consistent with
surrounding development and/or land use setting.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.090 ADDITIONAL DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FACILITIES IN THE
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Basic requirements. Facilities located in the public right-of-way are
subject to the design and development standards set forth in this section in
addition to all design and development standards that apply to all facilities.
   (B)   Right-of-way authority. An encroachment permit must be obtained for
any work in the public right-of-way. Only applicants authorized to enter the
public right-of-way pursuant to state or federal law or a franchise or other
agreement with the town shall be eligible for a permit to install or modify a
wireless telecommunications facility in the public right-of-way.
   (C)   Antennas.
      (1)   Utility poles. The maximum height of any antenna mounted to an
existing utility pole shall not exceed two feet above the height of the
existing utility pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment
mounted on a pole be less than 18 feet above any drivable road surface.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, all installations on utility poles shall fully
comply with the California Public Utilities Commission general orders,
including, but not limited to, General Order 95, as revised.
      (2)   Street light poles. The maximum height of any antenna mounted to a
street light pole shall not exceed seven feet above the existing height of the
street light pole in a location with its closest adjacent district being a
commercial zoning district, and shall not exceed three feet above the existing
height of the street light pole in any other zoning district. Any portion of
the antenna or equipment mounted on a street light pole shall be no less than
18 feet above any drivable road surface.
   (D)   Poles.
      (1)   Only pole-mounted antennas shall be permitted in the public right-
of-way. All other types of telecommunications towers are prohibited, and no new
poles are permitted that are not replacing an existing pole unless an exception
is granted pursuant to §
19.04.130.
      (2)   Pole height and width limitations.
         (a)   All replacement poles shall be designed to be the minimum
functional height and width required to support the proposed antenna
installation and meet FCC and CPUC requirements. Replacement poles and antennas
and similar structures shall be no greater in diameter or other cross-sectional
dimensions than is necessary for the proper functioning of the facility.
Replacement poles must match existing poles, as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
         (b)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2)(a) above, no facility shall be
located on a pole that is less than 20 feet in height, and no facility shall
exceed 35 feet in height as measured from the ground, including, but not
limited to, the pole or replacement pole and any antenna that protrudes above
the pole or replacement pole.
      (3)   Pole-mounted equipment shall not exceed six cubic feet in dimension
per pole.
      (4)   If an applicant proposes to replace a pole in order to accommodate
the facility, the pole shall match the appearance of the original pole to the
extent feasible, unless another design better accomplishes the objectives of
this chapter. Such replacement pole shall not exceed the height of the pole it
is replacing by more than seven feet, and no facility shall exceed 35 feet in
height as measured from where the base of the pole meets the ground.
      (5)   Mounting any and all hardware or antennas on decorative light poles
is prohibited except as a replacement pole that matches the existing decorative
light poles in the vicinity.
      (6)   If an exception is granted for placement of new poles in the public
right-of-way, new poles shall be designed to resemble existing poles in the
public right-of-way, including size, height, color, materials and style, with
the exception of any existing pole designs that are scheduled to be removed and
not replaced, unless another design better accomplishes the objectives of this
section. Such new poles that are not replacement poles shall be located no
closer than 90 feet to an existing pole.
      (7)   All new wires needed to service the wireless telecommunications
facility must be installed within the width of the existing utility pole so as
to not exceed the diameter and height of the existing utility pole. For
streetlights, any replacement pole must allow for an integrated design with
wires inside the pole.
   (E)   Space occupied. Facilities shall be designed to occupy the least
amount of space in the public right-of-way that is technically feasible.
   (F)   Location.
      (1)   Each component part of a facility shall be located so as not to
cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic,
inconvenience to the public's use of the right-of-way, or safety hazards to
pedestrians and motorists.
      (2)   A facility shall not be located within any portion of the public
right-of-way that would interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations,
fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, or
any other vital public health and safety facility.
      (3)   Each pole mounted wireless telecommunications facility must be
separated by at least 1,500 feet.
      (4)   All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility
cables, between the pole and any accessory equipment shall be placed
underground, if feasible.
      (5)   For all applications in undergrounding districts, all
undergrounding district regulations apply.
   (G)   Americans with Disabilities Act compliance. All facilities shall be
built in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
   (H)   Accessory equipment. The wireless facility shall be powered using
unmetered service, whenever available. If not available, the electric meter
shall be pole-mounted to the extent feasible, and all accessory equipment shall
be located underground within three feet of the pole and ground flush mounted
to the extent feasible. When above-ground is the only feasible location for a
particular type of accessory equipment and when such accessory equipment cannot
be pole-mounted, such accessory equipment shall be enclosed within a structure,
and shall not exceed a height of five feet and a total footprint of 15 square
feet, and shall be screened and camouflaged to the fullest extent possible,
including the use of landscaping or alternate screening. Required electrical
meter cabinets shall be adequately screened and camouflaged.
   (I)   Documentation. The applicant shall provide documentation satisfactory
to the Zoning Administrator establishing compliance with this section.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.100 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL FOR ALL FACILITIES.
   (A)   In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, upon
approval all facilities shall be subject to each of the following conditions of
approval, as well as any modification of these conditions or additional
conditions of approval deemed necessary by the reviewing authority throughout
the duration of the permit:
      (1)   Before the permittee submits any application for a permit or other
permits required by the Fairfax Municipal Code, the permittee must incorporate
the wireless telecommunication facility permit granted under this chapter, all
conditions associated with the wireless telecommunications facility permit and
engineering and electrical plans, schematics and specifications and the
approved plans and any photo simulations into the project plans (the "approved
plans"). The permittee must construct, install and operate the wireless
telecommunications facility in strict compliance with the approved plans. The
permittee shall submit an as-built drawing within 90 days after installation of
the facility.
      (2)   Where feasible, as new technology becomes available, the permittee
shall:
         (a)   Place above-ground wireless telecommunications facilities below
ground, including, but not limited to, accessory equipment that has been
mounted to a telecommunications tower or mounted on the ground; and
         (b)   Replace larger, more visually-intrusive facilities with smaller,
less visually-intrusive facilities, after receiving all necessary permits and
approvals required pursuant to the Fairfax Municipal Code.
      (3)   The permittee shall submit and maintain current at all times basic
contact and site information, in a form as may be required by the town. The
permittee shall notify the town of any changes to the information submitted
within seven days of any change, including change of the name or legal status
of the owner or operator. This information shall include, but is not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Identity, including the name, address and 24-hour local or toll
free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator, and the
agent or person responsible for the maintenance of the facility;
         (b)   The legal status of the owner of the wireless telecommunications
facility, including official identification numbers and FCC certification; and
         (c)   The name, address, and telephone number of the property owner if
different than the permittee.
      (4)   The permittee shall not place any facilities that will deny access
to, or otherwise interfere with, any public utility, easement, or right-of-way
located on the site. The permittee shall allow the town reasonable access to,
and maintenance of, all utilities and existing public improvements within or
adjacent to the site, including, but not limited to, pavement, trees, public
utilities, lighting, and public signage.
      (5)   At all times, all required notices and signs shall be posted on the
site as required by the FCC and California Public Utilities Commission, and as
approved by the town. The location and dimensions of a sign bearing the
emergency contact name and telephone number shall be posted pursuant to the
approved plans.
      (6)   At all times, the permittee shall ensure that the facility complies
with the most current regulatory and operational standards including, but not
limited to, radio frequency emissions standards adopted by the FCC, antenna
height standards adopted by the Federal Aviation Administration, and all
electrical code requirements for the equipment, wiring the equipment and
providing power to the equipment. At the sole expense of the permittee and
using a consultant approved by the town, testing shall be performed
demonstrating compliance with current regulatory and operational standards, and
to ensure the equipment is operating within proper specifications and does not
pose an undue fire risk or electrical risk. Tests shall occur upon commencement
of operations and annually thereafter, and results provided in a written report
to the town.
      (7)   If, upon inspection, the Town Building Official determines there is
good cause to believe that the facility (including, without limitation, its
accessory equipment, antenna and/or base station) may present a fire risk or
electrical hazard, the Building Official may order the facility to be shut down
and powered off until such time as the facility is repaired and restored to its
correct operating specifications, at the sole expense of the permittee.
      (8)   Permittee shall pay for and provide a performance bond, which shall
be in effect until the facilities are fully and completely removed and the site
reasonably returned to its original condition, to cover permittee's obligations
under these conditions of approval and the Fairfax Municipal Code. The bond
coverage shall include, but not be limited to, removal of the facility,
maintenance obligations and landscaping obligations. The amount of the
performance bond shall be set by the Zoning Administrator in an amount
rationally related to the obligations covered by the bond and shall be
specified in the conditions of approval.
      (9)   Permittee shall defend, indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the
town, its elected and appointed council members, boards, commissions, officers,
officials, agents, consultants, employees, and volunteers from and against any
and all claims, actions, or proceeding against the town and its elected and
appointed Council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents,
consultants, employees, and volunteers to attack, set aside, void or annul, an
approval of the town, Planning Commission or Town Council concerning the
permit, the project, and any and all claims, actions, or proceedings arising
from, or related to, the installation, operation, or inspection of any
facility. Such indemnification shall include damages, judgments, settlements,
penalties, fines, defensive costs or expenses, including, but not limited to,
interest, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees, or liability of any kind
related to or arising from such claim, action, or proceeding. The town shall
promptly notify the permittee of any claim, action, or proceeding that this
indemnification obligation may cover. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit
the town from participating in a defense of any claim, action or proceeding.
The town shall have the option of coordinating the defense, including, but not
limited to, choosing counsel for the defense at permittee's expense. The town
shall retain the right to participate in any claim, action or proceeding if the
town bears its own attorney's fees and costs, and the town defends the action
in good faith.
      (10)   Permittee shall obtain and maintain insurance for the coverages
and in the amounts reasonably specified by the Zoning Administrator.
      (11)   All conditions of approval shall be binding as to the applicant
and all successors in interest to permittee.
      (12)   The proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions of
this chapter, including the technical review by the town's independent expert
set forth in §
19.04.050(B).
      (13)   The proposed facility has been designed and located to achieve
compatibility with the community to the maximum extent reasonably feasible.
      (14)   Noise generated by equipment will not be excessive, annoying nor
be detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not exceed
the standards set forth in this chapter.
      (15)   A condition setting forth the permit expiration date in accordance
with §
19.04.200 shall be included in the conditions of approval.
      (16)   Record retention. The permittee must maintain complete and
accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in
connection with the wireless facility, including, without limitation, any
approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into the
approval, all conditions associated with the approval, and any other
ministerial permits or approvals issued in connection with the approval. In the
event that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this
condition, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an
inspection of the missing records will be construed against the permittee.
      (17)   Compliance obligations. An applicant or permittee will not be
relieved of its obligation to comply with every applicable provision in the
Fairfax Municipal Code, any permit, any permit condition, or any applicable law
or regulation by reason of any failure by the town to timely notice, prompt or
enforce compliance by the applicant or permittee.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.110 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL FOR FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, upon
approval all facilities in the public right-of-way shall be subject to each of
the conditions of approval set forth in §
19.04.100, each of the following conditions of approval, and any modification
of these conditions or additional conditions of approval deemed necessary by
the reviewing authority throughout the duration of the permit:
      (1)   The wireless telecommunications facility shall be subject to such
conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by
the Town Manager or his or her designee for the purpose of: (a) protecting the
public health, safety, and welfare, (b) preventing interference with pedestrian
and vehicular traffic, and (c) preventing damage to the public right-of-way or
any property adjacent to it. The town may modify the permit to reflect such
conditions, changes or limitations by following the same notice and public
hearing procedures as are applicable to the grant of a wireless
telecommunications facility permit for similarly located facilities, except the
permittee shall be given notice by personal service or by registered or
certified mail at the last address provided to the town by the permittee.
      (2)   The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change,
or interfere with any existing structure, improvement, or property without the
prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement, or property. No
structure, improvement or property owned by the town shall be moved to
accommodate a wireless telecommunications facility, unless the town determines
that such movement will not adversely affect the town or any surrounding
businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and expenses related
to the relocation of the town's structure, improvement, or property. Prior to
commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit issued for any
facility within the public right-of-way, the permittee shall provide the with
documentation establishing to the town's satisfaction that the permittee has
the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement, or
property within the public right-of-way to be affected by applicant's
facilities.
      (3)   The permittee shall assume full liability for damage or injury
caused to any property or person by the facility.
      (4)   The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and expense, any
damage including, but not limited to, subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse,
weakening, or loss of lateral support to town streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs,
gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any
kind or nature, utility lines and systems, underground utility lines and
systems, or sewer systems and sewer lines that result from any activities
performed in connection with the installation or maintenance of a wireless
telecommunications facility in the public right-of-way. The permittee shall
restore such areas, structures and systems to the condition in which they
existed prior to the installation or maintenance that necessitated the repairs.
In the event the permittee fails to complete such repair within the number of
days stated on a written notice by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause such repair to be completed at permittee's sole cost
and expense.
      (5)   Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall obtain
the Zoning Administrator's approval of a tree protection plan prepared by a
certified arborist if the installation of the wireless telecommunication
facility will be located within the canopy of a street tree, or a protected
tree on private property, or within a ten-foot radius of the base of such a
tree. Depending on site specific criteria (e.g., location of tree, size, and
type of tree, etc.), a radius greater than ten feet may be required by the
Zoning Administrator.
      (6)   If a meter cabinet has been approved for the facility and
subsequently any utility company offers electrical service that does not
require the use of a meter cabinet, the permittee shall seek approval of the
utility company to switch to the unmetered service and, at its sole cost and
expense, remove the meter cabinet and any related foundation within 30 days of
such service being obtained and reasonably restore the area to its prior
condition.
      (7)   The permittee shall modify, remove, or relocate its facility, or
portion thereof, without cost or expense to the town, if and when made
necessary by:
         (a)   Any public improvement project, including, but not limited to,
the construction, maintenance, or operation of any underground or aboveground
facilities, including, but not limited to, sewers, storm drains, conduits, gas,
water, electric or other utility systems, or pipes owned by the town or any
other public agency;
         (b)   Any abandonment of any street, sidewalk, or other public
facility;
         (c)   Any change of grade, alignment or width of any street, sidewalk,
or other public facility; or
         (d)   A determination by the Zoning Administrator that the wireless
telecommunications facility has become incompatible with public health, safety,
or welfare or the public's use of the public right-of-way.
      (8)   Any modification, removal, or relocation of the facility shall be
completed within 90 days of written notification by the town, unless exigencies
dictate a shorter period for removal or relocation. Modification or relocation
of the facility shall require submittal, review, and approval of a permit
amendment pursuant to the Fairfax Municipal Code. The permittee shall be
entitled, on permittee's election, to either a pro-rata refund of fees paid for
the original permit or to a new permit, without additional fee, at a location
as close to the original location as the standards set forth in the Fairfax
Municipal Code allow. In the event the facility is not modified, removed, or
relocated within said period of time, the town may cause the same to be done at
the sole cost and expense of permittee. Further, due to exigent circumstances
as provided in the Fairfax Municipal Code, the town may modify, remove, or
relocate wireless telecommunications facilities without prior notice to
permittee, provided permittee is notified within a reasonable period
thereafter.
      (9)   The applicant has the right to enter the public right-of-way
pursuant to state or federal law, or by virtue of a franchise or other
agreement with the town permitting them to use the public right-of-way.
      (10)   The facility will not interfere with the use of the public right-
of-way, existing subterranean infrastructure, or the town's plans for
modification or use of such location and infrastructure.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.120 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Where a wireless telecommunication facility requires a conditional use
permit under this chapter, the reviewing authority shall not approve any
application unless, in addition to the findings generally applicable to all
conditional use permits, all of the following additional findings are made:
      (1)   The proposed facility complies with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
      (2)   The proposed facility has been designed and located to achieve
compatibility with the community to the maximum extent reasonably feasible.
      (3)   The applicant has submitted a statement of its willingness to allow
other carriers to collocate on the proposed wireless telecommunications
facility wherever technically and economically feasible and where collocation
would not harm community compatibility.
      (4)   Noise generated by equipment will not be excessive, annoying nor be
detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare and will not exceed the
standards set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the findings in division (A) above, approval of a
wireless telecommunications facility permit for a facility that will be located
in the public right-of-way may be granted only if the following findings are
made by the reviewing authority:
      (1)   The applicant has provided substantial written evidence supporting
the applicant's claim that it has the right to enter the public right-of-way
pursuant to state or federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise
or other agreement with the town permitting them to use the public right-of-
way.
      (2)   The applicant has demonstrated that the facility will not interfere
with the use of the public right-of-way, existing subterranean infrastructure,
or the town's plans for modification or use of such location and
infrastructure.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.130 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Exceptions pertaining to any provision of this chapter, including, but
not limited to, exceptions from findings that would otherwise justify denial,
may be granted by the reviewing authority if the reviewing authority makes the
finding that a refusal to grant the exception would violate federal law, state
law, or both. Such exceptions may be granted if the reviewing authority finds,
without limitation, that:
      (1)   A provision of this chapter, as applied to applicant, would deprive
applicant of its rights under federal law, state law, or both; and
      (2)   The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a "personal wireless
service facility" as defined in §
19.04.020, as may be amended or superseded; and
      (3)   The applicant has provided the reviewing authority with a
reasonable and clearly defined technical service objective to be achieved by
the proposed wireless facility; and
      (4)   The applicant has provided the reviewing authority with a written
statement that contains a detailed and fact-specific explanation as to why the
proposed wireless facility cannot be deployed in compliance with the applicable
provisions in this chapter, the Fairfax Municipal Code, the General Plan and/or
any specific plan; and
      (5)   The applicant has provided the reviewing authority with a
meaningful comparative analysis with the factual reasons why all alternative
locations and/or designs identified in the administrative record (whether
suggested by the applicant, the town, public comments or any other source) are
not technically feasible or potentially available to reasonably achieve the
applicant's reasonable and clearly defined technical service objective to be
achieved by the proposed wireless facility; and
      (6)   The applicant has demonstrated to the reviewing authority that the
proposed location and design is the least non-compliant configuration that will
reasonably achieve the applicant's reasonable and clearly defined technical
service objective to be achieved by the proposed wireless facility, which
includes without limitation a meaningful comparative analysis into multiple
smaller or less intrusive wireless facilities dispersed throughout the intended
service area; and
      (7)   The applicant has demonstrated that its proposed wireless facility
will be in compliance with all applicable health, safety, and environmental
regulations, which include without limitation the Americans with Disabilities
Act, the Endangered Species Act, and all FCC rules and regulations for human
exposure to RF emissions.
   (B)   An applicant may only request an exception at the time of applying for
a wireless telecommunications facility permit. The request must include both
the specific provision(s) of this chapter from which the exception is sought
and the basis of the request. Any request for an exception after the town has
deemed an application complete shall be treated as a ew application.
   (C)   The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the exception
should be granted.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.140 ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS.
   (A)   Applicability. This section applies to all eligible facilities
requests pursuant to § 6409(a).
   (B)   Approval required. Applicants for eligible facilities requests must
submit a written request for a § 6409(a) approval consistent with this section,
which will be reviewed by the Zoning Administrator who will determine whether
the request should be approved, conditionally approved, or denied without
prejudice pursuant to the standards and procedures contained in this section.
   (C)   Other regulatory approvals. Any eligible facilities request approved
under this chapter shall be subject to any and all lawful conditions or
requirements associated with such other permits or regulatory approvals from
the town and state or federal agencies.
   (D)   Eligible facilities request application requirement. An application
must include the following information:
      (1)    Full name and contact information for the facility owner, facility
operator, agent (if any), and property owner, and related letter(s) of
authorization. If the applicant does not own the subject property, the
application must include a written authorization signed by the property owner
that empowers the applicant to file the application and perform all wireless
facility construction, installation, operation, and maintenance to the extent
described in the application.
      (2)   The type of facility, including a full, written description of the
proposed facility, its purpose, and technical specifications.
      (3)   A detailed site and engineering plan of the proposed facility
containing the exact proposed location of the facility, created by a qualified,
licensed engineer and in accordance with requirements set by the Zoning
Administrator. The site and engineering plan shall display the dimensions of
each proposed facility, including, but not limited to, its height from the
ground level. The site and engineering plans shall show the proposed facility
from each cardinal direction.
      (4)   Photographs of facility equipment and an accurate visual impact
analysis with photo simulations.
      (5)   A written statement that explains why the applicant believes § 6409
(a) and the related FCC regulations require approval. A complete written
narrative analysis will state the applicable standard and all the facts that
allow the town to conclude the standard has been met. Bare conclusions not
factually supported do not constitute a complete written analysis. As part of
this written statement the applicant must also include (a) whether and why the
support structure qualifies as an existing tower or existing base station; and
(b) whether and why the proposed eligible facilities request does not cause a
substantial change in height, width, excavation, equipment cabinets,
concealment, or permit compliance. The analysis provided under (b) shall
include a copy of all prior conditions of approval and an explanation as to why
the prior conditions of approval are met by the proposed wireless facility
application.
      (6)   A technically-sufficient written report by a qualified radio
frequency emissions engineer, certifying that the facility is in compliance
with such FCC standards.
      (7)   Public notification. Proof that the applicant has provided public
notification, at its own cost, via mail to all property owners and occupants
within a radius of 300 feet from its proposed facilities. Information regarding
the application shall be displayed on the outside of the envelope.
   (E)   Administrative review; decision notices. The Zoning Administrator
shall administratively review an application for an eligible facilities request
and act on such an application without prior notice or a public hearing. Within
five working days after the Zoning Administrator approves, conditionally
approves, or denies an eligible facilities request application, the Zoning
Administrator shall send a written notice to the applicant. In the event that
the Zoning Administrator determines that an application submitted for approval
pursuant to § 6409(a) does not qualify for approval, the Zoning Administrator
will send written notice to the applicant that includes the reasons to support
the review authority's decision and states that the application will be denied
without prejudice.
   (F)   Required findings for § 6409(a) approval. The Zoning Administrator may
approve or conditionally approve an application submitted for § 6409(a)
approval when the Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed project:
      (1)   Qualifies as an eligible facilities request; and
      (2)   Complies with (or is conditioned to comply with) all generally
applicable health and safety rules.
   (G)   Criteria for denial without prejudice. The Zoning Administrator may
deny without prejudice an application submitted for approval pursuant to § 6409
(a) when it finds that the proposed project does not meet the criteria under
division (D) above.
   (H)   Conditional § 6409(a) approvals. Subject to any applicable limitations
in federal or state law, nothing in this chapter is intended to limit the
town's authority to conditionally approve an application for a § 6409(a)
approval to protect and promote the public health, safety, and welfare.
   (I)   Standard conditions of approval. In addition to all other conditions
adopted by the Zoning Administrator, all § 6409(a) approvals, whether approved
by the Zoning Administrator or deemed approved by the operation of law, shall
be automatically subject to the following conditions in this section; provided,
however, that the Zoning Administrator shall have discretion to modify or amend
these conditions on a case-by-case basis as may be necessary or appropriate
under the circumstances:
      (1)   Approved plans. Before the permittee submits any application for a
building permit or other permits required by the Fairfax Municipal Code, the
permittee must incorporate the wireless telecommunications facility permit
granted under this section, all conditions associated with the wireless
telecommunications facility permit and the approved plans and any photo
simulations into the project plans (the "approved plans") . The permittee must
construct, install and operate the wireless telecommunications facility in
strict compliance with the approved plans. The permittee shall submit an as-
built drawing within 90 days after installation of the facility.
      (2)   Permit term. The town's grant or grant by operation of law of a §
6409(a) approval will not extend the permit term, if any, for any conditional
use permit, or other underlying prior regulatory authorization. Accordingly,
the term for a § 6409(a) approval shall be coterminous with the underlying
permit or other prior regulatory authorization for the subject tower or base
station.
      (3)   Accelerated permit terms due to invalidation. In the event that any
court of competent jurisdiction invalidates any portion of § 6409(a) or any FCC
Rule 1217 that interprets § 6409(a) such that federal law would not mandate
approval for any § 6409(a) approval, such § 6409(a) approvals shall
automatically expire one year from the effective date of the judicial order,
unless the decision would not authorize accelerated termination of previously-
approved § 6409(a) approvals or the Zoning Administrator grants an extension
upon written request from the permittee that shows good cause for the
extension, which includes, without limitation, extreme financial hardship.
Notwithstanding anything in the previous sentence to the contrary, the Zoning
Administrator may not grant a permanent exemption or indefinite extension. A
permittee shall not be required to remove its improvements approved under the
invalidated § 6409(a) approval when it has submitted an application for a
conditional use permit for those improvements before the one-year period ends.
      (4)   No waiver of standing. The town's grant or grant by operation of
law of a § 6409(a) approval does not waive, and shall not be construed to
waive, any standing by or right of the town to challenge § 6409(a), any FCC
rules that interpret § 6409(a), or any § 6409(a) approval.
      (5)   Build-out period. The § 6409(a) approval will automatically expire
one year from the issuance date, unless the permittee obtains all other permits
and approvals required to install, construct and operate the approved wireless
facility, which includes, without limitation, any permits or approvals required
by the any federal, state, or local public agencies with jurisdiction over the
subject property, the wireless facility, or its use. The Zoning Administrator
may grant one written extension to a date certain when the permittee shows good
cause to extend the limitations period in a written request for an extension
submitted at least 30 days prior to the automatic expiration date in this
division (I)(5). Any further extensions may be granted by the Planning
Commission, in its sole discretion, pursuant to the same procedures to request
an extension from the Zoning Administrator.
      (6)   Maintenance obligations; vandalism. The permittee shall keep the
site, which includes, without limitation, any and all improvements, equipment,
structures, access routes, fences and landscape features, in a neat, clean, and
safe condition in accordance with the approved plans and all conditions in the
§ 6409(a) approval. The permittee shall keep the site area free from all litter
and debris at all times. The permittee, at its sole cost, shall remove and
remediate any graffiti or other vandalism at the site within two days after the
permittee receives notice or otherwise becomes aware that such graffiti or
other vandalism occurred.
      (7)   Compliance with laws. The permittee shall maintain compliance at
all times with all federal, state, and local laws applicable to the permittee,
the subject property, the wireless facility, or any use or activities in
connection with the use authorized in this § 6409(a) approval, including, but
not limited to, compliance with the Americans with Disability Act. The
permittee expressly acknowledges and agrees that this obligation is intended to
be broadly construed and that no other specific requirements in these
conditions are intended to reduce, relieve, or otherwise lessen the permittee's
obligations to maintain compliance with all applicable laws.
      (8)   Adverse impacts on other properties. The permittee shall use all
reasonable efforts to avoid any and all undue or unnecessary adverse impacts on
nearby properties that may arise from the permittee's construction,
installation, operation, modification, maintenance, repair, removal, or other
activities at the site. The permittee shall not perform or cause others to
perform any construction, installation, operation, modification, maintenance,
repair, removal, or other work that involves heavy equipment or machines on any
day and at any time prohibited under the Fairfax Municipal Code. The restricted
work hours in this condition will not prohibit any work required to prevent an
actual, immediate harm to property or persons, or any work during an emergency
declared by the town. The Zoning Administrator may issue a stop work order for
any work that violates this condition.
      (9)   Noise complaints. The permittee shall conduct all activities on the
site in compliance with the noise standards in the Fairfax Municipal Code. In
the event that any person files a noise complaint and the town verifies that
such complaint is valid, the permittee must remedy the violation within ten
days after notice from the town, which may include a demonstration that the
permittee has amended its operational guidelines in situations where the
violation arises from the permittee's personnel rather than the permittee's
equipment.
      (10)   Inspections; emergencies. The permittee expressly acknowledges and
agrees that the town or its designee may enter onto the site and inspect the
improvements and equipment upon reasonable prior notice to the permittee;
provided, however, that the town or its designee may, but is not obligated to,
enter onto the site area without prior notice to support, repair, disable, or
remove any improvements or equipment in emergencies or when such improvements
or equipment threatens actual, imminent harm to property or persons. The
permittee will be permitted to supervise the town or its designee while such
inspection or emergency access occurs.
      (11)   Contact information. The permittee shall furnish the town with
accurate and up-to-date contact information for a person responsible for the
wireless facility, which includes, without limitation, such person's full name,
title, direct telephone number, facsimile number, mailing address, and email
address. The permittee shall keep such contact information up-to-date at all
times.
      (12)   Performance bond. Before the town issues any construction permit
in connection with the wireless facility, if, in the town's sole discretion,
the existing performance bond for the facility is inadequate or the facility is
not associated with any existing performance bond, the permittee shall post a
performance bond from a surety and in a form acceptable to the Town Manager in
an amount equal to or greater than a written estimate from a qualified
contractor with experience in wireless facilities removal. The written estimate
must include the cost to remove all equipment and other improvements, which
includes, without limitation, all antennas, radios, batteries, generators,
utilities, cabinets, mounts, brackets, hardware, cables, wires, conduits,
structures, shelters, towers, poles, footings and foundations, whether above
ground or below ground, constructed or installed in connection with the
wireless facility. In establishing or adjusting the bond amount required under
this condition, and in accordance with Cal. Government Code § 65964(a), the
Town Manager shall take into consideration information provided by the
permittee regarding the cost to remove the wireless facility.
      (13)   Conditions of approval shall specify a maximum number of trips on
a case-by-case basis based upon the carrier's maintenance and testing schedule.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.150 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS COLLOCATION FACILITIES COVERED UNDER
CAL. GOVERNMENT CODE § 65850.6.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with an application
for a wireless telecommunications collocation facility under Cal. Government
Code § 65850.6, for which a § 6409(a) approval is not being requested. This
section provides the requirements, standards, and regulations for a wireless
telecommunications collocation facility for which subsequent collocation is a
permitted use pursuant to California law. Only those facilities that fully
comply with the eligibility requirements set forth in Cal. Government Code §
65850.6, or its successor provision, and which strictly adhere to the
requirements and regulations set forth in this section, shall qualify as a
wireless telecommunications collocation facility.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms are
defined as follows:
      COLLOCATION FACILITY. The placement or installation of wireless
facilities, including antennas, and related equipment, on, or immediately
adjacent to, a wireless telecommunications collocation facility.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS COLLOCATION FACILITY. A wireless
telecommunications facility that includes collocation facilities.
      WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. Equipment and network components
such as towers, utility poles, transmitters, base stations, and emergency power
systems that are integral to providing wireless telecommunications services.
   (C)   Procedures. Applications for wireless telecommunications collocation
facilities shall comply with this section and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. An application for a collocation facility under Cal. Government
Code § 65850.6 shall be processed in the same manner as an application for §
6409(a) approval is processed, except that where the process requires
justification for the § 6409(a) approval, the applicant shall instead provide
the justification for a collocation facility under Cal. Government Code §
65850.6.
   (D)   Requirements. All requirements, regulations, and standards set forth
in this chapter for a wireless telecommunications facility shall apply to a
wireless telecommunications collocation facility; provided, however, the
following shall also apply to a wireless telecommunications collocation
facility:
      (1)   The applicant for a wireless telecommunications collocation
facility permit shall describe or depict:
         (a)   The wireless telecommunications collocation facility as it will
be initially built; and
         (b)   All collocations at full build-out, including, but not limited
to, all antennas, antenna support structures, and accessory equipment.
      (2)   Any collocation shall use screening methods substantially similar
to those used on the existing wireless telecommunications facilities, unless
other optional screening methods are specified in the conditions of approval.
      (3)   A wireless telecommunications collocation facility permit shall not
be approved, unless an environmental impact report, negative declaration, or
mitigated negative declaration was prepared and approved for the wireless
telecommunications collocation facility.
   (E)   Permitted use. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a
subsequent collocation facility on a wireless telecommunications collocation
facility shall be a permitted use only if all of the following requirements are
satisfied:
      (1)   The wireless telecommunications collocation facility:
         (a)   Was approved after January 1, 2007, by discretionary permit;
         (b)   Was approved subject to an environmental impact report, negative
declaration, or mitigated negative declaration; and
         (c)   Otherwise complies with the requirements of Cal. Government Code
§ 65850.6(b), or its successor provision, for addition of a collocation
facility to a wireless telecommunications collocation facility, including, but
not limited to, compliance with all performance and maintenance requirements,
regulations, and standards in this chapter and the conditions of approval in
the wireless telecommunications collocation facility permit.
      (2)   The collocations were specifically considered when the relevant
environmental document was prepared for the wireless telecommunications
collocation facility.
      (3)   Before collocation, the applicant seeking collocation shall obtain
all other applicable non-discretionary permits, as required pursuant to the
Fairfax Municipal Code.
   (F)   New or amended permit. Except as otherwise provided above, approval of
a new or amended permit shall be required when the facility is modified other
than by collocation in accordance with this section, or the proposed
collocation:
      (1)   Increases the height of the existing permitted telecommunications
tower or otherwise changes the bulk, size, location, or any other physical
attributes of the existing permitted wireless telecommunications collocation
facility, unless specifically permitted under the conditions of approval
applicable to such wireless telecommunications collocation facility; or
      (2)   Adds any microwave dish or other antenna not expressly permitted to
be included in a collocation facility by the conditions of approval.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.160 BUSINESS LICENSE.
   A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be a substitute for any
business license otherwise required under the Fairfax Municipal Code.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.170 EMERGENCY DEPLOYMENT.
   In the event of a declared federal, state, or local emergency, or when
otherwise warranted by conditions that the Zoning Administrator deems to
constitute an emergency, the Zoning Administrator may approve the installation
and operation of a temporary wireless telecommunications facility (e.g., a cell
on wheels or "COW"), which is subject to such reasonable conditions that the
Zoning Administrator deems necessary.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.180 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   All wireless telecommunications facilities must comply at all times
with the following operation and maintenance standards. All necessary repairs
and restoration shall be completed by the permittee, owner, or operator within
48 hours:
      (1)   After discovery of the need by the permittee, owner, operator or
any designated maintenance agent; or
      (2)   After permittee, owner, operator, or any designated maintenance
agent receives notification from a resident or the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   All facilities, including, but not limited to, telecommunication
towers, poles, accessory equipment, lighting, fences, walls, shields, cabinets,
artificial foliage or camouflage, and the facility site shall be maintained in
good condition, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of:
      (1)   General dirt and grease;
      (2)   Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint;
      (3)   Rust and corrosion;
      (4)   Cracks, dents, and discoloration;
      (5)   Missing, discolored, or damaged artificial foliage or other
camouflage;
      (6)   Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris;
      (7)   Broken and misshapen structural parts; and
      (8)   Any damage from any cause.
   (C)   All trees, foliage, and other landscaping elements approved as part of
the facility shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the
permittee, owner, and operator of the facility shall be responsible for
replacing any damaged, dead, or decayed landscaping. No amendment to any
approved landscaping plan may be made until it is submitted to and approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   The permittee shall replace its facilities, after obtaining all
required permits, if maintenance or repair is not sufficient to return the
facility to the condition it was in at the time of installation.
   (E)   Each facility, operating alone and in conjunction with other
telecommunications facilities, shall be operated and maintained at all times in
compliance with applicable federal regulations, including FCC radio frequency
emissions standards. Within one month post-construction and annually
thereafter, permittee must provide a radio frequency report as a condition of
project approval to verify that actual levels of radio frequency emitted by the
approved facilities, operating alone and in combination with other approved
facilities, substantially conform to the pre-approved radio frequency report
and do not exceed current standards for permissible human exposure to radio
frequency as adopted by the FCC. In the event of an increase over accepted
levels is detected, the permittee shall be responsible for immediately making
the necessary adjustments to comply with FCC standards.
   (F)   Each facility shall be operated and maintained to comply at all times
with the noise regulations of this chapter and shall be operated and maintained
in a manner that will minimize noise impacts to surrounding residents. Except
for emergency repairs, any testing and maintenance activities that will be
audible beyond the property line shall only occur between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, unless
alternative hours are approved by the Zoning Administrator. Backup generators,
if permitted, shall only be operated during periods of power outages or for
testing.
   (G)   If a flagpole is used for camouflaging a wireless telecommunications
facility, flags shall be flown and shall be properly maintained at all times.
   (H)   Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely inspect each site
to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section and the
conditions of approval.
   (I)   Annual certification.
      (1)   Each year on July 1, the permittee shall submit an affidavit which
shall list, by location, all facilities it owns within the town by location,
and shall certify (1) each such installation remains in use; (2) that such in
use facility remains covered by insurance; and (3) each such installation which
is no longer in use, and pay applicable recertification fees established by the
town. Any facility which is no longer in use shall be removed by permittee
within 60 days of delivery of the affidavit, or be subject to a fine of $100
per day until removal.
      (2)   Where such annual re-certification has not timely submitted, or
equipment no longer in use has not been removed within the required 60-day
period, no further application for that small cell wireless installation will
be accepted by the town until such time as the annual re-certification has been
submitted and fee and fines paid.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.190 NO DANGEROUS CONDITIONS OR OBSTRUCTIONS ALLOWED.
   No person shall install, use, or maintain any wireless telecommunications
facility which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk
or parkway, when such installation, use, or maintenance endangers or is
reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, or when such
site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation
purposes, or other governmental use, or when such facility unreasonably
interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic
including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress
from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs
or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street
furniture, or other objects permitted at or near said location.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.200 PERMIT EXPIRATION.
   (A)   A permit for any wireless telecommunications facility shall be valid
for a period of ten years, unless the Planning Commission authorizes a
different period, or pursuant to another provision of the Fairfax Municipal
Code the permit lapses sooner or is revoked. At the end of such period, the
permit shall expire.
   (B)   A permittee may apply for renewals of its permit in increments of no
more than ten years and no sooner than 12 months prior to expiration of the
permit.
   (C)   An application for renewal shall be evaluated based on federal, state,
and local law as it exists at the time applicant seeks renewal. The following
may also be required for an application to renew a wireless permit:
      (1)   At the Zoning Administrator's discretion, additional studies and
information may be required of the applicant.
      (2)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the facility is
nonconforming or that additional conditions of approval are necessary to bring
the facility into compliance with the provisions of the Fairfax Municipal Code
that are then in effect, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the renewal
request to the Planning Commission.
   (D)   The request for a renewal shall be decided by the Planning Commission
if the permit expired before the application is made for a renewal or if the
Zoning Administrator refers the matter to the Planning Commission. After notice
and a public hearing, the Planning Commission may approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the renewal. A permit application may not be renewed if the
facility is not upgraded to mitigate its impacts, including land use
compatibility, visual resources, public safety or other factors addressed by
CEQA, to the greatest extent permitted by technology which exists at the time
of renewal and is consistent with the provisions of adequate service at
affordable rates.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.210 CESSATION OF USE OR ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A wireless telecommunications facility is considered abandoned and
shall be promptly removed as provided herein if it ceases to provide wireless
telecommunications services for 90 or more consecutive days. If there are two
or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become
effective until all users cease using the facility.
   (B)   The operator of a facility shall notify the town in writing of its
intent to abandon or cease use of a permitted site or a nonconforming site
(including unpermitted sites) within ten days of ceasing or abandoning use.
Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the operator of the facility shall
provide written notice to the Zoning Administrator of any discontinuation of
operations of 30 days or more.
   (C)   Failure to inform the Zoning Administrator of cessation or
discontinuation of operations of any existing facility as required by this
section shall constitute a violation of any approvals and be grounds for:
      (1)   Prosecution;
      (2)   Revocation or modification of the permit;
      (3)   Calling of any bond or other assurance required by this chapter or
conditions of approval of the permit;
      (4)   Removal of the facilities by the town in accordance with the
procedures established under the Fairfax Municipal Code for abatement of a
public nuisance at the owner's expense; and
      (5)   Any other remedies permitted under the Fairfax Municipal Code or
applicable law.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.220 REMOVAL AND RESTORATION, PERMIT EXPIRATION, REVOCATION OR
ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Permittee's removal obligation. Upon the expiration date of the
permit, earlier termination or revocation of the permit or abandonment of the
facility, the permittee, owner or operator shall remove its wireless
telecommunications facility and restore the site to its natural condition,
except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at
the sole discretion of the Zoning Administrator. Removal shall be in accordance
with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the town. The facility shall be removed from the property within
30 days of the permit's expiration, at no cost or expense to the town. If the
facility is located on private property, the private property owner shall also
be jointly and severally responsible for the expense of timely removal and
restoration.
   (B)   Failure to remove. Failure of the permittee, owner, or operator to
promptly remove its facility and restore the property within 30 days after
expiration, earlier termination, or revocation of the permit, or abandonment of
the facility, shall be a violation of the Fairfax Municipal Code, and be
grounds for:
      (1)   Prosecution;
      (2)   Calling of any bond or other assurance required by this chapter or
conditions of approval of permit;
      (3)   Removal of the facilities by the town in accordance with the
procedures established under the Fairfax Municipal Code for abatement of a
public nuisance at the owner's expense; or
      (4)   Any other remedies permitted under the Fairfax Municipal Code.
   (C)   Summary removal. In the event the Zoning Administrator determines that
the condition or placement of a wireless telecommunications facility located in
the public right-of-way constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of the
public right-of-way, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines
other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively,
"exigent circumstances"), the Zoning Administrator may cause the facility to be
removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing. If the
circumstances allow for it and, to the extent feasible, the Zoning
Administrator will notify the permittee to remove the facility and allow for
the reinstallation of the facility, subject to the permittee demonstrating to
the satisfaction of the town's Building Official and Zoning Administrator that
the work can be done in safe manner compliant with the original approved plans
and §
19.04.100. Written notice of the removal shall be served upon the person who
owns the facility within five business days of removal and all property removed
shall be preserved for the owner's pick-up, as is reasonably feasible. If the
owner cannot be identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to
pick-up the property within 60 days, the facility shall be treated as abandoned
property.
   (D)   Removal of facilities by town. In the event the town removes a
facility in accordance with this chapter, any such removal shall be without any
liability to the town for any damage to such facility that may result from
reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering
costs of nuisance abatement, the town may collect such costs from the
performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the
performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with the Fairfax
Municipal Code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the town has no obligation to
store such facility. Neither the permittee, the owner, nor the operator shall
have any claim if the town damages or destroys any such facility not timely
removed by the permittee, owner, or operator after notice, or removed by the
town due to exigent circumstances.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.230 AUTHORIZATION FOR DEPARTMENTAL FORMS, RULES, AND OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The Town Council authorizes the Zoning Administrator to develop and publish
permit application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related
materials that the Zoning Administrator finds necessary, appropriate or useful
for processing requests, applications, permits, or any other matter under this
chapter. Without further authorization from the Town Council, the Zoning
Administrator may from time-to-time update and alter any such permit
application forms, checklists, informational handouts and other related
materials as the Zoning Administrator deems necessary, appropriate or useful to
respond to regulatory, technological or other changes related to this chapter.
The Town Council authorizes the Zoning Administrator to establish other
reasonable rules and regulations, which may include, without limitation,
regular hours for appointments with applicants, as the Zoning Administrator
deems necessary or appropriate to organize, document, and manage the
application intake and permitting process.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.240 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals by applicants. Notwithstanding any provision of the Fairfax
Municipal Code to the contrary, including, but not limited to,
Chapter 17.036, any applicant may appeal a decision by the Zoning Administrator
under this chapter. The appeal must be filed within two days from the Zoning
Administrator's decision. The appeal must state in plain terms the grounds for
reversal and the facts that support those grounds. The Town Council shall serve
as the appellate authority for all appeals of all actions of the Zoning
Administrator taken pursuant to this section. The town shall provide notice for
an administrative hearing by the Town Council. The Town Council shall limit its
review to whether the project should be approved or denied in accordance with
the provisions in this chapter.
   (B)   Appeals by the general public. Any interested person or entity may
appeal any decision by the approval authority in accordance with the standards
and procedures in
Chapter 17.036, except as modified in this section. On the next available
meeting date after the appeal period lapses, or as soon as reasonably feasible
thereafter, the appellate body shall hold a public hearing to consider and act
on the application in accordance with the applicable provisions in the General
Plan, any applicable specific plan and all applicable provisions in the Fairfax
Municipal Code. Appeals from an approval will not be permitted to the extent
that the appeal is based on environmental effects from RF emissions that comply
with all applicable FCC regulations.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
§ 19.04.250 EFFECT ON OTHER ORDINANCES.
   Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve a person
from complying with any other applicable provision of the Fairfax Municipal
Code, including, but not limited to, obtaining any necessary encroachment or
building permits. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this
chapter and other provisions of the Fairfax Municipal Code, this chapter shall
control.
(Ord. 833, passed 8-7-2019)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to California Codes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO CALIFORNIA CODES
References to Cal. Cites Code Sections
References to Cal. Cites                                                   Code
                                                                           Sections
Building Code § 310                                                       17.048.010
Business and Professions Code Division 2, Chapter 9, commencing with §    8.19.020
4000
                                                                           5.56.020,
Business and Professions Code Division 10                                  17.110.020,
                                                                           17.110.050,
                                                                           17.110.100
Business and Professions Code § 8762                                      16.40.040
Business and Professions Code § 8771                                      16.16.040
Business and Professions Code § 11003                                     16.24.100
Business and Professions Code § 11003.1                                   16.24.100
Business and Professions Code § 11003.2                                   16.24.100
Business and Professions Code § 11003.4                                   16.24.100
Business and Professions Code § 11004                                     16.24.100
Business and Professions Code § 22952                                     8.44.210
Business and Professions Code § 25658                                     9.28.020
Business and Professions Code § 26001                                     17.110.020
Business and Professions Code § 26033                                     17.110.020
Business and Professions Code § 26054                                     17.110.040
Business and Professions Code § 26054(b)                                  17.110.040,
                                                                           17.110.050
Business and Professions Code § 26054(c)                                  5.56.030,
                                                                           17.110.030
Business and Professions Code § 26054(d)                                  5.56.030,
                                                                           17.110.030
Business and Professions Code § 26080(b)                                  5.56.030,
                                                                           17.110.030
Business and Professions Code § 26090(e)                                  5.56.030,
                                                                           17.110.030
Business and Professions Code § 26200                                     5.56.030
Civil Code §§ 51—53                                                    17.090.010,
                                                                           17.090.130
Civil Code §§ 51.3(b)(1)                                                 17.090.020
Civil Code § 783                                                          16.24.100
Civil Code § 801.5(a)(1) and (2)                                          17.138.210
Civil Code § 827                                                          5.55.040,
                                                                           5.55.050
Civil Code § 1159—1179.15                                               5.54.020
Civil Code § 1351(d)(f)(m)                                                16.04.030
                                                                           5.54.010,
Civil Code § 1940                                                         5.54.020,
                                                                           5.55.020,
                                                                           5.55.030
Civil Code § 1940.3                                                    5.55.060
Civil Code § 1946.1                                                       5.55.060
Civil Code § 1946.2                                                       5.54.020
Civil Code §§ 1946.12—1946.13                                          5.55.090
Civil Code § 1954.50—1954.535                                           5.55.090
Civil Code § 2080.7                                                       9.30.070
Civil Code § 4080                                                         15.04.065,
                                                                           17.138.260
Civil Code § 4100                                                         16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Code of Civil Procedure §§ 415.10 et seq.                               1.12.100
                                                                           1.12.120,
Code of Civil Procedure § 1094.6                                          5.56.140,
                                                                           8.44.310
Code of Civil Procedure § 1161(3)                                         5.55.030
Code of Civil Procedure § 1161(4)                                         5.55.030
Code of Civil Procedure §§ 1822.50—1822.59                             8.04.115
Code of Regulations 16 § 5003                                             5.56.020
Code of Regulations 16 § 5025                                             5.56.040,
                                                                           17.110.040
Code of Regs. § 18730                                                     2.48.010
Code of Regulations Title 12, Parts 1—12                                 15.04.010
Code of Regulations Title 14                                               8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 2, §    8.04.100
1270
Code of Regulations Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12                       8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 2            8.08.130-4
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 17225.54                                  8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 17331                                     8.08.130-13
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 17402.5(b)(4)                             8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 17855(a)(4)                               8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18784.7                                   8.08.130-4
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18784.8                                   8.08.130-4
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)                                  8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(6)                               8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(8)                               8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(18)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(25)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(26)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(35)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(40)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(46)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(48)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(73)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18982(a)(74)                              8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.8                                   8.08.130-3
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.9(b)                                8.08.130-3
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18984.9(b)(3)                             8.08.130-3
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18989.1                                   8.08.130-4
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3                                   8.08.130-11
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.3(b)                                8.08.130-12
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.4                                   8.08.130-11
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(1)                             8.08.130-12
Code of Regulations Title 14, § 18991.5(a)(2)                             8.08.130-12
Code of Regulations Title 19                                               8.04.100,
                                                                           15.04.020
Code of Regulations Title 23, Div. 2, Chapter 2.7                          17.138.470
Code of Regulations Title 24                                               15.04.010,
                                                                           15.04.065
Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 1                                       15.05.020
                                                                           15.04.070,
Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 6                                       15.04.075,
                                                                           15.05.020
Code of Regulations Title 24, Part 11                                      15.04.070,
                                                                           15.04.080
Code of Regulations Title 25, § 6932                                      17.008.020
Code of Regulations Title 27                                               8.08.010
Code of Regulations Title 27, § 20164                                     8.14.020
Elections Code § 22003                                                    2.04.010
Elections Code §§ 23300 et seq.                                          2.04.010
Electrical Code, Article 625                                               17.008.020
Fish and Game Code §§ 2050 et seq.                                       19.04.020
Gov’t Code Division 1, Chapter 13                                     17.048.010
Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 2, Article 2                     16.16.050
Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 2, Chapter 5, commencing at § 66499        16.16.070
Gov’t Code, Title 7, Division 2, commencing with § 66410                16.04.010
Gov’t Code Title 7, Division 3, § 66499.50                              16.16.050
Gov't Code § 831.7                                                        10.28.030
Gov’t Code § 905                                                        1.20.020
Gov’t Code § 910                                                        3.44.060
Gov’t Code § 910—915.2                                                1.20.020
Gov’t Code § 935                                                        1.20.020
Gov’t Code § 945.4                                                      1.20.020
Gov’t Code § 945.6                                                      3.40.020
Gov’t Code §§ 6250 et seq.                                             8.08.130-13
Gov’t Code §§ 7060—7060.7                                            16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Gov’t Code § 7280                                                       3.32.010,
                                                                           3.32.030
Gov’t Code § 7281                                                       3.32.010,
                                                                           3.32.030
Gov’t Code §§ 12900—12995                                            17.090.010,
                                                                           17.090.130
Gov’t Code § 17021.5                                                    17.008.020
Gov’t Code § 19572                                                      2.56.090
Gov’t Code § 36512(b)                                                   2.04.020
Gov’t Code § 36512(c)(3)                                                2.04.020
Gov’t Code § 36516                                                      2.08.080
                                                                           1.08.020,
Gov’t Code § 36900                                                      8.04.120,
                                                                           8.32.030
Gov’t Code § 36901                                                      1.08.020,
                                                                           8.32.030
Gov’t Code § 36937                                                      1.04.150
                                                                           1.12.100,
Gov’t Code § 38773.1                                                    8.04.115,
                                                                           8.06.015
                                                                           1.12.105,
Gov’t Code § 38773.5                                                    8.04.115,
                                                                           8.06.015,
                                                                           10.16.150
Gov’t Code § 38773.7                                                    1.12.110
Gov’t Code §§ 38780—38785                                            15.08.010
Gov’t Code §§ 40802—40805                                            2.16.050
Gov’t Code § 40805.5                                                    2.16.010
                                                                           6.04.010,
                                                                           6.04.030,
                                                                           6.04.036,
Gov’t Code § 50022.9                                                    6.04.037,
                                                                           6.04.038,
                                                                           6.04.040,
                                                                           6.04.041,
                                                                           13.04.020
Gov’t Code § 50065                                                      17.008.020
Gov’t Code § 50075.3                                                    3.02.010
Gov’t Code §§ 51175—51189                                            8.04.100
Gov’t Code § 51182                                                      17.008.020
Gov't Code § 51182.1                                                      17.138.610
Gov’t Code §§ 51500—51521                                            3.04.020
                                                                           8.18.060,
Gov’t Code § 53069.4                                                    8.44.290,
                                                                           9.28.070
                                                                           17.020.100,
Gov’t Code § 65010                                                      17.028.060,
                                                                           17.032.050
Gov’t Code § 65089.3(2)                                                 10.32.020
Gov’t Code § 65090                                                      16.08.080
Gov’t Code § 65091                                                      16.08.080
Gov’t Code § 65302                                                      17.068.010
Gov’t Code § 65560                                                      17.068.010
Gov’t Code § 65583(a)(7)                                                17.126.020
Gov’t Code § 65583.1                                                    17.048.010
                                                                           15.05.040,
                                                                           17.140.040,
Gov’t Code § 65589.5                                                    17.027.030,
                                                                           17.027.040,
                                                                           17.027.090
Gov’t Code § 65589.5(d)                                                 17.027.080
                                                                           16.22.010,
Gov’t Code § 65589.5(d)(2)                                              17.049.010,
                                                                           17.126.060
Gov’t Code § 65589.5(h)(2)                                           17.027.030
Gov’t Code § 65589.5(o)                                                 15.05.040
Gov’t Code § 65589.5(o)(1)(D)                                           17.027.050
Gov’t Code § 65660                                                      17.138.320
Gov't Code § 65664                                                        17.138.320
Gov’t Code § 65800                                                      17.004.010,
                                                                           17.068.010
Gov’t Code § 65850(g)                                                   17.140.060
Gov’t Code § 65850.5                                                    17.138.210
Gov’t Code § 65850.55                                                   17.138.250
Gov’t Code § 65850.6                                                    19.04.150
Gov’t Code § 65850.6(b)                                                 19.04.150
Gov't Code § 65850.7                                                      15.04.065
Gov’t Code § 65852.1                                                    8.44.020
Gov’t Code § 65852.150                                                  8.44.020
Gov’t Code § 65852.2                                                    8.44.020
Gov't Code § 65852.2(c)                                                   15.04.020
Gov’t Code § 65852.2(i)(4)                                              8.04.100 ,
                                                                           15.04.020
Gov’t Code § 65852.21                                                   17.049.010
Gov’t Code § 65866                                                      15.05.040
Gov’t Code § 65905.5                                                    17.027.070
Gov’t Code § 65912.122                                                  17.126.060
                                                                           15.05.040,
                                                                           17.020.100,
Gov’t Code § 65913.4                                                    17.026.020 -
                                                                           17.026.060,
                                                                           17.050.030
Gov’t Code § 65913.4(a)                                                 17.026.060
Gov’t Code § 65913.4(a)(6)(B)-(K)                                       16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Gov’t Code § 65913.4(b)                                                 17.026.060
Gov’t Code § 65913.4(e)                                                 17.026.060
Gov’t Code § 65913.4(h)                                                 17.026.060
Gov’t Code §§ 65915 through 65918                                      17.050.020
                                                                           17.010.020,
Gov’t Code § 65915                                                      17.050.030,
                                                                           17.126.070
Gov’t Code § 65915(g)(2)(A through H)                                   17.050.050
Gov’t Code § 65915(h)                                                   17.050.050
Gov’t Code § 65915(h)(2)(A) and (B)                                     17.050.050
Gov't Code § 65915(k)                                                     17.126.060
Gov’t Code § 65915(k)(2)                                                17.050.050
Gov’t Code § 65941.1                                                    17.026.060,
                                                                           17.027.050
Gov’t Code § 65943                                                      17.140.040
Gov’t Code § 65950                                                   17.027.080
Gov’t Code § 65962.5                                                    16.08.030
Gov’t Code § 66000(b)                                                   17.048.010
Gov’t Code § 66015                                                      17.138.250
Gov’t Code § 66016                                                      17.138.250
Gov’t Code § 66330                                                   17.048.010
Gov’t Code § 66333(a)                                                   17.048.010
Gov’t Code §§ 66333 through 66339                                      17.048.010
Gov’t Code § 66341                                                   17.048.010
Gov’t Code §§ 66410 et seq.                                            16.22.010,
                                                                           16.48.020
Gov’t Code § 66411.1                                                    16.22.010
Gov’t Code § 66411.7                                                    16.22.010
Gov’t Code § 66411.7(a)(3)(C)                                           16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Gov’t Code § 66412                                                      16.04.030—
                                                                           16.04.050
Gov’t Code § 66412.1                                                    16.04.040,
                                                                           16.04.050
Gov’t Code § 66412.2                                                    16.04.040
Gov’t Code § 66412.6                                                    16.44.070
Gov’t Code § 66418.2                                                    16.04.030
Gov’t Code § 66426                                                      16.04.050
Gov’t Code § 66428                                                      16.04.050
Gov’t Code § 66430                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66434                                                      16.16.020
Gov’t Code § 66434.2                                                    16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66434.5                                                    16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66439                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66439(a)                                                   16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66440                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66441                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66442                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66445                                                      16.20.030
Gov’t Code § 66447                                                      16.20.040
Gov’t Code § 66448                                                      16.20.050
Gov’t Code § 66449(a)                                                   16.20.060
Gov’t Code § 66449(b)                                                   16.20.060
Gov’t Code § 66450                                                      16.20.060
Gov’t Code § 66451.11(b)(A), (C) or (D)                                 16.28.030
Gov’t Code § 66451.12                                                   16.32.040
Gov’t Code §§ 66451.15—66451.21                                      16.28.040
Gov’t Code § 66451.3                                                    16.36.080
Gov’t Code § 66451.3(a)                                                 16.08.080
Gov’t Code §§ 66451.10 et seq.                                         16.28.020
Gov’t Code § 66452.2                                                    16.08.070
Gov’t Code § 66452.3                                                    16.08.050
Gov’t Code § 66452.5                                                    16.08.090
Gov’t Code § 66452.6                                                    16.08.110
Gov’t Code § 66453                                                      16.08.050
Gov’t Code § 66455                                                      16.08.050
Gov’t Code § 66458                                                      16.20.080
Gov’t Code § 66458(c)                                                   16.20.080
Gov’t Code § 66462                                                      16.16.070
Gov’t Code § 66466(c)                                                   16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66473.1                                                    16.08.100
Gov’t Code § 66474.6                                                    16.08.100
Gov’t Code § 66475.3                                                    16.24.200
Gov’t Code § 66477                                                      16.24.100,
                                                                           17.48.010
Gov’t Code § 66477(b)                                                   16.24.100
Gov’t Code § 66477(f)                                                   16.24.100
Gov’t Code §§ 66479—66482                                            16.24.180
Gov’t Code §§ 66485—66489                                            16.24.190
Gov’t Code § 66490                                                      16.24.140
Gov’t Code § 66491                                                      16.24.140
Gov’t Code § 66492                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66495                                                      16.16.050
Gov’t Code § 66498.1                                                    16.04.030,
                                                                           16.12.090
Gov’t Code § 66499.203/4                                                16.04.030,
                                                                           16.32.010
Gov’t Code § 66499.34                                                   16.44.060
Gov’t Code § 66499.35(a)                                                16.44.040
Gov’t Code § 66499.35(b)                                                16.44.040
Gov’t Code § 66499.37                                                   16.24.210
Gov’t Code § 66998.1                                                    15.05.040
Gov’t Code §§ 81000 et seq.                                            2.48.010
Gov’t Code § 84100                                                      2.04.030
Gov’t Code § 87200                                                   2.04.030
Gov’t Code § 95962.5                                                    16.16.060
Health and Safety Code, Division 10                                        17.110.120
Health and Safety Code, Division 106, Part 2, Chapter 1, Article 2,        8.19.030,
commencing with § 123275                                                  8.72.050
Health and Safety Code § 1596.76                                          17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 1596.750                                         17.110.020
Health and Safety Code §§ 11000 et seq.                                  9.28.040
Health and Safety Code § 11018                                            17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 11018.5                                          17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 11350                                            9.28.020
Health and Safety Code § 11357                                            9.28.020
Health and Safety Code § 11362.1                                          17.110.020
Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.1 et seq.                                5.56.020,
                                                                           17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 11362.2                                          17.110.020
Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.3                                        8.44.010
Health and Safety Code § 11362.5                                          5.56.020,
                                                                           17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 11362.7                                          17.110.020 
Health and Safety Code §§ 11362.7 et seq.                                5.56.020,
                                                                           17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 11362.765                                        17.110.020
Health and Safety Code § 11362.768(c)                                     17.110.040
Health and Safety Code § 11377                                            9.28.020
Health and Safety Code §§ 11472—11479                                  17.110.120
Health and Safety Code § 16007                                            15.04.070
Health and Safety Code § 17920.3                                          17.048.010
Health and Safety Code § 17951                                            17.138.250
Health and Safety Code § 17958.1                                          15.04.070,
                                                                           17.048.010
Health and Safety Code § 17980                                            1.12.110
Health and Safety Code § 17980.12                                         17.048.010
Health and Safety Code § 18007                                            17.048.010,
                                                                           17.048.030
Health and Safety Code § 18551                                            17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50052.5                                          17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50053                                            5.55.020,
                                                                           5.55.090
Health and Safety Code § 50053(b)                                         17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50079.5                                          17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50093                                            17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50105                                            17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50519(b)(1)                                      8.44.020
Health and Safety Code § 50675.2(h)                                       17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50675.14(b)                                      17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 50801                                            17.008.020
Health and Safety Code § 113783                                           8.08.010
Health and Safety Code § 113789                                           8.72.010
Health and Safety Code § 113841                                           8.08.010
Health and Safety Code § 113842                                           8.08.010
Health and Safety Code §§ 114960 et seq.                                 8.08.010
Health and Safety Code § 115800                                           10.28.030
Health and Safety Code §§ 117600 et seq.                                 8.08.010
Labor Code § 6404.5                                                       8.44.260
Motor Vehicle Code § 27001                                                8.20.060
Penal Code Title 3, Chapter 5C, Part 2                                     1.08.060
Penal Code Title 3, Chapter 5C, Part 2, commencing with § 853.5           1.16.010
                                                                           8.04.110,
Penal Code Title 3, Part 2, Chs. 5, 5c and 5d, including § 853.6          8.06.014,
                                                                           8.32.030
Penal Code § 308(a)                                                       8.44.210
                                                                           5.32.010,
Penal Code § 326.5                                                        5.32.040,
                                                                           5.32.220,
                                                                           8.44.040
Penal Code § 326.5(b)                                                     5.32.210
                                                                           1.08.060,
                                                                           1.16.010,
Penal Code § 836.5                                                        8.04.110,
                                                                           8.06.014,
                                                                           8.32.030
Penal Code § 1212                                                         1.04.180
Public Contract Code §§ 22000 et seq.                                    3.36.010
Public Resources Code § 4290                                              8.04.100
Public Resources Code Division 13                                          16.08.070
                                                                           5.56.060,
Public Resources Code §§ 21000 et seq.                                   5.56.070,
                                                                           16.08.060
Public Resources Code § 21155                                             17.048.010
Public Resources Code Division 30                                          8.08.010
Public Resources Code §§ 40000 et seq.                                   8.08.010,
                                                                           8.08.130-1
Public Resources Code § 40141                                             8.08.010
Public Resources Code § 40191                                             8.08.010
Public Resources Code § 40195.1                                           8.08.010
Public Resources Code § 40201                                             8.08.010
Public Resources Code Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 5.1, commencing with § 8.18.010
42250
Public Utilities Code § 218                                               3.12.010
Public Utilities Code § 222                                               3.12.010
Public Utilities Code § 234                                               3.12.010
Public Utilities Code § 453(b)                                            8.68.010
Public Utilities Code § 21411                                             3.10.110
                                                                           3.08.070,
                                                                           3.08.090,
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1                               3.08.120,
                                                                           3.08.130,
                                                                           3.10.090,
                                                                           3.10.130
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1, commencing with § 6001      3.10.080
                                                                           3.08.020,
                                                                           3.08.060,
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.5                             3.08.110,
                                                                           3.08.140,
                                                                           3.08.150
                                                                           3.10.030,
                                                                           3.10.080,
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.6                             3.10.110,
                                                                           3.10.130,
                                                                           3.10.140
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.6, commencing with § 7251    3.10.030
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.7                             3.10.130
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 1.7, § 7285.9                  3.10.030
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 6.7                             3.16.100
Revenue and Taxation Code Division 2, Part 20                              3.12.030
Revenue and Taxation Code § 214(g)                                        16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 214.15                                        16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii)                           16.22.010,
                                                                           17.049.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 3691                                          1.12.105
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 5096 et seq.                                3.16.110
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 6001 et seq.                                3.10.080
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6067                                          3.08.080,
                                                                           3.10.100
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6203                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
                                                                           3.08.090,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6366                                          3.08.130,
                                                                           3.10.110
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6366.1                                        3.08.130,
                                                                           3.10.110
                                                                           3.08.070,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6701                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
                                                                           3.08.070,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6702                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
                                                                           3.08.070,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6711                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
                                                                           3.08.070,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6715                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
                                                                           3.08.070,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6737                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
                                                                           3.08.070,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6797                                          3.08.120,
                                                                           3.10.090
Revenue and Taxation Code § 6868                                          3.10.090
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 7251 et seq.                                3.10.030
Revenue and Taxation Code § 7285.9                                        3.10.030
Revenue and Taxation Code §§ 11901 et seq.                               3.16.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701a                                        5.32.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701b                                        5.32.010
                                                                           5.32.010,
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701d                                        5.32.040,
                                                                           5.32.080
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701e                                        5.32.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701f                                        5.32.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701g                                        5.32.010
Revenue and Taxation Code § 23701l                                        5.32.010
Streets and Highways Code Division 7, Part 3, Chapter 22                   12.44.030
Streets and Highways Code § 894                                           10.30.070
Streets and Highways Code § 2105                                          10.32.020
Streets and Highways Code § 2113                                          3.24.010
Streets and Highways Code § 5614                                          12.44.030
Vehicle Code Division 3, Chapter 1, commencing with § 4000                3.10.110
Vehicle Code Division 3.5, commending with § 9840                         3.10.110
Vehicle Code Division 11, Chapter 10, commencing with § 22650             10.16.020
Vehicle Code § 231                                                        10.30.020
Vehicle Code § 312.5                                                      10.30.020
Vehicle Code § 313                                                        10.30.020
Vehicle Code § 313.5                                                      10.30.020
Vehicle Code § 385.5.5                                                    10.30.020
Vehicle Code § 407.5                                                      10.30.020
Vehicle Code § 670                                                        10.30.020
Vehicle Code §§ 4000 et seq.                                             3.10.110
Vehicle Code § 5004                                                       10.16.120
Vehicle Code § 5900                                                       10.16.170
Vehicle Code §§ 9840 et seq.                                             3.10.110
Vehicle Code § 21212(a)                                                   10.30.030,
                                                                           10.30.070
Vehicle Code § 21214.5                                                    10.30.030,
                                                                           10.30.070
Vehicle Code § 22660                                                      10.16.040
Vehicle Code § 22669                                                      10.16.160
Vehicle Code § 22851.8                                                    10.16.160
Water Code § 10910                                                        16.24.130
Water Code § 13000 et seq.                                                8.32.010
Welfare and Institutions Code Chapter 2, Division 2                        9.04.040
Welfare and Institutions Code Chapter 6.5, Division 8                      17.138.320
Welfare and Institutions Code § 10072                                     8.72.050
Welfare and Institutions Code Division 9, Part 3, Chapter 10, commencing   8.19.030
with § 15500
                                                                           
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2006 Code
Prior Code  2006 Code
1.08.010    1.08.010
1.08.020    1.08.020
1.08.030    1.08.030
1.08.040    1.08.040
1.08.050    1.08.050
1.08.060    1.08.060
1.12.010    1.16.010
1.12.020    1.16.020
1.12.030    1.16.030
1.16.010    1.20.010
1.16.020    1.20.020
2.02.010    2.04.010
2.04.010    2.08.010
2.04.020    2.08.020
2.04.030    2.08.030
2.04.060    2.08.050
2.04.070    2.08.060
2.04.080    2.08.070
2.04.090    2.08.080
2.08.010    2.12.010
2.08.020    2.12.020
2.08.030    2.12.030
2.08.040    2.12.040
2.08.060    2.12.050
2.08.070    2.12.060
2.08.080    2.12.070
2.08.100    2.12.090
2.08.110    2.12.100
2.08.120    2.12.110
2.12.010    2.16.010
2.12.020    2.16.020
2.12.030    2.16.030
2.12.040    2.16.040
2.12.050    2.16.050
2.12.060    2.16.060
2.16.010    2.20.010
2.16.020    2.20.020
2.16.030    2.20.030
2.20.010    2.24.010
2.20.020    2.24.020
2.24.010    2.28.010
2.24.020    2.28.020
2.24.030    2.28.030
2.24.040    2.28.040
2.24.050    2.28.050
2.24.060    2.28.060
2.24.070    2.28.070
2.24.080    2.28.080
2.24.090    2.28.090
2.24.100    2.28.100
2.24.140    2.28.130
2.26.010    2.32.010
2.26.020    2.32.020
2.26.030    2.32.030
2.26.040    2.32.040
2.26.050    2.32.050
2.26.060    2.32.060
2.40.010    2.44.010
2.40.020    2.44.020
2.52.010    2.52.010
2.52.020    2.52.020
2.52.030    2.52.030
2.52.040    2.52.040
2.52.050    2.52.050
2.52.060    2.52.060
2.52.070    2.52.070
2.52.080    2.52.080
2.52.090    2.52.090
2.52.100    2.52.100
2.52.110    2.52.110
2.56.010    2.56.010
2.56.020    2.56.020
2.56.030    2.56.030
2.56.070    2.56.040
2.56.080    2.56.050
2.56.090    2.56.060
2.56.100    2.56.070
2.56.110    2.56.080
2.56.120    2.56.090
2.56.130    2.56.100
2.56.140    2.56.110
2.56.150    2.56.120
2.56.160    2.56.130
2.56.170    2.56.140
2.56.180    2.56.150
2.60.010    2.60.010
2.60.020    2.60.020
2.60.030    2.60.030
2.60.040    2.60.040
2.60.050    2.60.050
2.60.060    2.60.060
2.60.070    2.60.070
2.60.080    2.60.080
2.64.010    2.64.010
2.64.020    2.64.020
3.04.010    3.04.010
3.04.020    3.04.020
3.08.010    3.08.010
3.08.020    3.08.020
3.08.030    3.08.030
3.08.040    3.08.040
3.08.050    3.08.050
3.08.060    3.08.060
3.08.070    3.08.070
3.08.080    3.08.080
3.08.090    3.08.090
3.08.100    3.08.100
3.08.110    3.08.110
3.08.120    3.08.120
3.08.130    3.08.130
3.08.140    3.08.140
3.08.150    3.08.150
3.12.010    3.12.010
3.12.020    3.12.020
3.12.030    3.12.030
3.12.040    3.12.040
3.12.050    3.12.050
3.12.060    3.12.060
3.12.070    3.12.070
3.12.080    3.12.080
3.12.090    3.12.090
3.12.100    3.12.100
3.12.110    3.12.110
3.12.120    3.12.120
3.12.130    3.12.130
3.16.010    3.16.010
3.16.020    3.16.020
3.16.030    3.16.030
3.16.040    3.16.050
3.16.040    3.16.040
3.16.060    3.16.060
3.16.070    3.16.070
3.16.080    3.16.080
3.16.090    3.16.090
3.16.100    3.16.100
3.16.110    3.16.110
3.24.010    3.24.010
3.24.020    3.24.020
3.24.030    3.24.030
3.28.010    3.28.010
3.32.010    3.32.010
3.32.020    3.32.020
3.32.030    3.32.030
3.32.040    3.32.040
3.32.050    3.32.050
3.32.060    3.32.060
3.32.070    3.32.070
3.32.080    3.32.080
3.32.090    3.32.090
3.32.100    3.32.100
3.32.110    3.32.110
3.32.120    3.32.120
3.36.010    3.36.010
3.36.020    3.36.020
3.36.030    3.36.030
3.36.040    3.36.040
3.36.050    3.36.050
3.36.060    3.36.060
3.40.010    3.40.010
3.40.020    3.40.020
5.04.010    5.04.010
5.04.020    5.04.020
5.04.030    5.04.030
5.04.040    5.04.040
5.08.010    5.08.010
5.08.020    5.08.020
5.08.030    5.08.030
5.08.040    5.08.040
5.08.050    5.08.050
5.08.060    5.08.060
5.08.070    5.08.070
5.12.010    5.12.010
5.12.020    5.12.020
5.12.030    5.12.030
5.12.040    5.12.040
5.12.050    5.12.050
5.12.060    5.12.060
5.12.070    5.12.070
5.12.080    5.12.080
5.12.090    5.12.090
5.12.100    5.12.100
5.12.110    5.12.110
5.12.120    5.12.120
5.12.130    5.12.130
5.16.010    5.16.010
5.16.020    5.16.020
5.16.030    5.16.030
5.16.040    5.16.040
5.16.070    5.16.050
5.16.080    5.16.060
5.16.090    5.16.070
5.16.100    5.16.080
5.16.110    5.16.090
5.16.120    5.16.100
5.16.130    5.16.110
5.16.140    5.16.120
5.16.160    5.16.130
5.16.170    5.16.140
5.16.180    5.16.150
5.16.190    5.16.160
5.16.210    5.16.170
5.16.220    5.16.180
5.20.010    5.20.010
5.20.020    5.20.020
5.24.010    5.24.010
5.24.020    5.24.020
5.24.030    5.24.030
5.24.040    5.24.040
5.28.010    5.28.010
5.28.020    5.28.020
5.28.030    5.28.030
5.28.040    5.28.040
5.32.010    5.32.010
5.32.020    5.32.020
5.32.030    5.32.030
5.32.040    5.32.040
5.32.050    5.32.050
5.32.060    5.32.060
5.32.070    5.32.070
5.32.080    5.32.080
5.32.090    5.32.090
5.32.100    5.32.100
5.32.110    5.32.110
5.32.120    5.32.120
5.32.130    5.32.130
5.32.140    5.32.140
5.32.150    5.32.150
5.32.160    5.32.160
5.32.170    5.32.170
5.32.180    5.32.180
5.32.190    5.32.190
5.32.200    5.32.200
5.32.210    5.32.210
5.32.220    5.32.220
5.36.010    5.36.010
5.36.020    5.36.020
5.40.010    5.40.010
5.40.020    5.40.020
5.40.030    5.40.030
5.40.040    5.40.040
5.40.050    5.40.050
5.40.060    5.40.060
5.40.070    5.40.070
5.40.080    5.40.080
5.44.010    5.44.010
5.44.020    5.44.020
5.44.030    5.44.030
5.44.040    5.44.040
5.44.050    5.44.050
5.44.060    5.44.060
5.44.070    5.44.070
5.44.080    5.44.080
5.44.090    5.44.090
5.44.100    5.44.100
5.44.110    5.44.110
5.44.120    5.44.120
5.44.130    5.44.130
5.44.140    5.44.140
5.44.150    5.44.150
5.44.160    5.44.160
6.04.010    6.04.010
6.04.020    6.04.020
6.04.036    6.04.030
6.08.010    6.08.010
6.08.020    6.08.020
6.08.030    6.08.030
6.08.040    6.08.040
6.08.050    6.08.050
6.12.010    6.12.010
6.12.020    6.12.020
6.12.030    6.12.030
6.12.040    6.12.040
6.12.050    6.12.050
6.12.060    6.12.060
6.12.070    6.12.070
6.12.080    6.12.080
6.12.090    6.12.090
6.16.010    6.16.010
6.16.011    6.16.020
6.16.020    6.16.030
6.16.030    6.16.040
6.16.040    6.16.050
6.16.050    6.16.060
6.16.060    6.16.070
8.08.010    8.08.010
8.08.020    8.08.020
8.08.030    8.08.030
8.08.040    8.08.040
8.08.050    8.08.050
8.08.060    8.08.060
8.08.070    8.08.070
8.08.080    8.08.080
8.08.090    8.08.090
8.08.100    8.08.100
8.08.110    8.08.110
8.08.120    8.08.120
8.10.010    8.16.010
8.10.020    8.16.020
8.10.030    8.16.030
8.10.040    8.16.040
8.10.050    8.16.070
8.10.060    8.16.100
8.10.070    8.16.110
8.12.030    8.12.010
8.12.031    8.12.020
8.12.032    8.12.030
8.12.033    8.12.040
8.12.034    8.12.050
8.12.035    8.12.090
8.12.035    8.12.060
8.12.036    8.12.070
8.12.037    8.12.080
8.12.039    8.12.100
8.12.040    8.12.110
8.12.041    8.12.120
8.12.042    8.12.130
8.12.043(a) 8.12.140
8.12.043(b) 8.12.150
8.12.043(c) 8.12.160
8.16.010    8.20.010
8.16.020    8.20.020
8.16.030    8.20.030
8.16.040    8.20.040
8.16.050    8.20.050
8.16.060    8.20.060
8.16.070    8.20.070
8.16.080    8.20.080
8.16.090    8.20.090
8.16.100    8.20.100
8.16.110    8.20.110
8.16.120    8.20.120
8.20.010    8.24.010
8.20.020    8.24.020
8.20.030    8.24.030
8.24.010    8.28.010
8.24.020    8.28.020
8.24.030    8.28.030
8.24.040    8.28.040
8.24.050    8.28.050
8.24.060    8.28.060
8.24.070    8.28.070
8.24.080    8.28.080
8.24.090    8.28.090
8.24.100    8.28.100
8.24.110    8.28.110
8.24.120    8.28.120
8.24.130    8.28.130
8.24.140    5.28.140
8.24.150    8.28.150
8.26.010    8.32.010
8.26.020    8.32.010
8.26.030    8.32.030
8.30.010    8.40.010
8.30.020    8.40.020
8.30.030    8.40.030
8.30.040    8.40.040
8.30.050    8.40.050
8.30.060    8.40.060
8.30.070    8.40.070
8.30.080    8.40.080
8.30.090    8.40.090
8.36.010    8.48.010
8.36.020    8.48.020
8.36.030    8.48.030
8.36.040    8.48.040
8.36.050    8.48.050
8.36.060    8.48.060
8.36.070    8.48.070
8.36.080    8.48.080
8.36.090    8.48.090
9.04.010    9.04.010
9.04.020    9.04.020
9.04.040    9.04.030
9.04.050    9.04.040
9.04.060    9.04.050
9.08.010    9.08.010
9.08.020    9.08.020
9.08.030    9.08.030
9.08.040    9.08.040
9.12.010    9.12.010
9.12.020    9.12.020
9.12.030    9.12.030
9.14.010    9.16.010
9.14.020    9.16.020
9.14.030    9.16.030
9.16.010    9.20.010
10.04.010   10.04.010
10.04.020   10.04.020
10.04.030   10.04.030
10.04.040   10.04.040
10.04.050   10.04.050
10.04.060   10.04.060
10.04.070   10.04.070
10.04.080   10.04.080
10.04.090   10.04.090
10.04.095   10.04.100
10.04.100   10.04.110
10.04.110   10.04.120
10.04.120   10.04.130
10.04.130   10.04.140
10.04.140   10.04.150
10.04.150   10.04.160
10.08.010   10.08.010
10.08.020   10.08.020
10.08.030   10.08.030
10.08.040   10.08.040
10.08.050   10.08.050
10.08.060   10.08.060
10.08.070   10.08.070
10.12.010   10.12.010
10.12.020   10.12.020
10.12.030   10.12.030
10.12.040   10.12.040
10.12.050   10.12.050
10.16.010   10.16.010
10.16.020   10.16.020
10.16.030   10.16.030
10.16.040   10.16.040
10.16.050   10.16.050
10.16.060   10.16.060
10.16.070   10.16.070
10.16.080   10.16.080
10.16.090   10.16.090
10.16.100   10.16.100
10.16.110   10.16.110
10.16.120   10.16.120
10.16.130   10.16.130
10.16.140   10.16.140
10.16.150   10.16.150
10.16.160   10.16.160
10.16.170   10.16.170
10.24.010   10.24.010
10.24.020   10.24.020
10.24.030   10.24.030
10.24.040   10.24.040
10.24.050   10.24.050
10.24.060   10.24.060
10.30.010   10.28.010
10.40.010   10.32.010
10.40.020   10.32.020
10.40.030   10.32.030
10.40.040   10.32.040
10.40.050   10.32.050
10.40.060   10.32.060
12.04.010   12.04.010
12.04.020   12.04.020
12.08.010   12.08.010
12.08.020   12.08.020
12.08.030   12.08.030
12.08.040   12.08.040
12.08.050   12.08.050
12.08.060   12.08.060
12.08.070   12.08.070
12.08.080   12.08.080
12.12.010   12.12.010
12.12.020   12.12.020
12.12.030   12.12.030
12.12.040   12.12.040
12.12.050   12.12.050
12.12.060   12.12.060
12.12.070   12.12.070
12.12.080   12.12.080
12.12.090   12.12.090
12.16.010   12.16.010
12.16.020   12.16.020
12.16.030   12.16.030
12.16.040   12.16.040
12.16.050   12.16.050
12.16.060   12.16.060
12.16.070   12.16.070
12.16.080   12.16.080
12.16.090   12.16.090
12.20.010   12.20.010
12.20.020   12.20.020
12.20.030   12.20.030
12.20.040   12.20.040
12.20.050   12.20.050
12.20.060   12.20.060
12.20.070   12.20.070
12.20.080   12.20.080
12.20.090   12.20.090
12.20.100   12.20.100
12.20.110   12.20.110
12.20.120   12.20.120
12.20.130   12.20.130
12.20.140   2.20.140
12.20.150   12.20.150
12.20.160   12.20.160
12.20.170   12.20.170
12.24.010   12.24.010
12.24.020   12.24.020
12.24.030   12.24.030
12.24.040   12.24.040
12.24.050   12.24.050
12.24.060   12.24.060
12.24.070   12.24.070
12.24.080   12.24.080
12.24.090   12.24.090
12.28.010   12.28.010
12.28.020   12.28.020
12.28.030   12.28.030
12.28.040   12.28.040
12.28.050   12.28.050
12.28.060   12.28.060
12.32.010   12.32.010
12.32.020   12.32.020
12.32.030   12.32.030
12.44.010   12.44.010
12.48.010   12.48.010
13.04.010   13.04.010
13.04.020   13.04.020
13.04.030   13.04.030
13.04.040   13.04.040
13.04.050   13.04.050
13.04.060   13.04.060
13.04.070   13.04.070
13.04.080   13.04.080
13.04.090   13.04.090
13.04.100   13.04.100
13.04.110   13.04.110
13.04.120   13.04.120
13.04.130   13.04.130
13.04.140   13.04.140
13.04.150   13.04.150
13.08.010   13.08.010
13.08.020   13.08.020
13.08.030   13.08.030
13.08.040   13.08.040
13.08.050   13.08.050
13.08.060   13.08.060
13.08.070   13.08.070
13.08.080   13.08.080
13.08.090   13.08.090
13.08.100   13.08.100
13.08.110   13.08.110
13.08.120   13.08.120
15.32.010   15.08.010
15.32.020   15.08.020
15.32.030   15.08.030
15.32.040   15.08.040
15.32.050   15.08.050
15.32.060   15.08.060
15.32.070   15.08.070
15.32.080   15.08.080
15.32.090   15.08.090
15.32.100   15.08.100
15.36.010   15.12.010
15.36.020   15.12.020
15.36.030   15.12.030
15.36.040   15.12.040
15.36.050   15.12.050
15.36.060   15.12.060
15.36.070   15.12.070
15.36.080   15.12.080
15.36.090   15.12.090
15.36.100   15.12.100
15.44.010   15.16.010
15.44.020   15.16.020
15.44.030   15.16.030
15.44.040   15.16.040
16.02.010   16.04.010
16.02.020   16.04.020
16.02.030   16.04.030
16.02.040   16.04.040
16.02.050   16.04.050
16.02.060   16.04.060
16.02.070   16.04.070
16.03.010   16.08.010
16.03.020   16.08.020
16.03.030   16.08.030
16.03.040   16.08.040
16.03.050   16.08.050
16.03.060   16.08.060
16.03.070   16.08.070
16.03.080   16.08.080
16.03.090   16.08.090
16.03.100   16.08.100
16.03.110   16.08.110
16.04.010   16.12.010
16.04.020   16.12.020
16.04.030   16.12.030
16.04.040   16.12.040
16.04.050   16.12.050
16.04.060   16.12.060
16.04.070   16.12.070
16.04.080   16.12.080
16.04.090   16.12.090
16.04.100   16.12.100
16.05.010   16.16.010
16.05.020   16.16.020
16.05.030   16.16.030
16.05.040   16.16.040
16.05.050   16.16.050
16.05.060   16.16.060
16.05.070   16.16.070
16.05.080   16.16.080
16.05.090   16.16.090
16.06.010   16.20.010
16.06.020   16.20.020
16.06.030   16.20.030
16.06.040   16.20.040
16.06.050   16.20.050
16.06.060   16.20.060
16.06.070   16.20.070
16.06.080   16.20.080
16.06.090   16.20.090
16.06.100   16.20.100
16.07.010   16.24.010
16.07.020   16.24.020
16.07.030   16.24.030
16.07.040   16.24.040
16.07.050   16.24.050
16.07.060   16.24.060
16.07.070   16.24.070
16.07.080   16.24.080
16.07.090   16.24.090
16.07.100   16.24.100
16.07.110   16.24.110
16.07.120   16.24.120
16.07.130   16.24.130
16.07.140   16.24.140
16.07.150   16.24.150
16.07.160   16.24.160
16.07.170   16.24.170
16.07.180   16.24.180
16.07.190   16.24.190
16.07.200   16.24.200
16.07.210   16.24.210
16.07.220   16.24.220
16.07.230   16.24.230
16.08.010   16.28.010
16.08.020   16.28.020
16.08.030   16.28.030
16.08.040   16.28.040
16.09.010   16.32.010
16.09.020   16.32.020
16.09.030   16.32.030
16.09.040   16.32.040
16.10.010   16.36.010
16.10.020   16.36.020
16.10.030   16.36.030
16.10.040   16.36.040
16.10.050   16.36.050
16.10.060   16.36.060
16.10.070   16.36.070
16.10.080   16.36.080
16.10.090   16.36.090
16.10.100   16.36.100
16.10.110   16.36.110
16.10.120   16.36.120
16.10.130   16.36.130
16.10.140   16.36.140
16.11.010   16.40.010
16.11.020   16.40.020
16.11.030   16.40.030
16.11.040   16.40.040
16.12.010   16.44.010
16.12.020   16.44.020
16.12.030   16.44.030
16.12.040   16.44.040
16.12.050   16.44.050
16.12.060   16.44.060
16.12.070   16.44.070
16.13.010   16.48.010
16.13.020   16.48.020
16.13.030   16.48.030
16.13.040   16.48.040
16.13.050   16.48.050
16.13.060   16.48.060
17.02.010   17.004.010
17.02.020   17.004.020
17.02.030   17.004.030
17.02.040   17.004.040
17.02.050   17.004.050
17.02.060   17.004.060
17.02.070   17.004.070
17.02.080   17.004.080
17.02.085   17.004.090
17.02.090   17.004.100
17.02.100   17.004.110
17.02.110   17.004.120
17.02.120   17.004.130
17.02.130   17.004.140
17.02.140   17.004.150
17.02.150   17.004.160
17.02.160   17.004.170
17.04.003   17.008.010
17.04.006   17.008.020
17.04.009   17.008.020
17.04.012   17.008.020
17.04.015   17.008.020
17.04.018   17.008.020
17.04.021   17.008.020
17.04.024   17.008.020
17.04.027   17.008.020
17.04.030   17.008.020
17.04.033   17.008.020
17.04.036   17.008.020
17.04.039   17.008.020
17.04.042   17.008.020
17.04.045   17.008.020
17.04.048   17.008.020
17.04.051   17.008.020
17.04.054   17.008.020
17.04.057   17.008.020
17.04.060   17.008.020
17.04.066   17.008.020
17.04.069   17.008.020
17.04.072   17.008.020
17.04.075   17.008.020
17.04.081   17.008.020
17.04.084   17.008.020
17.04.087   17.008.020
17.04.090   17.008.020
17.04.093   17.008.020
17.04.099   17.008.020
17.04.102   17.008.020
17.04.105   17.008.020
17.04.111   17.008.020
17.04.114   17.008.020
17.04.117   17.008.020
17.04.120   17.008.020
17.04.123   17.008.020
17.04.126   17.008.020
17.04.129   17.008.020
17.04.132   17.008.020
17.04.135   17.008.020
17.04.138   17.008.020
17.04.141   17.008.020
17.04.144   17.008.020
17.04.147   17.008.020
17.04.150   17.008.020
17.04.153   17.008.020
17.04.156   17.008.020
17.04.159   17.008.020
17.04.162   17.008.020
17.04.165   17.008.020
17.04.168   17.008.020
17.04.171   17.008.020
17.04.174   17.008.020
17.04.177   17.008.020
17.04.180   17.008.020
17.04.183   17.008.020
17.04.186   17.008.020
17.04.189   17.008.020
17.04.192   17.008.020
17.04.195   17.008.020
17.04.198   17.008.020
17.04.201   17.008.020
17.04.204   17.008.020
17.04.207   17.008.020
17.04.210   17.008.020
17.04.213   17.008.020
17.04.216   17.008.020
17.04.219   17.008.020
17.04.222   17.008.020
17.04.225   17.008.020
17.04.228   17.008.020
17.04.231   17.008.020
17.04.234   17.008.020
17.04.237   17.008.020
17.04.240   17.008.020
17.04.246   17.008.020
17.04.249   17.008.020
17.04.252   17.008.020
17.04.255   17.008.020
17.04.258   17.008.020
17.04.261   17.008.020
17.04.264   17.008.020
17.04.267   17.008.020
17.04.270   17.008.020
17.04.273   17.008.020
17.04.276   17.008.020
17.04.279   17.008.020
17.04.282   17.008.020
17.04.285   17.008.020
17.04.288   17.008.020
17.04.291   17.008.020
17.04.294   17.008.020
17.04.297   17.008.020
17.04.300   17.008.020
17.04.303   17.008.020
17.04.306   17.008.020
17.04.309   17.008.020
17.04.312   17.008.020
17.04.315   17.008.020
17.04.318   17.008.020
17.04.321   17.008.020
17.04.324   17.008.020
17.04.327   17.008.020
17.04.330   17.008.020
17.04.333   17.008.020
17.04.336   17.008.020
17.04.339   17.008.020
17.04.342   17.008.020
17.04.345   17.008.020
17.04.348   17.008.020
17.04.351   17.008.020
17.04.354   17.008.020
17.04.357   17.008.020
17.04.360   17.008.020
17.04.363   17.008.020
17.04.366   17.008.020
17.04.372   17.008.020
17.04.375   17.008.020
17.04.378   17.008.020
17.04.381   17.008.020
17.04.384   17.008.020
17.04.387   17.008.020
17.04.390   17.008.020
17.04.393   17.008.020
17.04.396   17.008.020
17.04.399   17.008.020
17.04.402   17.008.020
17.04.405   17.008.020
17.04.408   17.008.020
17.04.411   17.008.020
17.04.414   17.008.020
17.04.417   17.008.020
17.04.420   17.008.020
17.04.423   17.008.020
17.04.426   17.008.020
17.04.429   17.008.020
17.04.432   17.008.020
17.04.435   17.008.020
17.04.438   17.008.020
17.04.441   17.008.020
17.04.444   17.008.020
17.04.447   17.008.020
17.04.450   17.008.020
17.04.453   17.008.020
17.04.456   17.008.020
17.04.459   17.008.020
17.04.462   17.008.020
17.04.465   17.008.020
17.04.468   17.008.020
17.04.471   17.008.020
17.04.477   17.008.020
17.04.480   17.008.020
17.04.483   17.008.020
17.04.486   17.008.020
17.04.489   17.008.020
17.04.492   17.008.020
17.04.495   17.008.020
17.04.498   17.008.020
17.04.501   17.008.020
17.04.504   17.008.020
17.04.507   17.008.020
17.04.513   17.008.020
17.04.516   17.008.020
17.04.519   17.008.020
17.04.522   17.008.020
17.04.525   17.008.020
17.04.528   17.008.020
17.04.531   17.008.020
17.04.534   17.008.020
17.04.537   17.008.020
17.04.540   17.008.020
17.04.543   17.008.020
17.04.546   17.008.020
17.04.549   17.008.020
17.04.552   17.008.020
17.04.555   17.008.020
17.04.558   17.008.020
17.04.561   17.008.020
17.04.564   17.008.020
17.04.567   17.008.020
17.04.570   17.008.020
17.04.573   17.008.020
17.04.579   17.008.020
17.04.582   17.008.020
17.04.585   17.008.020
17.04.588   17.008.020
17.04.591   17.008.020
17.04.594   17.008.020
17.04.597   17.008.020
17.04.600   17.008.020
17.04.603   17.008.020
17.04.606   17.008.020
17.04.609   17.008.020
17.04.612   17.008.020
17.04.615   17.008.020
17.04.618   17.008.020
17.04.621   17.008.020
17.04.624   17.008.020
17.04.627   17.008.020
17.08.010   17.012.010
17.08.020   17.012.020
17.08.030   17.012.030
17.08.040   17.012.040
17.08.050   17.012.050
17.08.060   17.012.060
17.08.070   17.012.070
17.08.080   17.012.080
17.08.090   17.012.090
17.08.100   17.012.100
17.08.110   17.012.110
17.08.120   17.012.120
17.08.130   17.012.130
17.08.140   17.012.140
17.08.150   17.012.150
17.08.160   17.012.160
17.10.010   17.016.010
17.10.020   17.016.020
17.10.030   17.016.030
17.10.040   17.016.040
17.10.050   17.016.050
17.10.060   17.016.060
17.10.070   17.016.070
17.12.010   17.020.010
17.12.020   17.020.020
17.12.030   17.020.030
17.12.040   17.020.040
17.12.050   17.020.050
17.12.060   17.020.060
17.12.070   17.020.070
17.12.080   17.020.080
17.12.090   17.020.090
17.12.100   17.020.100
17.12.110   17.020.110
17.12.130   17.020.120
17.14.010   17.024.010
17.14.020   17.024.010
17.14.030   17.024.030
17.14.040   17.024.040
17.14.050   17.024.050
17.14.060   17.024.060
17.14.070   17.024.070
17.14.080   17.024.080
17.14.090   17.024.090
17.14.100   17.024.100
17.14.110   17.024.110
17.14.120   17.024.120
17.16.010   17.028.010
17.16.020   17.028.020
17.16.030   17.028.030
17.16.040   17.028.040
17.16.050   17.028.050
17.16.060   17.028.060
17.16.070   17.028.070
17.16.080   17.028.080
17.16.100   17.028.100
17.16.110   17.028.110
17.16.120   17.028.120
17.16.130   17.028.130
17.18.010   17.032.010
17.18.020   17.032.020
17.18.030   17.032.030
17.18.040   17.032.040
17.18.050   17.032.050
17.18.060   17.032.060
17.18.070   17.032.070
17.18.080   17.032.080
17.18.090   17.032.090
17.20.010   17.036.010
17.20.020   17.036.020
17.20.030   17.036.030
17.20.040   17.036.040
17.20.050   17.036.050
17.20.060   17.036.060
17.20.070   17.036.070
17.20.080   17.036.080
17.20.090   17.036.090
17.20.100   17.036.100
17.20.110   17.036.110
17.20.120   17.036.120
17.20.130   17.036.130
17.20.140   17.036.140
17.22.010   17.040.010
17.22.020   17.040.020
17.22.030   17.040.030
17.22.040   17.040.040
17.22.050   17.040.050
17.22.060   17.040.060
17.22.070   17.040.070
17.22.080   17.040.080
17.22.090   17.040.090
17.24.010   17.044.010
17.24.020   17.044.020
17.24.030   17.044.030
17.24.050   17.044.040
17.24.060   17.044.050
17.24.070   17.044.060
17.24.080   17.044.070
17.24.090   17.044.080
17.28.010   17.052.010
17.28.020   17.052.020
17.28.030   17.052.030
17.28.040   17.052.070
17.28.040   17.052.040
17.28.050   17.052.070
17.28.050   17.052.050
17.28.060   17.052.060
17.28.070   17.052.070
17.30.010   17.056.010
17.30.020   17.056.020
17.30.030   17.056.030
17.30.040   17.056.040
17.30.050   17.056.050
17.30.060   17.056.060
17.30.070   17.056.070
17.30.080   17.056.080
17.30.090   17.056.090
17.30.100   17.056.100
17.30.110   17.056.110
17.32.010   17.060.010
17.32.020   17.060.020
17.32.030   17.060.030
17.32.040   17.060.040
17.32.050   17.060.050
17.32.060   17.060.060
17.32.070   17.060.070
17.32.080   17.060.080
17.32.100   17.060.100
17.32.110   17.060.110
17.34.010   17.064.010
17.34.020   17.064.020
17.34.030   17.064.030
17.34.040   17.064.040
17.34.050   17.064.050
17.34.060   17.064.060
17.34.070   17.064.070
17.34.080   17.064.080
17.34.090   17.064.090
17.34.100   17.064.100
17.34.110   17.064.110
17.34.120   17.064.120
17.34.130   17.064.130
17.34.140   17.064.140
17.34.150   17.064.150
17.34.160   17.064.160
17.34.170   17.064.170
17.36.010   17.068.010
17.36.020   17.068.020
17.36.030   17.068.030
17.36.040   17.068.040
17.36.050   17.068.050
17.36.060   17.068.060
17.36.070   17.068.070
17.36.080   17.068.080
17.36.090   17.068.090
17.36.100   17.068.100
17.36.110   17.068.110
17.36.120   17.068.120
17.36.130   17.068.130
17.36.140   17.068.140
17.36.150   17.068.140
17.36.160   17.068.160
17.36.170   17.068.170
17.36.180   17.068.180
17.36.190   17.068.190
17.36.200   17.068.200
17.36.210   17.068.210
17.36.220   17.068.220
17.36.230   17.068.230
17.36.240   17.068.240
17.36.250   17.068.250
17.36.260   17.068.260
17.36.270   17.068.270
17.36.280   17.068.280
17.38.010   17.072.010
17.38.020   17.072.020
17.38.030   17.072.030
17.38.040   17.072.040
17.38.050   17.072.050
17.38.060   17.072.060
17.38.070   17.072.070
17.38.080   17.072.050
17.38.090   17.072.090
17.38.100   17.072.100
17.38.110   17.072.110
17.38.120   17.072.120
17.38.130   17.072.130
17.38.140   17.072.140
17.38.150   17.072.140
17.40.010   17.076.010
17.40.020   17.076.020
17.40.030   17.076.030
17.40.040   17.076.040
17.40.050   17.076.050
17.40.060   17.076.060
17.40.070   17.076.070
17.40.080   17.076.080
17.40.090   17.076.090
17.40.100   17.076.100
17.40.110   17.076.110
17.42.010   17.080.010
17.42.020   17.080.020
17.42.030   17.080.030
17.42.040   17.080.040
17.42.050   17.080.050
17.42.060   17.080.060
17.42.070   17.080.070
17.42.080   17.080.080
17.42.090   17.080.090
17.42.100   17.080.100
17.42.110   17.080.110
17.44.010   17.084.010
17.44.020   17.084.020
17.44.030   17.084.030
17.44.040   17.084.040
17.44.050   17.084.050
17.44.060   17.084.060
17.44.070   17.084.070
17.44.080   17.084.080
17.44.090   17.084.090
17.44.100   17.084.100
17.44.110   17.084.110
17.46.010   17.088.010
17.46.020   17.088.020
17.46.030   17.088.030
17.46.040   17.088.040
17.46.050   17.088.050
17.46.060   17.088.060
17.46.070   17.088.070
17.46.080   17.088.080
17.46.090   17.088.090
17.46.100   17.088.100
17.46.110   17.088.110
17.48.010   17.092.010
17.48.020   17.092.020
17.48.030   17.092.030
17.48.040   17.092.040
17.48.050   17.092.050
17.48.060   17.092.060
17.48.070   17.092.070
17.48.080   17.092.080
17.48.090   17.092.090
17.48.100   17.092.100
17.48.110   17.092.110
17.48.120   17.092.120
17.50.010   17.096.010
17.50.020   17.096.020
17.50.030   17.096.030
17.50.040   17.096.040
17.50.050   17.096.050
17.50.055   17.096.060
17.50.060   17.096.070
17.50.070   17.096.080
17.50.080   17.096.090
17.50.080   17.096.100
17.50.100   17.096.110
17.50.110   17.096.120
17.50.120   17.096.130
17.52.010   17.100.010
17.52.020   17.100.020
17.52.030   17.100.030
17.52.040   17.100.040
17.52.050   17.100.050
17.52.060   17.100.060
17.52.070   17.100.070
17.52.080   17.100.080
17.52.090   17.100.090
17.52.100   17.100.100
17.52.110   17.100.110
17.52.120   17.100.120
17.54.010   17.104.010
17.54.020   17.104.020
17.54.030   17.104.030
17.54.040   17.104.040
17.54.050   17.104.050
17.54.060   17.104.060
17.54.070   17.104.070
17.54.080   17.104.080
17.54.090   17.104.090
17.54.100   17.104.100
17.54.110   17.104.110
17.56.010   17.108.010
17.56.020   17.108.020
17.56.030   17.108.030
17.56.040   17.108.040
17.56.050   17.108.050
17.56.060   17.108.060
17.56.070   17.108.070
17.58.010   17.112.010
17.58.020   17.112.020
17.58.030   17.112.030
17.58.040   17.112.040
17.58.050   17.112.050
17.58.060   17.112.060
17.58.070   17.112.070
17.58.080   17.112.080
17.58.090   17.112.090
17.58.100   17.112.100
17.58.110   17.112.110
17.58.120   17.112.120
17.58.130   17.112.130
17.58.140   17.112.140
17.58.150   17.112.150
17.58.160   17.112.160
17.58.170   17.112.170
17.58.180   17.112.180
17.60.010   17.116.010
17.60.020   17.116.020
17.60.030   17.116.030
17.60.040   17.116.040
17.60.050   17.116.050
17.60.060   17.116.060
17.60.070   17.116.070
17.60.080   17.116.080
17.60.090   17.116.090
17.60.100   17.116.100
17.60.110   17.116.110
17.60.120   17.116.120
17.60.130   17.116.130
17.60.140   17.116.140
17.60.150   17.116.150
17.60.160   17.116.160
17.62.010   17.120.010
17.62.020   17.120.020
17.62.030   17.120.030
17.62.040   17.120.040
17.62.050   17.120.050
17.62.060   17.120.060
17.64.020   17.128.020
17.64.030   17.128.030
17.64.040   17.128.040
17.64.060   17.128.060
17.64.070   17.128.070
17.64.080   17.128.080
17.64.090   17.128.090
17.64.100   17.128.100
17.66.010   17.124.010
17.66.020   17.124.020
17.66.030   17.124.030
17.66.040   17.124.040
17.66.050   17.124.050
17.66.060   17.124.060
17.66.070   17.124.070
17.66.080   17.124.080
17.66.090   17.124.090
17.66.100   17.124.100
17.66.110   17.124.110
17.66.120   17.124.120
17.68.010   17.132.010
17.68.020   17.132.020
17.68.030   17.132.030
18.02.010   18.04.010
18.02.020   18.04.020
18.02.030   18.04.030
18.02.040   18.04.040
18.02.050   18.04.050
18.02.060   18.04.060
18.02.070   18.04.070
18.02.080   18.04.080
18.02.090   18.04.090
18.02.100   18.04.100
18.02.110   18.04.110
18.02.120   18.04.120
            
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
605      - -         17.100.080
                     17.004.010—
                     17.004.170,
                     17.008.010,
                     17.008.020,
                     17.012.010—
                     17.012.140,
                     17.016.010—
                     17.016.070,
                     17.020.010—
                     17.020.120,
                     17.024.010—
                     17.024.120,
                     17.028.010—
                     17.028.080,
                     17.028.100 —
                     17.028.130,
                     17.032.010—
                     17.032.090,
                     17.036.010—
                     17.036.140,
                     17.040.010—
                     17.040.090,
                     17.044.010—
                     17.044.080,
                     17.052.010—
                     17.052.070,
                     17.056.010—
                     17.056.080,
                     17.056.100,
                     17.056.110,
                     17.060.010—
                     17.060.080,
                     17.060.100,
352      - -1973     17.060.110,
                     17.064.010—
                     17.064.170,
                     17.072.010—
                     17.072.070,
                     17.072.090—
                     17.072.140,
                     17.076.010—
                     17.076.110,
                     17.080.010—
                     17.080.110,
                     17.084.010—
                     17.084.110,
                     17.088.010—
                     17.088.110,
                     17.092.010—
                     17.092.120,
                     17.096.010—
                     17.096.050,
                     17.096.070—
                     17.096.130,
                     17.100.010—
                     17.100.120,
                     17.104.010—
                     17.104.110,
                     17.108.010—
                     17.108.070,
                     17.112.010—
                     17.112.180,
                     17.116.010—
                     17.116.160,
                     17.120.010—
                     17.120.060,
                     17.028.010—
                     17.028.130
438      - -1978     2.12.030
440      - -1978     15.08.040,
                     15.08.100
441      - -1978     15.08.040,
                     15.08.100
                     12.16.090,
                     12.20.040,
                     12.20.070,
                     12.32.030,
                     17.004.050,
443      - -1978     17.020.070,
                     17.032.030,
                     17.036.080,
                     17.112.050,
                     17.112.060,
                     17.112.120
444      - -1978     10.04.060
445      - -1979     10.04.060
459      - -1979     12.32.010,
                     12.32.020
                     17.028.010—
                     17.028.080,
                     17.028.100—
461      - -1979     17.028.130,
                     17.040.020,
                     17.044.070,
                     17.044.080
20       1-1-1980    1.04.180
10       1-17-1980   1.04.180
                     17.020.030,
                     17.060.010—
476      - -1980     17.028.080,
                     17.028.100,
                      
                     17.060.110
478      - -1981     2.64.020
479      - -1981     6.16.010,
                     6.16.030
481      - -1981     8.20.010—
                     8.20.120
482      - -1981     17.012.010,
                     17.020.030
                     17.016.010—
                     17.016.070,
                     17.028.020,
                     17.028.030,
                     17.028.070,
                     17.028.080,
                     17.028.100,
                     17.028.120,
                     17.028.130,
                     17.040.010,
                     17.044.030,
486      - -1981     17.052.010—
                     17.052.030,
                     17.076.060,
                     17.076.070,
                     17.076.110,
                     17.080.060,
                     17.080.110,
                     17.084.060,
                     17.084.070,
                     17.084.110,
                     17.088.060,
                     17.088.070,
                     17.088.110
487      - -1981     17.040.090
488      - -1981     17.064.010—
                     17.064.170
489      - -1981     17.008.010,
                     17.008.020
485      - -1982     15.08.030,
                     15.08.060
                     17.052.010—
490      - -1982     17.052.040,
                     17.076.060,
                     17.080.060
                     17.008.020,
                     17.052.030,
                     17.092.050,
                     17.092.060,
491      - -1982     17.096.050,
                     17.096.070,
                     17.100.060,
                     17.108.040,
                     17.116.010
492      - -1982     17.116.060
                     17.112.030,
                     17.112.040,
493      - -1982     17.112.100,
                     17.112.120,
                     17.112.160
495      - -1982     17.040.040
496      - -1982     8.28.110—
                     8.28.150
497      - -1982     2.64.020
498      - -1982     17.040.040
                     5.28.140,
499      - -1982     8.28.110—
                     8.28.130,
                     8.28.150
                     17.020.030,
                     17.020.100,
500      - -1982     17.060.030 ,
                     17.060.060,
                     17.064.050—
                     17.064.140
                     17.076.030,
                     17.080.030,
509      - -1983     17.084.030,
                     17.088.030,
                     17.116.040
511      - -1983     8.28.120
514      - -1983     17.096.050
                     17.020.030,
515      - -1983     17.064.020,
                     17.064.050—
                     17.064.080
516      - -1983     1.08.010—
                     1.08.060
                     5.04.010—
                     5.04.040,
                     5.08.010—
                     5.08.070,
                     5.12.010—
518      - -1983     5.12.130,
                     5.16.010—
                     5.16.180,
                     5.20.010,
                     5.20.020,
                     5.24.010—
                     5.24.040
                     17.032.080,
513      - -1984     17.036.090—
                     17.036.140
515      - -1983     17.064.040
                     17.092.040,
                     17.092.050,
                     17.092.070,
                     17.092.110,
522      - -1984     17.096.010,
                     17.096.040,
                     17.096.050,
                     17.100.040,
                     17.100.050,
                     17.100.110
525      - -1984     17.008.020
                     1.08.020,
528      - -1984     1.16.010—
                     1.16.030
529      - -1984     8.20.040,
                     8.20.050
532      - -1984     5.16.020,
                     5.16.100
20       1-1-1985    1.04.180
25       1-1-1985    1.04.180
536      - -1985     2.64.020
                     17.076.030,
                     17.080.030,
538      - -1985     17.084.030,
                     17.088.030,
                     17.116.040
542      - -1986     2.56.010
552      8-25-1986   3.12.010—
                     3.12.130
                     17.056.010—
                     17.056.080,
                     17.056.100,
                     17.056.110,
                     17.076.100,
                     17.080.100,
                     17.084.100,
553      - -1986     17.088.100,
                     17.092.120,
                     17.096.130,
                     17.100.120,
                     17.104.110,
                     17.108.070,
                     17.112.180,
                     17.116.160,
                     17.120.060
554      - -1986     3.12.060
556      - -1986     8.08.010—
                     8.08.120
559      - -1987     10.04.060,
                     10.04.120
562      - -1987     10.04.070
563      - -1987     17.036.060
567      - -1988     17.040.080
573      - -1988     8.08.040
                     1.08.010—
                     1.08.030,
                     2.08.080,
                     2.28.020,
                     2.28.030,
                     2.44.010,
                     2.44.020,
                     2.60.080,
                     3.08.090,
                     3.08.130,
575      - -1988     3.16.050,
                     3.16.090,
                     3.24.010,
                     3.24.030,
                     3.28.010,
                     5.32.010,
                     10.08.020,
                     10.08.030,
                     10.16.120,
                     12.48.010,
                     13.08.020,
                     17.040.020
576      - -1988     2.32.010—
                     2.32.060
                     17.068.010—
577      - -1988     17.068.140,
                     17.068.160—
                     17.068.280
582      - -1989     8.40.010—
                     8.40.090
583      - -1989     8.40.010—
                     8.40.090
                     17.012.150,
584      - -1989     17.64.010—
                     17.128.100
585      - -1989     17.064.030
593      - -1990     1.08.020,
                     10.28.010
595      - -1990     6.16.020
                     17.008.020,
                     17.012.010,
                     17.016.040,
                     17.020.040,
                     17.024.010,
                     17.024.030,
                     17.032.060,
                     17.032.070,
                     17.040.040,
                     17.052.040,
                     17.072.060,
                     17.072.090,
605      - -1991     17.076.050—
                     17.076.070,
                     17.080.050—
                     17.080.070,
                     17.084.050—
                     17.084.070,
                     17.088.050—
                     17.088.070,
                     17.092.080,
                     17.096.090,
                     17.112.020,
                     17.112.150,
                     17.112.160
606      - -1991     9.08.010
                     17.012.160,
607      - -1991     17.124.010—
                     17.124.120
612      - -1992     2.32.020
614      1-11-1993   3.12.060
615      - -1992     17.132.010—
                     17.132.030
618      - -1993     2.32.020
619      - -1993     10.32.010—
                     10.32.060
620      - -1993     2.04.010
                     10.16.010,
                     10.16.040,
621      - -1993     10.16.130,
                     10.16.160—
                     10.16.180
623      - -1993     8.32.010,
                     8.32.030
623      11-2-1993   8.16.010—
                     8.16.110
625      - -1993     10.28.010
626      - -1993     1.20.010,
                     1.20.020
627      - -1993     9.16.010—
                     9.16.030
                     17.004.060—
                     17.004.090,
                     17.004.120,
                     17.004.150,
                     17.020.100,
                     17.028.060,
628      - -1994     17.032.050,
                     17.036.040,
                     17.060.060,
                     17.072.040,
                     17.112.080,
                     17.112.120,
                     17.116.090,
                     17.116.130
629      - -1994     18.04.010—
                     18.04.120
631      - -1994     5.16.130
632      - -1994     17.012.140
635      - -1994     10.04.060
636      - -1994     10.24.010—
                     10.24.060
639      - -1994     9.20.010
                     1.08.020,
641      - -1995     3.32.010—
                     3.32.120
642      - -1995     8.24.010—
                     8.24.030
643      - -1995     6.04.010,
                     6.04.020
644      - -1995     3.36.010—
                     3.36.060
646      - -1996     8.48.010—
                     8.48.090
650      - -1996     17.036.060,
                     17.036.130 
651      - -1996     17.008.020
652      - -1996     3.40.010,
                     3.40.020
653      - -1996     10.04.090—
                     10.04.110
655      - -1996     1.08.020
656      - -1996     12.24.050
657      - -1996     6.04.030 
658      - -1997     2.32.010—
                     2.32.040
659      --1997      2.28.030
                     17.068.050,
668      - -1997     17.068.070,
                     17.068.140
                     3.32.010,
                     3.32.020,
669      - -1997     3.32.040—
                     3.32.060,
                     3.32.110,
                     3.32.120
                     16.04.010—
                     16.04.070,
                     16.08.010—
                     16.08.110,
                     16.12.010—
                     16.12.100,
                     16.16.010—
                     16.16.090,
                     16.20.010—
                     16.20.100,
                     16.24.010—
670      - -1998     16.24.230,
                     16.28.010—
                     16.28.040,
                     16.32.010—
                     16.32.040,
                     16.36.010—
                     16.36.140,
                     16.40.010—
                     16.40.040,
                     16.44.010—
                     16.44.070,
                     16.48.010—
                     16.48.060
671      - -1998     6.04.010,
                     6.04.020
672      - -1998     17.096.040—
                     17.096.060
675      - -1998     6.16.030
682      1-9-2001    2.08.010
686      3-2-2001    8.52.010—
                     8.52.120
683      5-1-2001    12.24.100—
                     12.24.140
                     15.08.040,
687      10-2-2001   17.132.040,
                     17.132.050
688      3-6-2002    17.020.030
689      3-6-2002    17.100.040
                     17.020.080,
693      7-16-2002   17.020.110,
                     17.072.060
692      7-23-2002   2.48.010—
                     2.48.030
691      8-6-2002    8.56.010—
                     8.56.140
694      8-6-2002    2.64.020
695      8-20-2002   17.100.020
                     17.008.020,
                     17.016.010,
                     17.016.020,
                     17.016.040,
696      9-3-2002    17.016.070,
                     17.044.030,
                     17.136.010—
                     17.136.030,
                     17.136.050
701      12-16-2003  6.04.036
702      11-5-2003   2.64.020
                     17.092.110,
703      3-2-2004    17.100.040 ,
                     17.100.050
709      5-17-2005   5.48.010—
                     5.48.130
710      3-1-2005    2.08.010
712      7-6-2005    2.12.010—
                     2.12.110
713      9-7-2005    12.44.020—
                     12.44.040
714      8-2-2006    Adopting Ordinance
715      7-5-2006    8.36.030
                     17.004.070,
                     17.020.100,
                     17.028.060,
716      9-6-2006    17.032.050,
                     17.096.040,
                     17.096.050,
                     17.100.040,
                     17.100.050
717      9-6-2006    8.60.010—
                     8.60.080
718      11-1-2006   2.12.070
719      1-3-2007    1.08.010
720      5-2-2007    8.64.010—
                     8.64.130
722      8-1-2007    8.18.010—
                     8.18.060
725      11-7-2007   9.28.010—
                     9.28.090
726      11-7-2007   8.18.010—
                     8.18.060
                     8.06.010,
                     8.06.011,
                     8.06.014—
                     8.06.020,
730      12-5-2007   15.08.010—
                     15.08.100,
                     15.12.010—
                     15.12.100,
                     15.16.010—
                     15.16.040
731      2-6-2008    8.20.070
732      4-16-2008   6.04.010,
                     6.04.020
733      4-16-2008   2.08.090
                     1.12.005—
734      6-18-2008   1.12.050,
                     1.12.057
735      6-18-2008   2.28.110,
                     2.28.120
—      11-4-2008   8.18.010—
                     8.18.090
740      11-19-2008  8.36.050,
                     8.36.110
741      2-4-2009    2.64.020
742      9-2-2009    17.008.020,
                     17.016.040
743      7-1-2009    8.36.010 -
                     8.36.160
744      7-1-2009    2.12.070
745      9-2-2009    1.10.010 -
                     1.10.190
746      10-7-2009   12.36.010 -
                     12.36.060
749      3-3-2010    6.04.038
                     8.44.010—
754      6-1-2011    8.44.100,
                     8.44.120—
                     8.44.170
755      11-3-2010   2.08.010
                     17.110.010—
759      6-1-2011    17.110.040,
                     17.110.110,
                     17.110.120
762      7-13-2011   5.16.130
763      11-8-2011   3.10.010—
                     3.10.160
                     17.020.010—
                     17.020.120,
                     17.060.020—
                     17.060.080,
                     17.060.100,
                     17.064.040,
                     17.064.070,
                     17.064.080,
                     17.064.100—
764      2-1-2012    17.064.130,
                     17.072.060,
                     17.092.030,
                     17.096.030,
                     17.100.030,
                     17.104.020,
                     17.108.020,
                     17.108.040,
                     17.108.060,
                     17.132.010
U-767    7-11-2012   6.04.040
766      8-1-2012    8.12.170
768      8-1-2012    6.04.040,
                     6.04.042
769      4-3-2013    2.04.020
                     8.20.060,
770      11-6-2013   8.20.070,
                     8.20.120,
                     8.20.130
772      11-6-2013   8.08.130 —
                     8.08.130-13
773      12-4-2013   15.08.030,
                     15.08.060
                     8.04.010—
774      12-4-2013   8.04.135,
                     8.06.010
775      2-5-2014    8.68.010,
                     8.68.020
777      3-5-2014    6.16.050
783      9-3-2014    8.14.010—
                     8.14.070
784      10-1-2014   8.19.010—
                     8.19.070
                     17.064.020,
785      3-4-2015    17.064.030,
                     17.064.070,
                     17.064.140
                     3.02.010,
786      11-4-2014   3.20.010—
                     3.20.080
                     17.040.200—
                     17.040.220,
                     17.092.130,
787      3-4-2015    17.096.140,
                     17.100.130,
                     17.104.120,
                     17.112.030
                     17.008.020,
                     17.012.010,
                     17.012.040,
                     17.012.070,
                     17.012.080,
788      5-6-2015    17.012.170,
                     17.052.030,
                     17.100.040,
                     17.130.010—
                     17.130.110,
                     17.138.010
789      5-6-2015    8.36.030
                     8.44.010,
790      6-3-2015    8.44.020,
                     8.44.080
791      6-3-2015    8.32.010—
                     8.32.030
792      6-3-2015    10.04.120
                     17.036.090,
793      6-3-2015    17.036.100,
                     17.036.120,
                     17.036.130
                     17.060.050,
794      10-7-2015   17.138.200—
                     17.138.270
                     3.36.010,
795      10-7-2015   3.36.020,
                     3.36.060
796      4-6-2016    17.132.030,
                     17.132.040
799      2-3-2016    17.138.010
                     17.076.030,
                     17.080.030,
800      2-3-2016    17.084.030,
                     17.116.040,
                     17.124.030
                     12.44.020,
801      4-6-2016    12.44.030,
                     12.44.040
                     9.28.010,
                     9.28.020,
802      8-3-2016    9.28.040,
                     9.28.050,
                     9.28.060
804      12-7-2016   8.04.010—
                     8.04.135
805      11-8-2016   3.10.010—
                     3.10.160
806      2-1-2017    8.68.010
807      5-3-2017    2.04.010,
                     2.04.020
                     17.012.010,
                     17.012.040,
                     17.012.140,
808      6-7-2017    17.012.160,
                     17.012.180,
                     17.090.010—
                     17.090.140
                     17.048.010,
                     17.076.030,
                     17.076.040,
                     17.080.030,
                     17.080.040,
                     17.084.030,
810      11-1-2017   17.084.040,
                     17.088.030,
                     17.088.040,
                     17.116.040,
                     17.116.050,
                     17.124.030,
                     17.124.040
811      11-1-2017   15.04.065
813      12-6-2017   8.08.050
                     8.44.010,
                     8.44.020,
814      12-6-2017   8.44.070,
                     8.44.100,
                     8.44.200—
                     8.44.320
815      1-16-2018   9.28.010—
                     9.28.090
816      4-4-2018    5.52.010—
                     5.52.060
817      5-20-2018   2.08.010
                     6.04.010,
818      6-6-2018    6.04.020,
                     6.04.037,
                     6.04.041
822      11-7-2018   8.36.030,
                     8.36.090
                     3.36.010,
823      11-7-2018   3.36.020,
                     3.36.040
827      2-6-2019    17.112.040
                     1.12.005,
831      5-1-2019    1.12.055—
                     1.12.130
                     17.008.020,
832      6-5-2019    17.016.070,
                     17.136.010—
                     17.136.050
833      7-7-2019    19.04.010—
                     19.04.250
                     17.110.010—
834      9-4-2019    17.110.050,
                     17.110.100—
                     17.110.130
                     5.56.010—
835      9-4-2019    5.56.040,
                     5.56.060—
                     5.56.170
                     8.44.010,
836      9-4-2019    8.44.020,
                     8.44.210
                     17.020.130,
                     17.028.090,
                     17.032.100,
837      10-2-2019   17.040.100,
                     17.040.110,
                     17.060.090,
                     17.072.140 
839      11-5-2019   3.20.020,
                     3.20.080
840      12-4-2019   8.68.010
842      12-4-2019   8.04.010—
                     8.04.135
844      1-15-2020   17.048.010
                     17.072.020,
                     17.090.010,
845      2-5-2020    17.112.020,
                     17.116.020,
                     17.124.010
850      2-3-2021    8.36.030
852      3-3-2021    10.28.020,
                     10.28.030
854      7-7-2021    17.020.030
855      7-7-2021    2.12.030
856      9-1-2021    15.05.010—
                     15.05.090
                     8.44.010—
858      11-3-2021   8.44.170,
                     8.44.200—
                     8.44.320
859      12-1-2021   8.08.010—
                     8.08.130-15
860      12-1-2021   16.22.010,
                     17.049.010
861      1-19-2022   17.048.010
863      6-1-2022    2.08.010
                     17.008.020,
                     17.052.030,
865      7-6-2022    17.076.040,
                     17.080.040,
                     17.124.040
866      7-6-2022    5.57.010,
                     5.57.020
                     1.08.020,
867      7-6-2022    8.74.010—
                     8.74.060
868      9-7-2022    5.58.010—
                     5.58.100
                     12.32.010—
869      9-7-2022    12.32.025,
                     17.096.040,
                     17.100.040
872      12-7-2022   15.04.010—
                     15.04.100
                     8.04.010—
873      12-7-2022   8.04.135,
                     8.06.010
874      11-8-2022   3.44.010—
                     3.44.110
                     12.12.090,
                     17.076.075,
                     17.076.110,
                     17.080.075,
                     17.080.110,
                     17.084.075,
                     17.084.110,
                     17.088.075,
                     17.088.110,
                     17.090.085,
875      12-7-2022   17.090.120,
                     17.092.095,
                     17.092.125,
                     17.096.105,
                     17.096.125,
                     17.100.095,
                     17.100.125,
                     17.104.085,
                     17.104.115,
                     17.124.075,
                     17.124.110
876      12-7-2022   17.048.010
877      4-5-2023    8.16.030
878      4-5-2023    8.72.010—
                     8.72.090
879      6-7-2023    2.12.070
880      7-12-2023   2.65.010,
                     2.65.020
881      8-2-2023    15.17.010 -
                     15.17.070
                     5.54.020,
                     5.54.030,
                     5.54.050 -
                     5.54.070,
882      9-6-2023    5.55.020,
                     5.55.030,
                     5.55.070,
                     5.55.080,
                     5.55.110
881      8-2-2023    15.17.010 -
                     15.17.070
                     17.008.020,
883      11-1-2023   17.016.080,
                     17.096.050
884      11-1-2023   17.140.010 -
                     17.140.160
                     15.04.010,
                     17.008.020,
                     17.010.010—
                     17.010.140,
                     17.020.010—
                     17.020.100,
                     17.024.010—
                     17.024.030,
                     17.024.080—
                     17.024.110,
                     17.026.010—
                     17.026.060,
                     17.027.010—
                     17.027.090,
                     17.032.060,
                     17.032.065,
                     17.040.010,
                     17.044.010,
                     17.044.090,
                     17.044.100,
                     17.048.010,
                     17.050.010—
                     17.050.050,
                     17.052.030,
                     17.056.080,
                     17.056.110,
885      11-1-2023   17.076.010,
                     17.076.020,
                     17.076.040—17.076,070,
                     17.076.090,
                     17.080.010—
                     17.080.070,
                     17.080.090,
                     17.084.010—
                     17.084.070,
                     17.084.090,
                     17.088.010—
                     17.088.070,
                     17.088.090,
                     17.090.010—
                     17.090.060,
                     17.090.080,
                     17.090.100,
                     17.116.030,
                     17.116.040,
                     17.136.030,
                     17.138.310—
                     17.138.350,
                     17.138.410—
                     17.138.480,
                     17.138.500—
                     17.138.520,
                     17.138.600—
                     17.138.620
                     17.060.010—
                     17.060.080,
                     17.072.010—
886      1-24-2024   17.072.110,
                     17.124.040—
                     17.124.070,
                     17.124.090
                     17.012.010, 17.12.165,
                     17.092.010,
                     17.092.040,
                     17.092.050,
                     17.092.060,
                     17.092.070,
                     17.096.010,
                     17.096.040,
                     17.096.050,
887      2-7-2024    17.096.070,
                     17.096.080,
                     17.100.010,
                     17.100.040,
                     17.100.050,
                     17.100.060,
                     17.100.070,
                     17.126.010—
                     17.126.030,
                     17.126.060,
                     17.126.070
889      6-5-2024    2.04.030
                     17.008.020,
                     17.044.090,
                     17.052.030,
891      1-9-2025    17.084.050,
                     17.088.040,
                     17.092.060,
                     17.096.070,
                     17.100.060
                     5.54.010,
892      11-5-2024   5.54.020,
                     5.55.010—
                     5.55.090
894      1-9-2025    5.56.170
895      1-9-2025    9.30.010—
                     9.30.080
897      5-7-2025    17.048.010
898      6-4-2025    10.30.010—
                     10.30.070
                    
 
 
