La Mirada, California
Code of Ordinances
2025 S-38 Supplement contains
Local legislation current through Ord. 743, passed 7-8-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
   The La Mirada Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing
Company in 1969, has been kept current by regular supplementation by its
successor in interest Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. and American Legal
Publishing of Cincinnati, Ohio.
   During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and
indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction
of the city attorney.
   The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor
decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation
without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number
designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus,
Section
6.12.070 is Section .070, located in
Chapter 6.12 of Title 6. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens
(.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original
sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are
numbered to provide for internal expansion.
   In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying
the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative
history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text
of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they
appear in the codification.
   Footnotes referring to applicable statutory provisions are located
throughout the text. A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing,
locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers.
   This supplement brings the code up to date through Ordinance 743, passed
July 8, 2025.
   American Legal Publishing
   525 Vine Street,
   Suite 310
   Cincinnati, OH 45202
   800-445-5588
Title 1
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:
   
1.01   Code Adoption
   
1.04   Public Places for Posting of Notices
   
1.08   Penalties, Administrative and Civil Remedies, and General Provisions
   
1.10   Judicial Review of City Decisions
Chapter 1.01
   CODE ADOPTION  1
Sections:
   
1.01.010   Adoption of code.
   
1.01.020   Title--Citation--Reference.
   
1.01.030   Reference applies to amendments.
   
1.01.040   Definitions and construction.
   
1.01.050   Distribution of code.
   
1.01.060   Notation of amendments.
   
1.01.070   Amendments.
   
1.01.080   Title, chapter and section headings.
   
1.01.090   Reference to specific ordinances.
   
1.01.100   Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
   
1.01.110   Effective date.
 
Notes
1 For statutory provisions authorizing cities to codify their ordinances, see
  Gov. Code 50022.1--50022.10.
1.01.010 Adoption of code.
There is hereby adopted and enacted the La Mirada Municipal Code as recompiled
and edited as follows herein.
(Ord. 163 § 1, 1970).
1.01.020 Title--Citation--Reference.
This code shall be known as the "La Mirada Municipal Code" and it shall be
sufficient to refer to this code as the "La Mirada Municipal Code" in any
prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at
law or equity. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding
to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an
addition to, amendment to, correction of, or repeal of the "La Mirada Municipal
Code." Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and
subsections of the "La Mirada Municipal Code" and such reference shall apply to
that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in that code.
(Ord. 163 § 2, 1970).
1.01.030 Reference applies to amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the "La Mirada Municipal Code" or
to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of La Mirada, that
reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore,
now, or hereafter made.
(Ord. 163 § 3, 1970).
1.01.040 Definitions and construction.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words and phrases where
used in the ordinances of the city shall have the meaning and construction
given in this section:
   (a)   "Code" means the "La Mirada Municipal Code";
   (b)   "City" means the city of La Mirada;
   (c)   "City council" means the city council of the city of La Mirada;
   (d)   "County" means the county of Los Angeles;
   (e)   "Person" means any natural person, firm, association, joint venture,
joint stock company, partnership, organization, club, company, corporation,
business trust, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer, or employee of
any of them;
   (f)   "State" means the state of California;
   (g)   "Oath" includes affirmation;
   (h)   Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter;
   (i)   Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular;
   (j)   Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present tense;
   (k)   Shall, May. "Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive;
   (l)   Title of office. The use of the title of any officer, employee,
department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board
or commission of the city of La Mirada;
   (m)   "Owner" when pertaining to a building or land includes any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or part of such
building or land;
   (n)   "Street" includes all streets, highways, public roads, county roads,
avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, sidewalks, parkways, or
other public ways in La Mirada which have been or may hereafter be dedicated
and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law
of this state.
   (o)   "Tenant or occupant" when pertaining to a building or land shall
include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others;
   (p)   "Goods" includes wares and merchandise;
   (q)   "Operate" or "engage in" includes carry on, keep, conduct, maintain,
or cause to be kept or maintained;
   (r)   "Across" includes along, in or upon;
   (s)   "Sale" includes any sale, exchange, barter or offer for sale;
   (t)   "Ex officio" means by virtue of office.
(Ord. 163 § 4, 1970).
1.01.050 Distribution of code.
Not less than three copies of this code shall be filed for use and examination
by the public in the office of the city clerk. At least three copies duly
certified to by the city clerk shall be permanently bound and maintained on
file in his office. Additional copies shall be prepared in loose-leaf form and
mounted to withstand heavy usage in such binders as the city clerk may
prescribe. Copies thereof shall be distributed as determined by the city clerk.
(Prior code § 1104).
1.01.060 Notation of amendments.
Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this code, or upon the repeal
of any of its provisions, the city clerk shall certify thereto and shall made
an appropriate notation in the bound volume of this code of the taking of such
action, noting thereon the number of the ordinances pursuant to which such
action is taken. Duly certified copies of every ordinance making changes in
such code shall be filed in the office of the city clerk in books for such
purpose, duly indexed for ready reference.
(Prior code § 1105).
1.01.070 Amendments.
The city clerk shall prepare printed copies of such changes in the code for
insertion in the loose-leaf copies thereof. Every section of the code so
changed shall have printed thereon a notation of the ordinance number pursuant
to which such change is adopted.
   At least once yearly, the city clerk shall cause the loose-leaf pages of the
code in which changes have been made, to be reprinted, including the notation
as to the ordinance number pursuant to which such change is adopted, in order
that at least once yearly the loose-leaf copies of such code prepared for the
use and convenience of the officers and employees of the city and the general
public may be brought up-to-date.
(Prior code § 1106).
1.01.080 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to
govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of
the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof.
(Ord. 163 § 5, 1970).
1.01.090 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other
matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances
which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are
included within this code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to
the corresponding provisions contained within this code.
(Ord. 163 § 6, 1970)
1.01.100 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any
ordinance or any part of any ordinance of the city shall in any manner affect
the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed
prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any
license, fee, or penalty at the effective date due and unpaid under such
ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such
ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or
the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted,
filed, or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations
thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 163 § 7, 1970)
1.01.110 Effective date.
The La Mirada Municipal Code shall become effective on July 23, 1970.
(Ord. 163 § 8, 1970)
Chapter 1.04
   PUBLIC PLACES FOR POSTING OF NOTICES
Sections:
   
1.04.010   Designated.
1.04.010 Designated.
Any notice which is required to be posted by law, shall be posted in the
following places within the city:
   (1)   The La Mirada City Hall;
   (2)   The bulletin board in the lobby area at the La Mirada Resource Center,
13810 La Mirada Boulevard;
   (3)   The bulletin board in the office area at the Frontier Park Community
Building, 13212 Marquardt Avenue.
(Ord. 575 § 1, 2003; Ord. 567 § 1, 2001; Ord. 507 § 1, 1997; Ord. 413 § 1,
1988).
Chapter 1.08
PENALTIES, ADMINISTRATIVE AND CIVIL REMEDIES, AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
1.08.010   Penalties and general provisions.
   
1.08.020   Mandatory appearance required.
   
1.08.030   Arrests and citations.
   
1.08.040   Administrative penalties.
   
1.08.050   Definitions.
   
1.08.060   Administrative citation.
   
1.08.070   Content of administrative citation.
   
1.08.080   Procedure for serving administrative citation or compliance order.
   
1.08.090   Administrative fine.
   
1.08.100   Payment of administrative fine.
   
1.08.110   Request for administrative hearing.
   
1.08.120   Advance deposit hardship waiver.
   
1.08.130   Time for administrative hearing.
   
1.08.140   Request for continuance of hearing.
   
1.08.150   Appointment of administrative hearing officer.
   
1.08.160   Procedures at administrative hearing.
   
1.08.170   Failure to attend administrative hearing.
   
1.08.180   Decision of administrative hearing officer.
   
1.08.190   Late payment charges.
   
1.08.200   Collection of administrative fine.
   
1.08.210   Appeal of decision of administrative hearing officer.
   
1.08.220   Appeal fee.
   
1.08.230   Failure to comply with administrative order or pay administrative
fine.
   
1.08.240   Remedies cumulative.
   
1.08.250   Administrative penalties: continuing violations - compliance orders.
   
1.08.260   Compliance order.
   
1.08.270   Content of compliance order.
   
1.08.280   Compliance order satisfied.
   
1.08.290   Failure to comply - administrative citation.
   
1.08.300   Decision of administrative hearing officer following appeal.
   
1.08.310   Administrative costs.
   
1.08.320   Collection of administrative fines and costs - lien procedure.
1.08.010 Penalties and general provisions.
   (a)   No person shall violate or fail to comply with any provision or
requirement of this code or any other city ordinance. Any person who shall
violate or fail to comply with any provision or requirement of this code or any
other city ordinance, or a condition of any permit issued pursuant to this code
or any other city ordinance, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, unless:
      (1)   Such a violation or failure is designated as an infraction or is
subsequently prosecuted as an infraction, in which case such person shall be
guilty of an infraction; or
      (2)   Such a violation or failure is prosecuted as a civil administrative
action pursuant to this chapter. Any person, business, organization,
corporation or other entity that fails to pay an administrative fine or to
comply with an administrative order is guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in
this chapter.
   (b)   Any violation of any provision of this code or any other city
ordinance may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor unless otherwise provided in the
code, as an infraction, or as a civil administrative action in the discretion
of the city attorney or city prosecutor.
   (c)   Every day any violation of this code or any other city ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (d)   Unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by the city
council, any person guilty of a misdemeanor for violation of a provision of
this code shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or
by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine
and imprisonment.
   (e)   Unless otherwise provided by law, any person who has committed an
infraction shall be punished for a first violation by a fine not exceeding one
hundred dollars, and for committing the same offense a second time within one
year by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars, and for committing the same
offense a third or any subsequent time within one year, by a fine not exceeding
five hundred dollars.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person who has been convicted of
violating any provision of a building and safety code of the city, or failing
to comply with any of the requirements thereof, where such violation or failure
is deemed to be an infraction, is punishable for a first violation by a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars, and for committing the same offense a second
time within one year by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, and for
committing the same offense a third or any subsequent time within one year, by
a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars.
   (f)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, when a person under
eighteen years of age is charged with a violation of this code, and such person
is issued a notice to appear in a traffic court of competent jurisdiction as a
result thereof, the charge shall be deemed to be an infraction unless the minor
requests that a petition be filed pursuant to Section 601 or 602 of the Welfare
and Institutions Code.
   (g)   The violation of any of the provisions of this code or any city
ordinance constitutes a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil
process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or
in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
   (h)   The city council declares that, should any provision, section,
paragraph, sentence or word of this code or city ordinance be rendered or
declared invalid by any final court action by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining
provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this code and such
ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.020 Mandatory appearance required.
   Whenever any person is arrested for any violation of this code, the arrested
person shall be taken without unnecessary delay before a magistrate who has
jurisdiction over the offense and is nearest or most accessible with reference
to the place where the arrest is made, when the person arrested:
   (a)   Fails to present a driver's license or other satisfactory evidence of
identity for examination.
   (b)   Refuses to give a written promise to appear in court.
   (c)   Demands an immediate appearance before a magistrate. (Ord. 629, § 2,
2009).
1.08.030 Arrests and citations.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of state law, the city officers or
employees designated by the city manager to make misdemeanor arrests may issue
citations and make arrests without a warrant whenever they have reasonable
cause to believe that the person who is either arrested or to whom a citation
is issued has committed an infraction or misdemeanor violation of this code, or
violation of any condition of any permit issued pursuant to this code or
violation of any other city ordinance or state statute which such officers or
employees have the duty to enforce, and the violation has been committed in the
presence of such officers or employees.
   (b)   Arrests for misdemeanors and citations for infractions shall be
processed, issued and handled as provided by state law.
   (c)   In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this authority
and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the
officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear
and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Chapter 5(c),
commencing with Section 853.5, of the Penal Code.
   (d)   The officers and employees identified in subpart (a) of this section
and any other persons designated to do so by the city manager shall have the
concurrent authority to issue administrative citations. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.040 Administrative penalties.
   In addition to, or in place of, any other remedy which is allowed by law,
whether administrative, criminal, civil, or equitable, there is hereby
established an administrative penalty that may be imposed in connection with
any violation of this code. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall have
sole discretion to determine whether a violation will be prosecuted criminally.
(Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.050 Definitions.
   The following words and phrases, when used in the context of this chapter,
shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   "Citing official" means any officer or employee authorized by the city
manager to issue citations, and subject to Section
1.08.030 of this code.
   (b)   "City manager" means the city manager of the City of La Mirada, or the
city manager's designee.
   (c)   "Legal interest" means any ownership interest of any person in real
property as evidenced by title or ownership documents or instruments which have
been recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office or which are on
file with, or in possession of, any other governmental entity. "Legal interest"
shall also include the property interest of lessees or tenants of real
property, as well as all sublessors thereof.
   (d)   "Person" means any natural person, business, organization, corporation
or other entity.
   (e)   "Responsible person" means any natural person, business, organization,
corporation, or Other entity determined by a citing official to be responsible
for causing, maintaining, permitting, or allowing a violation of this code.
"Responsible person" includes but is not limited to any person, business,
organization, corporation, or other entity having an ownership or possessory
interest in property, or any agent thereof with actual or apparent authority,
possession, or control of property, as well as any other person, business,
organization, corporation or other entity that creates, permits, or allows a
violation of this code to occur or be maintained. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.060 Administrative citation.
   Any person violating or who has violated any section of this code that is
subject to this chapter may be issued an administrative citation by a citing
official as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.070 Content of administrative citation.
   An administrative citation shall contain all of the following information:
   (a)   The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the
violation occurred or was detected.
   (b)   The code section violated and a description of the violation.
   (c)   The amount of the fine imposed for the violation, and the time within
which and the place at which the fine shall be paid.
   (d)   An order prohibiting another occurrence of the code violation.
   (e)   A description of the administrative citation review process, including
the time within which to contest the administrative citation and the place from
which to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative
citation.
   (f)   The name and signature of the citing official. (Ord. 629, §2, 2009).
1.08.080 Procedure for serving administrative citation or compliance order.
   (a)   Except as provided below, the citing official may issue an
administrative citation, on a form approved by the city manager or, pursuant to
this chapter, serve a compliance order on a responsible person using either of
the following methods:
      (1)   Personal service. The citing official may issue the administrative
citation or serve a compliance order by personal delivery thereof to a
responsible person. The citing official shall attempt to obtain on the
administrative citation or compliance order the signature of the responsible
person. If the responsible person or person served refuses or fails to sign the
administrative citation or compliance order, the failure or refusal to sign
shall not affect the validity of the citation, the compliance order or of
subsequent proceedings. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of
delivery.
      (2)   Mail. The citing official may mail the administrative citation or
compliance order to the responsible person by registered mail. Service shall be
deemed effective on the date of mailing.
      (3)   Posting. If the citing official does not succeed in serving the
responsible party personally or by registered mail, the citing official shall
post the administrative citation or compliance order on any real property
within the city in which the responsible person has a legal interest and, when
so posted, shall be deemed effective service as of that date.
      (4)   Publication. If the citing official does not succeed in serving the
responsible person personally, by registered mail or by posting, the citing
official shall cause the administrative citation to be published once a week
for four successive weeks in a local newspaper published, in English, at least
once a week. Service shall be deemed effective upon the final date of
publication. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.090 Administrative fine.
   (a)   For any violation of this code for which there is no specific
administrative penalty established in this code or by the city council, the
fine shall be in the amount of one hundred dollars for a first violation; two
hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision of this code
within a twelve month period; and five hundred dollars for each additional
violation of the same provision of this code within a twelve month period.
   (b)   Administrative fines assessed pursuant to an administrative citation
are a debt owed to the city. (Ord. 629, §2, 2009).
1.08.100 Payment of administrative fine.
   The fine imposed pursuant to this chapter for a particular violation and for
any subsequent violation of the same code section, shall be in the amount set
forth in the bail schedule established by resolution of the city council. The
administrative fine shall be paid to the city clerk within twenty days from the
date of service of the administrative citation. If, after a hearing requested
pursuant to this chapter, the hearing officer determines that the
administrative citation should be cancelled, the administrative fine shall be
refunded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 629, § 2,
2009).
1.08.110 Request for administrative hearing.
   (a)   Any responsible person to whom an administrative citation is issued
may contest the citation by:
      (1)   Completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city
clerk; and
      (2)   Either depositing the administrative fine with the city clerk or
providing notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been
filed pursuant to this chapter. A request for hearing form may be obtained from
the city clerk.
   (b)   Any responsible person desiring an administrative hearing shall file
with the city clerk a completed request for hearing form and the administrative
fine or completed hardship waiver form pursuant to this chapter within twenty
days from the date of service of the administrative citation. In the event of
any dispute as to the date of filing, the date indicated on a file stamped copy
in the city clerk's office or a city clerk-file stamped copy in the possession
of the responsible party shall control. The responsible person's failure to
file the request for hearing form and the fine or hardship waiver form within
twenty days of the date of service of the administrative citation shall
constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing.
   (c)   The person requesting the hearing shall be notified by registered mail
of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days before the date of the
hearing. Any documentation, other than the administrative citation the citing
official has submitted or will submit to the hearing officer, shall be served
on the person requesting the hearing by registered mail at least five days
before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.120 Advance deposit hardship waiver.
   (a)   Any responsible person who requests an administrative hearing and who
is financially unable to deposit the administrative fine as provided in this
chapter may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The request
shall be filed with the city clerk on an advance deposit hardship waiver
application form, available from the city clerk, no later than twenty days
after service of the administrative citation. The responsible person's failure
to file a completed form, with all supporting documents, within twenty days
after service of the administrative citation shall constitute a waiver of the
right to receive a hardship waiver. In the event of any dispute as to the date
of filing, the date indicated on a file stamped copy in the city clerk's office
or a city clerk-file stamped copy in possession of the responsible party shall
control.
   (b)   The city manager may issue an advance deposit hardship waiver only if
the person requesting the waiver submits a sworn affidavit, together with any
supporting documents, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city manager,
the person's financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of
the fine in advance of the hearing. The city manager shall issue a written
decision specifying the reasons for issuing or not issuing the waiver. The
decision shall be served upon the person requesting the waiver by registered
mail. The decision shall be deemed served on the date of mailing. If the city
manager determines that the waiver is not warranted, the person shall remit the
full amount of the fine to the city clerk within ten days of service of the
city manager's written decision. The City manager's decision whether to issue a
hardship waiver shall be final. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.130 Time for administrative hearing.
   Only after a request for hearing form is received by the city clerk within
the required period, and the responsible person requesting the hearing has
either deposited the administrative fine in full or obtained an advance deposit
hardship waiver (hereinafter a "perfected appeal"), shall the city set the date
and time for the administrative hearing. The hearing shall be set for a date
not less than fifteen days nor more than sixty days after an appeal becomes a
perfected appeal. The city shall send notice of the date, time, and place of
the hearing to the person requesting the hearing by registered mail at least
ten days before the date of the hearing. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.140 Request for continuance of hearing.
   The responsible person requesting a hearing may request one continuance, and
the city may continue the hearing on its own initiative, but in no event shall
the hearing begin later than ninety days after the date the appeal becomes a
perfected appeal. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.150 Appointment of administrative hearing officer.
   The city manager shall establish procedures for the selection of
administrative hearing officers. In no event, however, shall the same person
who issued the administrative citation or any person who has been "adverse" to
the recipient of the citation in any other legal or administrative proceeding,
be the administrative hearing officer. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.160 Procedures at administrative hearing.
   Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and
discovery do not apply. Each party shall have the opportunity to present
evidence in support of that party's case and to cross-examine witnesses. The
city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish a
violation of the municipal code. Administrative citations, compliance orders
and any additional reports submitted by the citing official shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the facts contained in those documents. The
administrative hearing officer must use preponderance of evidence as the
standard of review in deciding the issues. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.170 Failure to attend administrative hearing.
   If the responsible person fails to attend the scheduled hearing, the hearing
will proceed without the responsible person, and the responsible person will be
deemed to have waived the right to an administrative hearing. (Ord. 629, § 2,
2009).
1.08.180 Decision of administrative hearing officer.
   The administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision entitled
"administrative order" no later than thirty days after the date on which the
administrative hearing concludes. The administrative order shall include the
administrative hearing officer's written decision to uphold or cancel the
administrative citation. The decision shall set forth the reasons for the
decision. If the administrative hearing officer upholds the administrative
citation, the city shall retain the fine deposited by the responsible person.
If the administrative hearing officer upholds the administrative citation and
the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver,
the administrative hearing officer shall specify in the decision a payment
schedule for the fine. If the administrative hearing officer cancels the
administrative citation, any fine deposited with the city shall be promptly
refunded. The administrative order shall be served upon the responsible person
by registered mail. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing.
The administrative order shall become final on the date of service, and shall
notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as provided in this
chapter. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.190 Late payment charges.
   Any person who fails to pay to the city, on or before the due date, any
administrative fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall
be liable for the payment of the applicable late payment charges as follows:
   (a)   For payments received within thirty days after the due date, a late
fee in the amount of fifty percent of administrative fine due;
   (b)   For payments received more than thirty days after the due date, a late
fee in the amount of fifty percent of administrative fine due, plus an
additional ten percent of the overdue administrative fine for each month the
payment is overdue. The maximum late fee shall be one hundred percent of the
overdue administrative fine. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.200 Collection of administrative fine.
   The city may collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment
charges by use of any available legal means, including the lien procedure set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.210 Appeal of decision of administrative hearing officer.
   Within twenty days after service of the decision of the administrative
hearing officer upon the responsible person, the responsible person may seek de
novo review of the decision by filing a notice of appeal with the Los Angeles
Superior Court. The responsible person shall serve upon the city clerk, either
in person or by registered mail, a copy of the notice of appeal. If the
responsible person fails to timely file a notice of appeal, the administrative
hearing officer's decision shall be deemed confirmed. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.220 Appeal fee.
   The responsible person seeking review of an administrative order must pay a
fee of twenty-five dollars, or such other fee as may be established, to the Los
Angeles Superior Court. In the event that the court finds in favor of the
responsible person, the city will refund this fee to the responsible person.
(Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.230 Failure to comply with administrative order or pay administrative
fine.
   Failure to comply with an administrative order after it becomes final, or to
pay an administrative fine or late payment charges, is a misdemeanor. Filing a
criminal misdemeanor action does not preclude the city from using any other
legal remedy available to gain compliance with an administrative order, or to
collect any past-due administrative fine or late payment charges. (Ord. 629, §
2, 2009).
1.08.240 Remedies cumulative.
   The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to comply with the
provisions of this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying any tax,
fee, penalty, or interest due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor
shall payment prevent a criminal prosecution or a civil or administrative
penalty for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All
remedies shall be cumulative, and the use of any one or more remedies by the
city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.250 Administrative penalties: continuing violations - compliance orders.
   The administrative remedy provided in this chapter for any continuing
violation of this code related to building, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or
other similar structural or zoning issues, that does not create an immediate
danger to health or safety, may be exercised in place of, or in addition to,
any other remedy which is allowed by law, whether administrative, criminal,
civil, or equitable. The city attorney or city prosecutor shall have sole
discretion to determine whether a violation will be prosecuted criminally. If a
violation is not prosecuted criminally, the city may proceed with civil or
administrative proceedings pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 629, §2, 2009).
1.08.260 Compliance order.
   Whenever the citing official determines that there exists a continuing
violation of any provision of this code related to building, plumbing,
electrical, mechanical or other similar structural or zoning issues, that does
not create an immediate danger to health or safety, the citing official shall
issue or cause to be issued a written compliance order to any responsible
person, and such order shall be served by the citing official as provided in
this chapter. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
 1.08.270 Content of compliance order.
   A compliance order shall contain all of the following information:
   (a)   The date and location of the violation and the approximate time the
violation occurred.
   (b)   The municipal code section violated and a description of the
violation.
   (c)   The action required to correct the violation and the date by which
such action must be completed. Except as otherwise provided in this section,
the date for compliance shall not be less than thirty days from the date the
compliance order is served.
   (d)   The consequences of failing to correct the violation, including a
description of the administrative hearing procedure and appeal process.
   (e)   The time period after which administrative fines will begin to accrue
if there is not full compliance with the order.
   (f)   The amount of the fine that will be imposed if there is not full
compliance with the order.
   (g)   The name and signature of the citing official. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.280 Compliance order satisfied.
   (a)   If the citing official determines that all violations specified in the
compliance order have been corrected within the time set forth in the order, no
further action shall be taken against the responsible person regarding the
violations.
   (b)   When a compliance order is issued, if the responsible person provides
written notice that the violation has been corrected, and if the citing
official finds compliance, the citing official shall deem the date the written
notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the city official to be the
date the violation was corrected. If, however, a final inspection confirms
compliance before mailing or personal delivery of a written notice, or if no
written notice is provided, the date of final inspection shall be the date the
violation was corrected. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.290 Failure to comply - administrative citation.
   If the responsible person fails to fully comply with the compliance order
within the time specified therein, the citing official may issue an
administrative citation as provided in this chapter. The issuance of the
administrative citation does not obviate the responsible person's obligation to
fully comply with the compliance order. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
1.08.300 Decision of administrative hearing officer following appeal.
   (a)   If an administrative citation is appealed by the responsible person
and an administrative hearing is held as provided in this chapter, the
administrative hearing officer shall issue a written decision entitled
"administrative order" no later than thirty days after the date on which the
administrative hearing concludes. The administrative hearing officer shall make
findings within the administrative order regarding the existence of the
violation(s) specified in the compliance order, and regarding whether the
responsible person took the required corrective action within the time period
set forth in the compliance order. If the administrative hearing officer
concludes that the violation continues to exist, the administrative order shall
set forth a schedule for correction. If the administrative hearing officer
determines that the violation(s) set forth in the compliance order did not
exist, or that the violation(s) was (were) timely corrected, all proceedings
regarding the violation(s) shall immediately cease and the administrative
citations shall be canceled. If the administrative hearing officer cancels the
administrative citation, any fine deposited with the city shall be promptly
refunded. The administrative order shall be served upon the responsible person
by registered mail. Service shall be deemed effective on the date of mailing.
   (b)   The administrative order shall impose administrative fines and costs
as provided in this chapter.
   (c)   The administrative order shall become final on the date of service,
and shall notify the responsible person of the right to appeal as provided in
this chapter. The administrative order shall set a deadline for compliance with
its terms in the event that the responsible person fails to file an appeal.
(Ord. 629, §2, 2009).
1.08.310 Administrative costs.
   The administrative hearing officer shall assess against the responsible
person administrative costs for any violation found to exist, or for any
violation which was not timely corrected. The administrative costs include any
and all costs incurred by the city in connection with prosecuting the
violation, including but not limited to costs of investigation, staffing costs
in preparation for the administrative hearing and for the hearing itself,
attorneys' fees and costs and costs for all inspections necessary to enforce
the compliance order and the administrative order. The administrative order
shall specify the date by which the costs must be paid to the city. (Ord. 629,
§ 2, 2009).
1.08.320 Collection of administrative fines and costs - lien procedure.
   (a)   If The responsible person fails to satisfy in full the assessed
administrative fines and costs by the time specified in the administrative
order, and no timely appeal of the administrative order has been filed with the
Los Angeles Superior Court, the city may recover the outstanding fines and
costs by imposing a lien against the real property on which the violation
occurred.
   (b)   Prior to recording the lien with the Los Angeles County Recorder's
Office, the city council shall conduct a hearing to hear any protest or
objection to the lien. The citing official shall serve notice of the hearing
upon the owner of record of the real property, based on the last equalized
assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice
of hearing shall include the time, date, and place of the hearing, and shall be
served upon the owner of record by certified mail return receipt and by first
class mail at least ten days before the date of the hearing. If the owner of
record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by
posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of
ten days and by publication of the notice at least ten days prior to the
hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published in Los Angeles County
and distributed within the city.
   (c)   If the city council determines that the lien should be imposed, then
the citing official shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating
the amount due and owing.
   (d)   After the report is filed with the city clerk, the citing official may
cause the lien to be recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the lien
shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien.
   (e)   The remedies set forth in this section are not exclusive and may be
used in addition to those set forth elsewhere in this code or in state law. The
city may collect any past-due fines and costs by use of any available legal
means. (Ord. 629, § 2, 2009).
Chapter 1.10
JUDICIAL REVIEW OF CITY DECISIONS
Sections:
   
1.10.010   Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure adopted.
   
1.10.020   Decision defined.
   
1.10.030   Judicial review for First Amendment protected activities.
1.10.010 Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure adopted.
The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 shall be
applicable to decisions of the city council and of any board or commission of
the city authorized to render a final adjudicatory administrative decision
where no right of appeal to the city council exists, and notice thereof shall
be given in the resolution effecting such decision that the rights of review
are governed by Section 1094.6.
(Ord. 549 § 1 (part), 2000).
1.10.020 Decision defined.
As used in this chapter, "decision" means an adjudicatory administrative
decision made, after a hearing required by law to be given, suspending,
demoting or dismissing an officer or employee, revoking or denying an
application for a permit or license, or denying an application for any
retirement benefit or allowance.
(Ord. 549 § 1 (part), 2000).
1.10.030 Judicial review for First Amendment protected activities.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any interested party may seek
judicial review of a final city decision regarding the issuance, revocation,
suspension, or denial of a permit or license for an activity protected by the
First Amendment to the United States Constitution in accordance with the
provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.
(Ord. 549 § 1 (part), 2000).
Title 2
   ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:
   
2.02   City Council Elections
   
2.04   Council--Mayor
   
2.08   City Manager
   
2.12   City Clerk
   
2.16   Director of Finance
   
2.20   Assessor and Tax Collector
   
2.28   Civil Defense and Disaster
   
2.32   Compensation and Salaries
   
2.34   Elections
   2.35   Electronic Filing of Campaign Disclosure Statements and Statements of
Economic Interest
   
2.36   Employees' Retirement System
   
2.40   Oath of Office
   
2.44   Training of Enforcement Officers
   
2.46   Authority to Arrest
   
2.48   Redevelopment Agency
   
2.52   Planning Commission
   
2.56   Claims and Demands Against the City
   
2.60   Claims and Actions for Money and Damages
Chapter 2.02
CITY COUNCIL ELECTIONS
Sections:
   
2.02.010   Declaration of purpose.
   
2.02.020   City council districts established.
   
2.02.030   Election of members of the City Council by district.
   
2.02.040   Dates of city council election.
   
2.02.050   Adjustment of boundaries.
2.02.010 Declaration of purpose.
   The city council hereby declares that the change of method of electing
members of this council hereby enacted is being made in furtherance of the
California Voting Rights Act of 2001.
(Ord. 684, § 1, 2016)
2.02.020 City council districts established.
   City Council districts modified. The boundaries of the five City Council
districts established by the passage of Ordinance No. 684 of this Council
hereby are reestablished and modified as described on the Council District Map
attached as Exhibit "A" to Ordinance No. 721 of this Council and incorporated
by this reference.
(Ord. 721, § 1, 2021; Ord. 684, § 1, 2016)
2.02.030 Election of members of the City council by district.
   (a)   Following the effective date of this chapter and upon the commencement
of "by district" elections in the order established in §
2.02.040 of this code, members of the city council shall be elected "by
district" as defined in California Government Code Section 34871 or any
successor statute. A person shall not be eligible to be elected to be a member
of the city council unless he or she is otherwise qualified as required by law
and both resided in the geographical area comprising the district from which he
or she is nominated to be elected and was a registered voter of the city at the
time nomination papers are issued to the candidate as provided for in Section
10227 of the California Elections Code and continue in that resident and
registered voter status through the subject election. It is the intent of the
city council that no term of any member of the city council that commenced
prior to the effective date of chapter shall be affected by the adoption of
this chapter.
   (b)   Registered voters signing nomination papers or voting for a member of
the city council shall be residents of the geographical area making up the
district from which the member is to be elected.
   (c)   The terms of the office of each member elected to the city council
shall remain four (4) years.
(Ord. 684, § 1, 2016)
2.02.040 Dates of city council election.
   Commencing with the general municipal election in June of 2022, and
thereafter, the voters in districts 1 and 2 shall elect members of the city
council by district for four (4) year terms. Commencing with the general
municipal election in March of 2024 and thereafter, the voters in districts 3,
4 and 5 shall elect members of the city council by district for full four (4)
year terms. All such elections shall be held on the same date as the applicable
statewide primary.
(Ord. 718 § 2, 2021; Ord. 701 § 4, 2017; Ord. 684, § 1, 2016)
2.02.050 Adjustment of boundaries.
   Pursuant to Elections Code Section 21601, as it may be amended, the city
council shall adjust the boundaries of any or all of the districts following
each decennial federal census. Using the census as a basis, the city council
shall adjust the boundaries so that the districts shall be as nearly equal in
population as practicable and in compliance with all applicable provisions of
law. Any adjustment of district boundaries shall be made by ordinance adopted
by the city council before the first day of November of the year following the
year in which each decennial federal census is taken. Prior to the public
hearing approving the adjustment of the district boundaries, the city council
shall hold a public hearing on the proposed district boundaries as required by
Elections Code Section 21607.
   At the time of any annexation of territory to the city, the city council
shall designate, by resolution adopted by a vote of at least a majority of the
city council, the contiguous district to which the annexed territory shall be a
part and shall amend the district boundaries if necessary in accordance with
Election Codes Section 21603, as it may be amended.
   Pursuant to Elections Code Section 21606, the term of office of any council
member who has been elected and whose term of office has not expired shall not
be affected by any change in the boundaries of the district from which he or
she was elected. At the first election for council following adjustment of the
boundaries of the districts, a person meeting the requirements of government
code section 34882 shall be elected to the city council for each district under
the readjusted district plan that has the same district number as a district
whose incumbent's term on the council is due to expire.
(Ord. 684, § 1, 2016)
Chapter 2.04
COUNCIL--MAYOR  *
Sections:
   
2.04.010   Council chambers.
   
2.04.020   Council meetings.
   
2.04.030   Discussion procedure.
   
2.04.040   Copy of minutes.
   
2.04.050   Special meetings.
   
2.04.060   Mayor.
   
2.04.070   Vice-mayor.
   
2.04.080   Order of business.
 
Notes
* For statutory provisions regulating the council and council meetings in
  general, see Gov. Code § 36805 et seq.
2.04.010 Council chambers.
The council chambers of the city council shall be at the Council Chambers, City
Hall, 13700 La Mirada Boulevard, La Mirada, California.
(Ord. 158 § 1, 1970; Ord. 42 § 1, 1961; prior code § 2900).
2.04.020 Council meetings.
The city council shall hold two regular meetings each calendar month, together
with such study sessions of the city council as may be deemed appropriate.
These meetings shall be held on the dates, times and in such locations as
specified by the Council by resolution in accordance with California Government
Code Section 36805.
(Ord. 357 § 2, 1984; Ord. 23 § 1, 1961; Ord. 19 § 1, 1961; prior code § 2902).
2.04.030 Discussion procedure.
While discussing any question under consideration by the council or during the
course of any public hearing it shall be the duty of the members of the city
council to remain seated and address their remarks to the presiding officer and
their fellow members. Any remarks or orders to the audience shall be addressed
by the presiding officer, or with his permission by members of the council.
(Prior code § 2905).
2.04.040 Copy of minutes.
Immediately following each council meeting, the city clerk shall send a
typewritten copy of the minutes thereof to each member of the city council at
their respective addresses as given by them to the city clerk. Thereafter, the
reading of such minutes by the city clerk at the following meeting may be
dispensed with by a majority vote of the members present.
(Prior code § 2906).
2.04.050 Special meetings.
Special meetings may be called at any time by the mayor or by a majority of the
members of the city council, provided written notice is given to each city
council member and each local newspaper of general circulation and each radio
or television station requesting notice in writing, and further provided said
notice is given in such form and in the manner prescribed in California
Government Code Section 54956, or any successor provision thereto. The required
notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business
to be transacted or discussed. No other business shall be considered at such
meeting. The required written notice may be dispensed with as to any member
who, at or prior to the time the meeting convenes, files with the city clerk a
written waiver of notice. Said waiver may be given by telegram. The required
written notice may also be dispensed with as to any city council member who is
actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. The required written
notice shall be posted at least twenty-four hours prior to the special meeting
in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public.
(Ord. 491 § 3, 1995; prior code § 2907).
2.04.060 Mayor.
   The mayor shall be a member of city council and elected by members of the
city council. The mayor shall be elected to such office for a term of one year.
   No councilmember may hold the office of mayor for two successive terms;
however, any councilmember may be elected to the office of mayor when he or she
has not held such office for the year immediately preceding the councilmember’s
election to such office.
   The election for mayor shall be held at the time prescribed by Section 36801
of the Government Code whereby following the declaration of the election
results and the installation of elected officials, the city council shall
choose one of its number as mayor, and one of its number as mayor pro tempore.
In non-city council election years, the election for mayor and mayor pro
tempore shall be held at the first regular meeting of the city council in the
month of June.
   The mayor may make or second any motion and present or discuss any matter as
a member of the city council. The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the
city council and shall have such other duties as may be prescribed by law.
(Ord. 718 § 3, 2021; Ord. 701 § 5, 2017; Ord. 482 § 3, 1994; Ord. 273 § 1,
1978; Ord. 234 § 1, 1975; Ord. 231 § 1, 1975; Ord. 102 § 1, 1966; Ord. 30 § 1,
1961; prior code § 2908).
2.04.070 Vice-mayor.
In order to expedite the orderly procedure of the city council meetings, in the
event the mayor cannot be present, the council shall also elect some other
member of the city council who shall act as mayor pro tempore in his absence.
The mayor pro tempore shall be known as the vice-mayor of the city.
(Prior code § 2909).
2.04.080 Order of business.
The order of business of each regular meeting of the city council shall be in
the manner and method as may be prescribed from time to time by resolution of
the city council.
(Prior code § 2910).
Chapter 2.08
CITY MANAGER
Sections:
   
2.08.010   Office created.
   
2.08.020   Conforming amendments.
2.08.010 Office created.
   The office of the city manager is created and established. The city manager
shall be appointed by the city council on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications and ability, and shall hold office at and during
the pleasure of the city council. The city manager shall receive such
compensation as the city council from time to time shall, by resolution, either
direct or authorize.
   The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government and
shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient operation of the
city. To this end he shall have the following powers and duties:
   (1)   Direct the activities of all appointed city employees and officers
except the city treasurer and the city attorney;
   (2)   Attend all meetings of the city council and report on or discuss any
matter under his jurisdiction upon which, in his judgment the city council
should be informed or upon which the city council may wish to be informed;
   (3)   Coordinate the administrative functions of the city and carry out the
policies, orders and instructions of the city council in the operation of the
city government;
   (4)   Cause to be enforced all ordinances of the city;
   (5)   Analyze the functions and services of the city government and make
such recommendations to the city council as in his judgment will result in the
highest degree of efficiency in the overall operation of the city government;
   (6)   Prepare and recommend to the city council prior to June 15th of each
year the municipal budget and after formal adoption of the budget by the city
council shall be responsible for its administration and shall keep the city
council informed with respect thereto;
   (7)   Develop and organize public improvement projects and programs and
coordinate these projects and programs with proper public bodies and recommend
any appropriate action in relation thereto to the city council;
   (8)   Meet with, assist and advise all commissions and committees appointed
by the city council for the purpose of furthering the aims and achieving the
goals of the city. For this purpose he may designate such subordinate employees
of the city as he deems appropriate;
   (9)   Act as personnel officer for the city and in accordance with good
personnel policy recruit and hire employees for any position authorized by the
city council. He may take or institute whatever disciplinary action is
necessary regarding city employees and shall report such actions to the city
council;
   (10)   On matters of administration, the city manager shall report to the
city council as a whole. Councilmen are expected to work through the city
manager's office in all matters affecting the administrative activities of the
city. Councilmen appointed as liaison representatives to the city commissions
or committees are authorized to participate in meetings or deliberations of the
groups;
   (11)   Designate city officers or employees of the city to exercise the
powers authorized by Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code, including the
issuance of citations for violations of the provisions of the municipal code.
      (A)   Any city officer or employee designated by the city manager under
this section shall complete such training and education as is required by law
prior to assuming any duties under this section.
      (B)   City officers or employees designated by the city manager under
this section shall have the powers and duties granted by this section only when
performing expressly assigned duties. At all other times said officers and
employees shall have no status as a peace officer or any powers or authority or
duties of a peace officer.
   (12)   To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be
delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other
official action of the city council.
(Ord. 590 § 1, 2005; Ord. 382 § l, 1986; Ord. 339 § 1 (part), 1983; Ord. 32 §
1, 1961; prior code § 2100).
2.08.020 Conforming amendments.
Wherever, in any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council enacted,
adopted or passed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter, the words "city administrator" appear, there shall be deemed
substituted the words "city manager." Wherever, in any city contract, franchise
or permit entered into or granted prior to the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter, any duty, power, right or responsibility is vested in
the city administrator, the city manager shall exercise the same.
(Ord. 339 § 1 (part), 1983).
Chapter 2.12
CITY CLERK
Sections:
   
2.12.010   Duties.
   
2.12.020   Bond.
   
2.12.030   Removal of papers or documents from city hall.
2.12.010 Duties.
Any applications required to be filed with the city or fees required to be paid
to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall be filed with or
paid to the city clerk, unless otherwise by this code provided.
(Prior code § 2201).
2.12.020 Bond.
The city clerk upon the entry to his duties of office shall execute a bond to
the city in conformity with bonds of public officers, and in conformity with
the provisions of the Government Code of the state of California relating
thereto, in the amount of five thousand dollars.
(Prior code § 2202).
2.12.030 Removal of papers or documents from city hall.
No person, unless authorized by the city clerk, mayor, city attorney, or any
three members of the city council, shall remove any official papers or
documents from the city hall.
(Prior code § 2203).
Chapter 2.16
DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Sections:
   
2.16.010   Office created--Duties.
2.16.010 Office created--Duties.
   There is hereby established the office of director of finance.
   Pursuant to the provisions of Section 37209 of the Government Code, the
duties of the city clerk as imposed on the city clerk by Article 1, Chapter 4,
Part 2, Division 3 of Title 4 of the Government Code are hereby transferred to
the director of finance.
   The director of finance shall be the accounting officer of the city and
shall maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the city.
   At the end of each fiscal year he shall prepare and present to the
legislative body a summary of receipts and disbursements by departments and
funds including opening and closing fund balances in the treasury.
   He shall prepare all disbursements including payrolls and the preparation of
invoices. He shall be responsible for inventory and budget control.
   He shall prepare financial reports as required for state and county
departments. He shall serve as the purchasing officer for the city. He shall
receive and deposit, in accordance with the instructions of the city treasurer,
all moneys accruing to the city.
   The city council may by resolution assign any employee of the city to act as
director of finance and to perform or cause to be performed the duties listed
in this section.
   The director of finance upon the entry to his duties of office shall execute
a bond to the city in conformity with bonds of public officers, and in
conformity with the provisions of the Government Code of the state of
California relating thereto, in the amount of five thousand dollars.
(Ord. 33 § 1, 1961; prior code § 2250).
Chapter 2.20
ASSESSOR AND TAX COLLECTOR
Sections:
   
2.20.010   Duties transferred--Generally.
   
2.20.020   Abolishment of offices.
   
2.20.030   Transfer of duties.
2.20.010 Duties transferred--Generally.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of
the state of California the assessment and tax collection duties performed by
the city assessor and tax collector hereby are transferred to the assessor and
tax collector of the county of Los Angeles.
(Prior code § 2200).
2.20.020 Abolishment of offices.
The offices of city assessor and tax collector hereby are abolished.
(Prior code § 2200.1).
2.20.030 Transfer of duties.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51507 of the Government Code of
this state, the duties of the city assessor, other than the assessing of city
property and the duties of the tax collector, other than the collection of
taxes, hereby are transferred to and shall be performed by the city clerk, or
such officer of the county of Los Angeles as may by contract with the city be
designated and authorized to perform such duties.
(Prior code § 2200.2).
Chapter 2.28
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER  *
Sections:
   
2.28.010   Purposes.
   
2.28.020   Emergency defined.
   
2.28.030   Disaster council membership.
   
2.28.040   Disaster council powers and duties.
   
2.28.050   Director and assistant director of emergency services.
   
2.28.060   Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of
emergency services.
    
2.28.070   Emergency organization.
   
2.28.080   Emergency plan.
   
2.28.090   Expenditures.
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions authorizing the legislative body of a city to
  provide by ordinance for a chief executive having complete municipal
* authority during periods of great public calamity, see California Government
  Code § 38791. For statutory provisions pertaining to the preservation of
  local government, see California Government Code Sections 8550 et seq. Prior
  ordinance history: Ords. 40 and 104.
2.28.010 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and
carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the
city in the event of an emergency, and direction of the emergency organization,
and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other
public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.
(Ord. 256 § 1, 1977).
2.28.020 Emergency defined.
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence
of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and
property within the city, caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire,
flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including
conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than
conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are
likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and
facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political
subdivisions to combat.
(Ord. 256 § 2, 1977).
2.28.030 Disaster council membership.
The La Mirada disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the
following:
   (a)   The mayor, who shall be chairman;
   (b)   The director of emergency services, who shall be vice- chairman;
   (c)   The assistant director of emergency services;
   (d)   Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current
emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;
   (e)   Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional
or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be
appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council.
(Ord. 256 § 3, 1977).
2.28.040 Disaster council powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the La Mirada disaster council, and it is hereby
empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency
and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and
rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.
The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or, in his absence
from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-
chairman.
(Ord. 256 § 4, 1977).
2.28.050 Director and assistant director of emergency services.
   (a)    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The
city administrator shall be the director of emergency services.
   (b)   There is created the office of assistant director of emergency
services, who shall be appointed by the director.
(Ord. 256 § 5, 1977).
2.28.060 Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency
services.
   (a)   The director is hereby empowered to:
      (1)   Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened
existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue
such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local
emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to
ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall
have no further force or effect;
      (2)   Request the Governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in
the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to
cope with the emergency;
      (3)   Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this
city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;
      (4)   Direct cooperation between the coordination of services and staff
of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority
and responsibility that may arise between them;
      (5)   Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies
in matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in Section
2.28.020 herein;
      (6)   In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided
in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or
the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a
"state of war emergency," the Director is hereby empowered:
         (A)   To make and issue rules and regulations and emergency orders
with respect to curfews, and to prohibitions or restrictions on the sale of
certain products, the commercial availability of which would contribute to the
enhancement of the emergency and on matters reasonably related to the
protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided,
however, such rules and regulations must be affirmed at the earliest
practicable time by the city council;
         (B)   To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties
found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind
the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer
the same for public use;
         (C)   To require emergency services of any city officer or employee
and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in
which this city is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to
command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in
the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges,
benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster
service workers;
         (D)   To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city
department or agency; and
         (E)   To execute all of his ordinary power as city administrator, all
of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or
emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers
conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city
council, and by any other lawful authority.
   (b)   The director of emergency services shall designate the order of
succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is
unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an
emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.
   (c)   The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director
and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans
and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other
powers and duties as may be assigned by the director.
(Ord. 471 § 2, 1993; Ord. 470 § 2, 1993; Ord. 256 § 6, 1977).
2.28.070 Emergency organization.
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces
enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and
persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed
into service under the provisions of Section
2.28.060(a)(6)(C) of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the
protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall
constitute the emergency organization of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 256 § 7, 1977).
2.28.080 Emergency plan.
The La Mirada disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the
city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of
all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any
condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war
emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services
and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon
adoption by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 256 § 8, 1977).
2.28.090 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual
aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection
and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 256 § 9, 1977).
Chapter 2.32
COMPENSATION AND SALARIES
Sections:
   
2.32.010   Officers and employees.
   
2.32.020   Basic salary plan and ranges.
   
2.32.065   Council member--Adjustment of compensation.
   
2.32.075   Reimbursement.
2.32.010 Officers and employees.
The salaries and compensation of officers and employees of the city shall be as
fixed and determined by resolution of the city council, except those fixed in
this chapter.
(Prior code § 2301).
2.32.020 Basic salary plan and ranges.
   There is established a basic salary plan for employment of and payment to
persons within the classified service of the city. Such basic salary plan shall
consist of various schedules of pay, each with five classifications of rates.
   The city council by resolution shall assign classes of employment to the
classified service. All classes of employment assigned to the classified
service shall be allocated to a schedule and all employees in the classified
service shall be paid at one of the rates listed on the appropriate schedule.
Said schedule and rates shall be as are established from time to time by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 238 § 1, 1975; Ord. 218 § 1, 1974; Ord. 201 § 1, 1973; Ord. 34 § 1, 1961;
prior code § 2260).
2.32.065 Council member--Adjustment of compensation.
   (a)   City Ordinance No. 598, providing for the compensation of council
members at a salary of nine hundred eighty-four dollars and ninety-one cents
per month, became operative during March 2007.
   (b)   Pursuant to Section 36516(c) of the Government Code, the compensation
of council members of this city is increased to the monthly sum of one thousand
and nine dollars and fifty-three cents. Pursuant to Section 36516.5 of the
Government Code, the increase in compensation provided for by this amended
Section
2.32.065 shall become payable to members of the city council only on and after
the date upon which one or more members of the city council becomes eligible
therefor, by virtue of his beginning a new term of office following the next
general municipal election held in the city.
(Ord. 621 § 1, 2008; Ord. 598 § 1, 2006; Ord. 554 § 1, 2000; Ord. 517 § 1,
1998; Ord. 452 §1, 1991; Ord. 362 § 1, 1985; Ord. 232 § 1 (part), 1975).
2.32.075 Reimbursement.
The salaries prescribed in Section
2.32.065 are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of
the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him
in the performance of his official duties for the city.
(Ord. 232 § 1 (part), 1975).
Chapter 2.34
ELECTIONS
Sections:
   
2.34.010   Campaign expenditure limitations.
2.34.010 Campaign expenditure limitations.
Pursuant to California Government Code 85400(c), a voluntary expenditure
ceiling of one dollar per resident is established for any candidate for the
office of member of the city council of the city of La Mirada and any
controlled committee of such a candidate for each election in the city of La
Mirada in which the candidate is seeking the office of member of the La Mirada
City Council.
(Ord. 508 § 2, 1997).
Chapter 2.35
ELECTRONIC FILING OF CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS AND STATEMENTS OF ECONOMIC
INTEREST
Sections:
   
2.35.010   General.
   
2.35.020   Procedures for utilizing online filing.
   
2.35.030   Availability of statements for public review; Records retention.
2.35.010 General.
   A.   Any elected officer, candidate, committee, or other person required to
file statements, reports, or other documents (statements) as required by
Government Code Chapter 4 of the Political Reform Act commencing with
Government Code Section 84100, must file such statements using the city clerk's
online system according to procedures established by the city clerk, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. These procedures shall ensure that the
online system complies with the requirements set forth in Section 84615 of the
Government Code. Elected officers, candidates, or committees required to file
statements must file such statements using the city clerk's online system,
unless exempt from the requirement to file online pursuant to Government Code
Section 84615(a) because the officer, candidate, or committee receives less
than $2,000 in contributions and makes less than $2,000 in expenditures in a
calendar year. All other individuals required to file statement of economic
interest according to the city's adopted code of conflict of interest must file
electronically using the city clerk's online system.
   B.   The online filing system shall ensure the integrity of the data
transmitted and shall include safeguards against efforts to tamper with,
manipulate, alter, or subvert the data.
   C.   The online filing system shall include a procedure for filers to comply
with the requirement that they sign statements and reports under penalty of
perjury pursuant to Section 81004 of the Government Code. (Ord. 719 § 2 (part),
2021).
2.35.020 Procedures for utilizing online filing.
   A.   Electronic filing is mandatory unless the officer, candidate, or
committee is exempt as provided in Section
2.35.010.A or California Government Code 84615(a), or the provisions of Section
2.35.020.D of this chapter apply.
   B.   Any elected officer, candidate, or committee who has electronically
filed a statement using the city clerk's online system is not required to file
a copy of the document in paper format with the city clerk.
   C.   The city clerk shall issue an electronic confirmation that notifies the
filer that the statement was received; the notification shall include the date
and the time that statement was received and the method by which the filer may
view and print the data received by the city clerk. The date of filing for a
statement filed online shall be the day that it is received by the city clerk.
   D.   If the city clerk's system is not capable of accepting a statement due
to technical difficulties, or the city does not have available a certified
online filing system, an elected officer, candidate, or committee shall file
that statement in paper format with the city clerk. Nothing in this section
shall affect the deadline date for any required filing.
   E.   The online filing system shall enable electronic filers to complete and
submit filings free of charge.
   F.   The city clerk is authorized to adopt such additional administrative
polices and procedures as deemed necessary to implement, and not otherwise in
conflict with, this chapter. (Ord. 719 § 2 (part), 2021).
2.35.030 Availability of statements for public review; Records retention.
   A.   The city clerk's system shall make all the data filed available on the
city's website in an easily understood format that provides the public access.
The data shall be made available free of charge. The data made available on the
city's website shall not contain the street name and building number of the
persons or entity representatives listed on the electronically filed forms or
any bank account number required to be disclosed by the filer.
   B.   The city clerk's office shall maintain, for the period specified in the
city's records retention schedule, but not less than ten (10) years from the
date of filing, a secured, official version of each online or electronic
statement which shall serve as the official version of that record for purpose
of audits and any other legal purpose. (Ord. 719 § 2 (part), 2021).
Chapter 2.36
EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM  *
Sections:
   
2.36.010   Contract authorized.
   
2.36.020   Execution of contract.
 
Notes
* Editor's Note: The contract authorized by this chapter has been amended by
  ordinance 243.
2.36.010 Contract authorized.
A contract between the city council and the Board of Administration, California
State Employees' Retirement System is hereby authorized, a copy of the
contract, marked "Exhibit A," and by such reference made a part hereof as
though herein set out in full.
(Ord. 87 § 1, 1965).
2.36.020 Execution of contract.
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to execute
the contract for and on behalf of the agency.
(Ord. 87 § 2, 1965).
Chapter 2.40
OATH OF OFFICE
Sections:
   
2.40.010   Required--Form.
   
2.40.030   Failure to take oath.
   
2.40.040   Applicability.
   
2.40.050   Severability.
2.40.010 Required--Form.
All officers, full-time employees, and all members of all boards, commissions
or committees of the city shall take and subscribe the following oath or
affirmation within thirty days from date of appointment:
"I,                                                         , do solemnly swear
(or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the state of California against all enemies,
foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state of
California; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation
or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter.
                                                                          
                  (Name of Office)
(Ord. 257 § 1 (part), 1977; Ord. 146 § 1, 1969; prior code § 2230).
2.40.030 Failure to take oath.
Any officer, full-time employee or member of any board, commission or committee
of the city who has not taken and subscribed the oath or affirmation as set
forth in Section
2.40.010, shall within thirty days after November 10, 1977, take and subscribe
such oath. In the event any officer, employee or member of any board,
commission or committee of the city fails or has failed to take and subscribe
such oath within thirty days after November 10, 1977, such person shall no
longer be eligible to hold such office or position with the city.
(Ord. 257 § 1 (part), 1977; Ord. 146 § 3, 1969).
2.40.040 Applicability.
Pursuant to the provisions of Article XX, Section 3 of the Constitution of the
state of California, the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to
apply to any member of the city council.
(Ord. 257 § 1 (part), 1977; Ord. 146 § 4, 1969).
2.40.050 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions of this chapter. The city council hereby declares that it
would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause,
phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more
sections, subsections, phrases or portions be declared invalid or
unconstitutional.
(Ord. 257 § 2, 1977).
Chapter 2.44
TRAINING OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS
Sections:
   
2.44.010   State aid.
2.44.010 State aid.
Pursuant to Section 13522 of Chapter I of Title 4, Part 4 of the California
Penal Code, the city, while receiving aid from the state of California pursuant
to Chapter I, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training
established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and
Training.
(Ord. 67 § 2, 1963).
Chapter 2.46
AUTHORITY TO ARREST
Sections:
   
2.46.010   Authority to arrest provided to authorized public safety officers.
   
2.46.020   Issuance of a notice to appear.
   
2.46.030   Conformance with policies and procedures.
2.46.010 Authority to arrest provided to authorized public safety officers.
Pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Section 836.5, designated
public safety officers of the city of La Mirada are given authority to arrest
which may be exercised solely in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. Each such designated public safety officer may exercise arrest
authority in connection with a misdemeanor occurring in his or her presence
which is a violation of a statute or ordinance which such officer has the duty
to enforce. Only those public safety officers designated in writing by the city
manager shall have the authority to arrest as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1998).
2.46.020 Issuance of a notice to appear.
In any case in which a person is arrested by a designated public safety officer
and such person does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the arresting
officer shall prepare a written notice to appear and shall release the person
on his or her promise to appear, in accordance with the provisions of
California Penal Code Sections 836.5(c) and 853.6.
(Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1998).
2.46.030 Conformance with policies and procedures.
Each designated public safety officer authorized to arrest pursuant to this
chapter shall, at all times while exercising such authority, conform with all
city policies and the procedures applicable thereto. Nothing herein shall
authorize any public safety officer to carry a firearm.
(Ord. 521 § 1 (part), 1998).
Chapter 2.48
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Sections:
   
2.48.010   Need declaration.
   
2.48.020   Authority--Designation.
2.48.010 Need declaration.
The city council finds and determines that there is a need for a redevelopment
agency in the city.
(Ord. 200 § 1, 1973).
2.48.020 Authority--Designation.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to and subject to
the terms and provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law of the state,
Division 24 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, commencing with Section
33000 of said code. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Health
and Safety Code, the city council declares itself to be the redevelopment
agency of the city.
(Ord. 200 § 2, 1973).
Chapter 2.52
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:
   
2.52.010   Planning commission created.
   
2.52.020   Composition--Appointment of members.
   
2.52.030   Terms of office.
   
2.52.040   Vacancies.
   
2.52.050   Removal of members.
   
2.52.060   Elections and posts within planning commission.
   
2.52.070   Rules of conduct of meetings.
   
2.52.080   Powers and duties.
2.52.010 Planning commission created.
A city planning commission, heretofore created and established under authority
of the California Government Code, is recreated and reestablished.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.52.020 Composition--Appointment of members.
The city planning commission shall consist of five members. Each member of the
city planning commission shall be nominated for appointment by one member of
the city council and shall be appointed to the city planning commission by the
mayor, subject to the approval of a majority of the city council. No person
shall be appointed to a position on the city planning commission unless such
person is a qualified elector of the city. Each such person appointed to the
city planning commission shall, as soon as is practicable after such
appointment, take and file with the city clerk the oath required pursuant to
Chapter 2.40 of this code.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.52.030 Terms of office.
Planning commissioners shall have a term of office of four years. The term of
office shall commence upon approval by the City Council and shall expire on
June 30 of the same year of the expiration of the term of their nominating
Councilmember.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982; Ord. 668 § 1, 2014; Ord. 708 § 1, 2019).
2.52.040 Vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs, other than by expiration of a term, it shall be filled by
appointment by the mayor, with the approval of a majority of the city council,
for the unexpired portion of the term. Further, all appointments to fill
vacancies in the city planning commission shall be subject to the provisions of
Section
2.52.020.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.52.050 Removal of members.
A member may be removed from office, prior to the expiration of the member’s
term, upon expiration of the term of their appointing Councilmember where the
commission member’s term would otherwise automatically expire the following
June without action of the City Council.
   Any member of the commission shall be removed from office or that office
shall be declared vacant, in the following manner and for the following
reasons:
   (a)   By order of the mayor, subject to the approval of a majority of the
City Council.
   (b)   By a majority vote of the entire City Council.
   (c)   If a member of the commission ceases to be a qualified elector of the
city, such member’s office shall be deemed vacant and no action by the City
Council shall be necessary.
   (d)   If a member of the commission shall be absent from three consecutive
regular meetings of the commission, such member’s office shall be deemed vacant
and no action by the City Council shall be necessary.
   (e)   If a member of the commission shall be absent from three regular
meetings of the commission in any eight-month period, such member’s office
shall be deemed vacant and no further action by the City Council shall be
necessary.
   (f)   If a member of the commission shall fail to comply with the provisions
of Chapter 2.4 of this code, such member’s office shall be deemed vacant and no
action by the City Council shall be necessary.
   (g)   At five p.m. on the date specified as the expiration date for the term
of office of any member of the commission, said office shall be deemed vacant
and no action by the City Council shall be necessary.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part) , 1982; Ord. 668 § 2, 2014; Ord. 708 § 2, 2019).
2.52.060 Elections and posts within planning commission.
The city planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from
among its appointed members for a term of twelve months, and subject to other
provisions of law, may create and fill such other offices as it may determine.
The election of officers shall occur at the first regular meeting in June of
each year. The city planning commission may appoint, from among its appointed
members, such subcommittees as are deemed necessary or convenient.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.52.070 Rules of conduct of meetings.
The city planning commission shall observe the following rules in the conduct
of its meetings and business:
   (a)   The times and places of all city planning commission meetings shall be
set by resolution of the city council.
   (b)   All meetings of the city planning commission shall be open to the
public.
   (c)   City council members and the city administrator, when in attendance,
shall have the right to be heard on all matters; however, they shall have no
vote as to any commission action to be taken.
   (d)   The city planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business which rules may be modified from time to time as the city planning
commission deems necessary or convenient.
   (e)   The city planning commission shall keep a record of its resolutions,
transactions, findings and determinations, which records shall, during all
regular business office hours, be open for public inspection.
   (f)   A written agenda shall be prepared and circulated to all city planning
commission members in advance of all meetings and a copy of such written agenda
shall be provided to any member of the public requesting such a copy.
(Ord. 392 § 1, 1987; Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.52.080 Powers and duties.
The city planning commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (a)   The city planning commission's responsibilities and authorities shall
be in accordance with the provisions of California law, except as may be
otherwise authorized by and set forth in specific ordinances.
   (b)   The city planning commission shall receive and expeditiously act on
all special project assignments made by the city council and shall submit
reports and recommendations to the city council on such assignment.
   (c)   The city planning commission may submit recommended city projects to
the city council for possible assignment by the city council.
   (d)   All actions and business of the city planning commission shall be
conducted by the commission as a whole, unless a representative or subcommittee
is appointed by the city planning commission to act on its behalf.
   (e)   Expenditure of any budgeted funds by the city planning commission
shall require the prior approval of the city administrator. Proposed
expenditures not budgeted in the annual budget shall be presented to the city
council with a recommendation from the city planning commission for a special
appropriation.
   (f)   It shall be the responsibility of the city planning commission to be
represented at the meetings of the city council and other commissions when
matters of joint concern are to be discussed, and to advise chairmen of other
commissions of city planning commission matters of concern to such commissions
which are to be discussed by the city planning commission.
   (g)   No decision of the city planning commission shall be final and binding
on the city unless approved by the city council, or unless authority for such
decision's finality has been granted to the city planning commission by
provision of some city ordinance.
(Ord. 322 § 1 (part), 1982).
Chapter 2.56
CLAIMS AND DEMANDS AGAINST THE CITY
Sections:
   
2.56.010   Filing of claims and demands--Council consideration-- Payment--
Salary.
   
2.56.020   Authority to draw warrants.
   
2.56.030   Form and contents of warrants.
   
2.56.040   Facsimile signatures.
2.56.010 Filing of claims and demands--Council consideration--Payment--Salary.
No demand against the city shall be allowed by the city council nor an order or
warrant ordered drawn paying the demand at any time other than a meeting of the
council and unless the claimant shall have filed with the city administrator
his itemized demand in writing, giving date of services rendered, the character
of work done, the number of days engaged therein, the supplies and material
furnished, and to whom furnished, the quantity and price paid therefor, which
claim must be verified by affidavit of claimant or some competent person for
him, stating that the items therein are true and correct and that no portion
thereof has been paid. If the work was done for, or the supplies furnished to,
any official of the city or committee of the council in its official capacity,
such demand must also bear the written approval of such officer or chairman of
such committee; provided, however, that an order or warrant for the regular
monthly salary of an official of the city may be drawn by the mayor and
countersigned by the city treasurer on the first regular meeting in the month
following the one for which such services for which payment is made were
performed, without the demand of the official being so made or filed with the
city administrator.
(Ord. 334 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.56.020 Authority to draw warrants.
No order or warrant upon the city treasury shall be drawn unless pursuant to a
provision of this code, an ordinance, resolution or motion duly passed by the
city council and unless there is sufficient money in the fund upon which it is
drawn to meet the same.
(Ord. 334 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.56.030 Form and contents of warrants.
All warrants, orders, or checks upon the city treasury for the payment of any
money shall be signed by either the mayor or one of such members of the city
council as are authorized to so sign by minute motion of the city council and
shall be countersigned by the city treasurer or, in his or her absence, by that
person designated as the deputy city treasurer by minute motion of the city
council. In every warrant, order or check so drawn shall be specified the name
of the person to whom the same is payable, the date and amount thereof, the
services or indebtedness for which it is to be issued and the fund out of which
it is to be paid and shall be made payable to the person named therein or to
his or her order.
(Ord. 334 § 1 (part), 1982).
2.56.040 Facsimile signatures.
Any person required, or authorized, pursuant to Section
2.56.030, to sign, or countersign, any warrant, order or check upon the city
treasury may execute such warrant, order or check by means of a facsimile
signature in lieu of his or her manual signature upon the filing and
certification of such person's manual signature in accordance with the Uniform
Facsimile Signature of Public Officials Act (California Government Code
Sections 5500 et seq.) as the same now exists or as may be amended from time to
time. The authority to utilize facsimile signatures in accordance with this
section shall not be applicable to any warrant, order or check when the amount
payable thereby is in excess of ten thousand dollars, in which case the
signatures of the persons required or authorized to sign or countersign shall
be affixed manually.
(Ord. 334 § 1 (part), 1982).
Chapter 2.60
CLAIMS AND ACTIONS FOR MONEY AND DAMAGES
Sections:
   
2.60.010   Applicability of chapter.
   
2.60.020   Suits for money or damages--Claim prerequisites.
   
2.60.030   Claims--Time limitation.
   
2.60.040   Claims--Late filing.
   
2.60.050   Claims--Presentation and contents.
   
2.60.060   Claims--Utilization of statutory procedures for consideration and
action on claims.
2.60.010 Applicability of chapter.
Pursuant to Section 935 of the Government Code, all claims against the city for
money or damages which are excepted by Section 905 of the Government Code from
the provisions of Division 3.6 of the Government Code (Sections 810 et seq.),
and which are not governed by any other statutes or regulations expressly
relating thereto, including Chapter 2.56 of this code, shall be governed by the
procedure prescribed in this chapter.
(Ord. 465 § 1 (part), 1993).
2.60.020 Suits for money or damages--Claim prerequisites.
No suit for money or damages may be brought against the city on a cause of
action for which this chapter requires a claim to be presented until a written
claim therefor has been filed and acted upon in conformity with this chapter
and Sections 945.4 and 945.6 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 465 § 1 (part), 1993).
2.60.030 Claims--Time limitation.
A claim for any cause of action specified in Section
2.60.010 of this chapter shall be presented in the manner provided in Section
2.60.050 not later than one year after the accrual of the cause of action;
except that a claim by the state or by a state department or agency or by
another local public entity on a cause of action for death or for injury to
person or to personal property or growing crops, or on a cause of action for
equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity, shall be presented not
later than six months after the accrual of the cause of action.
(Ord. 465 § 1 (part), 1993).
2.60.040 Claims--Late filing.
In accordance with Section 935 of the Government Code, the late filing of
claims pursuant to this chapter is regulated by Sections 911.4 to 912.2,
inclusive, of the Government Code.
(Ord. 465 § 1 (part), 1993).
2.60.050 Claims--Presentation and contents.
A signed, written claim shall be presented to the city by mailing or delivering
it to the city clerk by the claimant or by a person acting on his behalf. The
claim shall conform to the requirements of Section 910 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 465 § 1 (part), 1993).
2.60.060 Claims--Utilization of statutory procedures for consideration and
action on claims.
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the procedure for consideration and
action upon all claims filed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by and
be the same as the procedure provided and required by Sections 910.2 through
915.2 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 465 § 1 (part), 1993).
Title 3
   REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:
   
3.05   Sales and Use Tax
   
3.06   Transient Occupancy Tax
   
3.08   Documentary Stamp Tax
   
3.09   Crude Oil Producers' Tax
   
3.10   Transactions and Use Tax
   
3.12   Funds
   
3.14   Purchasing
Chapter 3.05
   SALES AND USE TAX  *
Sections:
   
3.05.010   Short title.
   
3.05.020   Rate.
   
3.05.030   Operative date.
   
3.05.040   Purpose.
   
3.05.050   Contract with state.
   
3.05.060   Sales tax.
   
3.05.070   Place of sale.
   
3.05.080   Use tax.
   
3.05.090   Adoption of provisions of state law.
   
3.05.100   Limitations on adoption of state law.
   
3.05.110   Permit not required.
   
3.05.120   Exclusions and exemptions.
   
3.05.150   Amendments.
   
3.05.160   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   
3.05.200   Sales and use tax credits to La Mirada Redevelopment Project Area I.
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions authorizing the imposition of a sales and use tax,
  see Gov. Code § 37101. For statutory provisions pertaining to sales and use
* taxes generally, see Cal. Rev. & T. Code §§ 6001 et seq. For statutory
  provisions pertaining to uniform local sales and use taxes, see Rev. & T.
  Code §§ 7200 et seq.
3.05.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.020 Rate.
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.030 Operative date.
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.040 Purpose.
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the
following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be
interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
   (1)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code;
   (2)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions
identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those
provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained
in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
   (3)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and
provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State
Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable
to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in
administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;
   (4)   To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a
manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part
1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of
collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of
record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.050 Contract with state.
Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and
operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this city has
not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative
date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date
shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of
such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter
following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.060 Sales tax.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section
3.05.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible
personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.070 Place of sale.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place
of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a
common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject
to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state
or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail
sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be
prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.080 Use tax.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city
of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the
operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate
stated in Section
3.05.020 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include
delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax
regardless of the place to which delivery is made.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set
forth herein.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name
of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall
not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title of the State
Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of
Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the state; the
substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would
require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof,
rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the
functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the
substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not
necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the
state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption
from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption
of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by
the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject
to tax by the state under said provisions of that code; the substitution shall
not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution
shall not be made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in
business in this state" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in
Section 6203.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.110 Permit not required.
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required
by this chapter.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
   (a)   The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax
imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
   (b)   The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property,
the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a
sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2
of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in
this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
   (c)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax
the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of
aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale
is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state,
the United States, or any foreign government.
   (d)   In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of
tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or
consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft
as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of
this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the
use tax.
(Ord. 350 § 1, 1983; Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.150 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the
sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of
the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this
chapter.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.160 Enjoining collection forbidden.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this
city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin
the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.
(Ord. 204 § 1 (part), 1973).
3.05.200 Sales and use tax credits to La Mirada Redevelopment Project Area I.
Any person or persons subject to the sales and use tax under this chapter shall
be entitled to a credit against the payment of such taxes due in the amount of
any sales and use taxes due from the person or persons to the La Mirada
Redevelopment Agency (Agency) pursuant to Ordinance No. RO-3, adopted by the
Agency on December 21, 1993, pursuant to Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code of the state.
(Ord. 481 § 2, 1993).
Chapter 3.06
   TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:
   
3.06.010   Short title.
   
3.06.020   Definitions.
   
3.06.030   Payment of transient occupancy tax.
   
3.06.040   Persons deemed exempt from tax.
   
3.06.050   Collection--Advertising that payment of tax not required prohibited.
   
3.06.060   Transient occupancy registration certificate.
   
3.06.070   Reports and remittances.
   
3.06.080   Penalties for failure to remit tax when due.
   
3.06.090   Failure of operator to collect and report tax-- Determination of tax
by tax administrator–Notice and hearing.
   
3.06.100   Appeal.
   
3.06.110   Records to be kept for a period of three years.
   
3.06.120   Refunds.
   
3.06.130   Action by city to collect tax.
   
3.06.140   Violation of provisions of chapter deemed misdemeanor--Penalties.
3.06.010 Short title.
   This chapter shall be known as the "uniform transient occupancy tax
ordinance." (Ord. 267 § 1 (part) , 1978).
3.06.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (1)   "Hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure which is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or
house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house,
apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer
at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.
   (2)   "Occupancy" means the use or possession or the right to the use or
possession of any rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging
or sleeping purposes.
   (3)   "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in
the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or
any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a
managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and
shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with
the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent
shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
   (4)   "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture,
association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any
other group or combination acting as a unit.
   (5)   "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for
the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in
money, goods, labor or otherwise including all receipts, cash, credits and
property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
   (6)   "Tax administrator" means the city administrator or his designee.
   (7)   "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to
occupancy by reason of concession permit, right of access, license or other
agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting
portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a
hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has
expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the
occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.030 Payment of transient occupancy tax.
   For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to
and shall pay a tax in the amount of seven percent of the rent charged by the
operator. Commencing January 1, 2010, said tax shall increase to nine percent,
and commencing January 1, 2013, said tax shall increase to ten percent. Such
tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished
only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax
to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid
in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each
installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy
space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator
of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid
directly to the tax administrator.
(Ord. 628, § 1, 2009: Ord. 399 §2, 1987; Ord. 267 §1 (part), 1978).
3.06.040 Persons deemed except from tax.
No tax shall be imposed upon:
   (1)   Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the
power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;
   (2)   Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by
reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty. No
exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent
is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax
administrator.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.050 Collection--Advertising that payment of tax not required prohibited.
   Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same
extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The
amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged,
and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No
operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or
indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the
operator or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part
will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.060 Transient occupancy registration certificate.
   Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is
later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall
register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a "Transient
Occupancy Registration Certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous
place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the
following:
   (1)   The name of the operator;
   (2)   The address of the hotel;
   (3)   The date upon which the certificate was issued;
   (4)   "This Transient Occupancy Registration Certifies that the person named
on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient
Occupancy Tax Ordinance by the registering with the Tax Administrator for the
purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting
said tax to the Tax Administrator. This certificate does not authorize any
person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an
unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all
local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit
from any board, commission, department or offices of this city. This
certificate does not constitute a permit."
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.070 Reports and remittances.
   Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the
close of each calendar quarter or at the close of any shorter reporting period
which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax
administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and
received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time
the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to
the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting
periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure
collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return.
Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any
reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held
in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax
administrator.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.080 Penalties for failure to remit tax when due.
   (a)    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed
by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of
the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.
   (b)   Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent
remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the
remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of
ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and
the ten percent penalty first imposed.
   (c)   Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five
percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the
penalties stated in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
   (d)   Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails
to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-
half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax,
exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent until paid.
   (e)   Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as
accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax
required to be paid as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.090 Failure of operator to collect and report tax-- Determination of tax
by tax administrator--Notice and hearing.
   If any operator fails or refuses to collect the tax and to make, within the
time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any
portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed
in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to
base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator procures
such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the
assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who
has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the
tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such
determination is made, the tax administrator shall give notice of the amount so
assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known
place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or
mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for
a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing
is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if
any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and
immediately due and payable. IF such application is made, the tax administrator
shall give not less than five days' written notice in the manner prescribed in
this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such
notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax,
interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer
evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed.
After such hearing, the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be
remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner
prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax,
interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after
fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section
3.06.100.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.100 Appeal.
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to
the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of
the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a
time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in
writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of
the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the
appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any
amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of
notice.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.110 Records to be kept for a period of three years.
   It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment
to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a
period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount
of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the
city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at
all reasonable times.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.120 Refunds.
   (a)   Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid
or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or
received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in
subsections (b) and (c) of this section; provided, that a claim in writing
therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the
claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within one year of the
date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax
administrator.
   (b)   An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes
collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously
or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner
prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been
collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a
credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either
been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the
transient to the operator.
   (c)   A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than
once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a
claim in the manner provided in subsection (a) of this section, but only when
the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator or when the
transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction
of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund
from the operator who collected the tax.
   (d)   No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless
the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing
entitlement thereto.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.130 Action by city to collect tax.
   Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this
article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax
collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a
debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under
the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name
of the city for the recovery of such amount.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
3.06.140 Violation of provisions of chapter deemed misdemeanor--Penalties.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more
than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in
this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or
refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax
administrator or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty
of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as stated above. Any person required to
make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes false or fraudulent
report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount
due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is
punishable as aforesaid.
(Ord. 267 § 1 (part), 1978).
Chapter 3.08
DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX  *
Sections:
   
3.08.010   Short title.
   
3.08.020   Imposition.
   
3.08.030   Who is liable.
   
3.08.040   Instrument in writing to secure a debt.
   
3.08.050   Instruments of the United States, any state, territory or political
subdivision exempt.
   
3.08.060   Making, delivering or filing conveyances.
   
3.08.070   Securities and Exchange Commission.
   
3.08.080   Partnerships.
   
3.08.090   Administration.
   
3.08.100   Claims for refund.
   
3.08.110   Operative date.
   
3.08.120   Copies filed.
 
Notes
* For statutory provisions authorizing the levy of a documentary stamp tax, see
  California Revenue and Taxation Code § 11911.
3.08.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Real property transfer tax ordinance of the
city." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Parts 6, 7
(commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code
of the state.
(Ord. 129 § 1, 1967).
3.08.020 Imposition.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands,
tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned,
transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, by his or their direction,
when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive
of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale)
exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half
cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof.
(Ord. 129 § 2, 1967).
3.08.030 Who is liable.
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section
3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or
instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made,
signed or issued.
(Ord. 129 § 3, 1967).
3.08.040 Instrument in writing to secure a debt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in
writing given to secure a debt.
(Ord. 129 § 4, 1967).
3.08.050 Instruments of the United States, any state, territory or political
subdivision exempt.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this
chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title thereby.
(Ord. 491 § 6, 1995; Ord. 129 § 5, 1967).
3.08.060 Making, delivering, or filing conveyances.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making,
delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of
reorganization or adjustment:
   (1)   Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;
   (2)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11
of the United States Code, as amended;
   (3)   Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a
corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the
United States Code, as amended; or
   (4)   Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is
effected.
   Subdivisions (1) to (4), inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the
making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs
within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change.
(Ord. 129 § 6, 1967).
3.08.070 Securities and Exchange Commission.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or
delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and
Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:
   (1)   The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to
which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or
appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the
United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;
   (2)   Such order specified the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
   (3)   Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.
(Ord. 129 § 7, 1967).
3.08.080 Partnerships.
   (a)   In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be
imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a
partnership or otherwise, if:
      (1)   Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a
continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1954; and
      (2)   Such continuing partnership continued to hold the realty concerned.
   (b)   If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of
Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this
ordinance, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument
whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of
any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty by such partnership at
the time of such termination.
   (c)   Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of a termination described in subdivision (b), and any transfer pursuant
thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of
such termination.
(Ord. 129 § 8, 1967).
3.08.090 Administration.
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the
provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the
provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 129 § 9, 1967).
3.08.100 Claims for refund.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this ordinance shall be governed
by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of
Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California.
(Ord. 129 § 10, 1967).
3.08.110 Operative date.
The ordinance codified herein shall become operative upon the operative date of
any ordinance adopted by the county of Los Angeles, pursuant to Part 6.7
(commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code
of the state of California, or upon the effective date of the ordinance
codified herein, whichever is the later.
(Ord. 129 § 11, 1967).
3.08.120 Copies filed.
Upon its adoption the city clerk shall file two copies of the ordinance
codified herein with the county recorder.
(Ord. 129 § 12, 1967).
Chapter 3.09
CRUDE OIL PRODUCERS' TAX
Sections:
   
3.09.010   Definitions.
   
3.09.020   Tax imposed.
   
3.09.030   Computation of tax.
   
3.09.040   Tax due dates.
   
3.09.050   Quarterly reports.
   
3.09.060   Records.
   
3.09.070   Penalties.
   
3.09.080   Failure to collect.
   
3.09.090   Deficiency determination.
   
3.09.100   Offsetting of overpayment.
   
3.09.110   Notice of determination.
   
3.09.120   Refunds.
   
3.09.130   Actions to collect.
   
3.09.140   Appeal.
3.09.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as
follows:
   (1)   "Crude oil producer" means every person, partnership, association or
corporation conducting, managing, carrying on or engaging in the business or
activity of producing crude oil, gas, petroleum or other hydrocarbon
substances.
   (2)   "Tax administrator" means the city manager or his or her designee.
   (3)   "Wellhead" means the place and/or facility where crude oil is brought
to the surface, whether or not such crude oil is removed at that location or
transferred to another facility.
   (4)   "Barrel" means, and shall be measured to consist of, forty-two U.S.
gallons of crude petroleum substances corrected for temperature variations in
accordance with methods generally approved in the petroleum industry.
"Petroleum substances" means crude oil remaining after the removal therefrom of
water and other impurities by preliminary processing in the vicinity of the
wellhead site preparatory to the shipment thereof.
   (5)   "City" means the corporate boundaries of the city as they now exist or
may exist in the future.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.020 Tax imposed.
Every crude oil producer who engages in the business of producing oil from any
well or wells located within this city shall pay a tax for each well operated
by such crude oil producer for the purpose of producing crude oil, gas or other
petroleum substances, computed as follows:
   (1)   An annual tax of one hundred fifty dollars per wellhead, which amount
is referred to in this chapter as the "wellhead tax"; and
   (2)   A quarterly tax of eleven cents times the number of barrels of oil
produced from the wellhead during each calendar quarter of the calendar year,
which amount is referred to in this chapter as the "per-barrel tax."
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.030 Computation of tax.
For the purposes of determining the wellhead and per-barrel tax, the following
provisions shall apply:
   (1)   A wellhead is located within this city if any portion of wellhead is
located within the city, regardless of the surface location of the well, the
producing interval thereof, or where the hold of the well may be bottomed.
   (2)   The calendar quarter of each year shall consist of the following:
      First quarter - January, February and March;
      Second quarter - April, May and June;
      Third quarter - July, August and September; and
      Fourth quarter - October, November and December.
   (3)   If oil produced from two or more wells is commingled without the
production of the respective wells being separately measured, each well whose
production has been so commingled shall be considered as having produced an
equal part of the total.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.040 Tax due dates.
All taxes under this chapter shall be due and payable and shall become
delinquent, as follows:
   (1)   The wellhead tax shall be due and payable on or before July 1st of
each year. Such wellhead tax shall be delinquent thirty days following such due
date, except in this event that the effective date of the ordinance codified in
this chapter is after July 1st, a prorated wellhead tax shall be delinquent
sixty days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter; and
   (2)   The amount of the per-barrel tax shall be due and payable on the first
day of the month next succeeding each calendar quarter, and shall become
delinquent if not paid on or before the last day of said month. In the event
that the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter is during a
calendar quarter, the tax administrator may assess a prorated tax, due and
payable at the next succeeding due date.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.050 Quarterly reports.
   (a)   Every crude oil producer required to make tax returns under this
chapter shall on or before the last day of April, July, October and January
file with the tax administrator a report, upon a form provided by the tax
administrator, setting forth such information as the tax administrator shall
require, including the following:
      (1)   The name or other identification of all wells located in the city
operated by the crude oil producer during the calendar quarter involved;
      (2)   The number of barrels of oil produced and shipped from each of the
wells during the quarter; and
      (3)   The computation of the amount of the per-barrel tax with respect to
such production due the city.
   (b)   At the time of filing the report, the producer shall also pay to the
tax administrator any additional tax which may be shown to be due. The report
must be signed by the person required to have a business license as per this
code or by a managing officer or agent thereof and shall include a declaration
substantially as follows:
"I declare under penalty of perjury that I am authorized to make and file the
foregoing statement, and that to the best of my knowledge and belief it is a
true, correct and complete statement made in good faith for the period stated."
   The statement shall not be conclusive against the city as to the information
set forth therein, nor shall the filing of a statement preclude the city from
collecting by appropriate action any additional tax that is later determined to
be due and payable.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.060 Records.
Every crude oil producer required to make remittance under this chapter shall
keep full, true and accurate records as to the amount of oil produced and
shipped or sold by such producer from wells located within the city and shall,
upon demand of the tax administrator, make the records, together with any
shipment documents or sales invoices pertaining to such oil, available for the
inspection of the tax administrator at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.070 Penalties.
   (a)   Any crude oil producer who fails to remit any payment on or before a
period of fifteen days following the date on which the remittance first became
delinquent shall pay a delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the
tax and an additional ten percent penalty for each thirty-day period or
fraction thereof of delinquency thereafter. The total delinquency shall not
exceed fifty percent of the tax imposed.
   (b)   If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any
remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five
percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the
penalties stated in subsection (a).
   (c)   Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall
become a part of the tax herein required to be paid.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.080 Failure to collect.
If any crude oil producer required to remit the tax imposed by this chapter
fails to file a return, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as
he or she may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his or
her estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator obtains such
facts and information on which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by
this chapter and payable by any crude oil producer who has failed or refused to
make such report and remittance, he or she shall proceed to determine and
assess against such producer the tax, interest and penalties provided for by
this chapter.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.090 Deficiency determination.
If the tax administrator has reasonable cause to believe the return or returns
of the amount of tax required to be paid to the city by any crude oil producer
are erroneous, he or she shall compute and determine the amount required to be
paid upon the basis of the facts contained in the return or returns or upon the
basis of any information within his or her possession or that may come into his
or her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the
amount due for one or more periods.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.100 Offsetting of overpayment.
In making a determination pursuant to Sections
3.09.070 and
3.09.080, the tax administrator may offset any overpayments for a period or
periods together with interest at the legal rate on the overpayments against
underpayments for another period or periods and against any penalties on such
underpayments.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.110 Notice of determination.
The tax administrator shall give to the producer written notice of any
determinations made pursuant to Sections
3.09.070 and
3.09.080. This notice may be served personally or by depositing in the United
States Postal Service, postage prepaid, and addressed to the producer at his
address as it appears in the records of the tax administrator. In case of
service by mail or any notice required under this chapter, the service is
complete at the time of deposit of the notice.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.120 Refunds.
Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid
more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by
the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided herein; provided,
that a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific
grounds upon which the claim is found, is filed with the tax administrator
within one year of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished
by the tax administrator.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.130 Actions to collect.
Any tax collected under the provisions of this chapter by a producer which has
not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the producer to the
city. Any producer owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter
shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery
of such amount.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
3.09.140 Appeal.
Any producer aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to
the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the
council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of
the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a
time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in
writing to such producer at his last known place of address. The findings of
the council shall be final and conclusive. Any amount found to be due shall be
immediately due and payable upon the service of notice.
(Ord. 348 § 1 (part), 1983).
Chapter 3.10
TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Sections:
   
3.10.010   Short title.
   
3.10.020   Operative date.
   
3.10.030   Purpose.
   
3.10.040   Contract with state.
   
3.10.050   Transactions tax rate.
   
3.10.060   Place of sale.
   
3.10.070   Use tax rate.
   
3.10.080   Adoption of provisions of state law.
   
3.10.090   Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
   
3.10.100   Permit not required.
   
3.10.110   Exemptions and exclusions.
   
3.10.120   Amendments.
   
3.10.130   Enjoining collection forbidden.
   
3.10.140   Citizens oversight committee.
   
3.10.150   Annual independent audits.
   
3.10.160   Termination date.
3.10.010 Short title.
   The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "City of La
Mirada Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance." The City of La Mirada hereinafter
shall be called "city." This chapter shall be applicable to all incorporated
territory of the city. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.020 Operative date.
   "Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter
commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified
herein, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 654 § 1
(part), 2012).
3.10.030 Purpose.
   This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and
directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those
purposes:
   (a)   To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the
provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which
authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a
majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition
of the tax at an election called for that purpose.
   (b)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates
provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of
California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue
and Taxation Code.
   (c)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a
tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by
the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as
practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of
Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use
Taxes.
   (d)   To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be
administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible,
consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes,
and at the same time, minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject
to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.040 Contract with state.
   Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of
Equalization to perform all functions incidental to the administration and
operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the
city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the
operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the
operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following
the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.050 Transactions tax rate.
   For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is
hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the city at
the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the
sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and
after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.060 Place of sale.
   For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is
delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination or
to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross
receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are
subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which
delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in
the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which
the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.
(Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.070 Use tax rate.
   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in
the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after
the operative date of this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in
said territory at the rate of one percent (1.0%) of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is
made. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001)
of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a
part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part),
2012).
3.10.090 Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes.
   In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code:
   (a)   Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing
agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. However, the
substitution shall not be made when:
      (1)   The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State
Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of
Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;
      (2)   The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by
or against this city or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by
or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this chapter;
      (3)   In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to
sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where
the result of the substitution would be to:
         (A)   Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain
sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or
other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of
Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or
         (B)   Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or
other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to
tax by the state under the said provision of that code.
      (4)   In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711,
6715, 6737, 6797, 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.
   (b)   The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the
phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203 and in the
definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.100 Permit not required.
   If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be
required by this chapter. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
   (a)   There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and
the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of
California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-
Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-
administered transactions or use tax.
   (b)   There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions
tax the gross receipts from:
      (1)   Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum
products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of
such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of
the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
      (2)   Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a
point outside the city, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such
point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a
carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this
subsection, delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
         (A)   With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles)
subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of
Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section
21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under
Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration
to an out-of-city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed
by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place
of residence; and
         (B)   With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place
of business out-of-city and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the
buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.
      (3)   The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated
to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into
prior to the operative date of this chapter.
      (4)   A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of
such property, for any period of time for which the leaser is obligated to
lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date
of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of subsections (b)(3) and (b)(4) of this section,
the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be
obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any
party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the
contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
   (c)   There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the
storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
      (1)   The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a
transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax
ordinance.
      (2)   Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of
aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the
use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or
compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign
government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in
Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of
California.
      (3)   If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this
chapter.
      (4)   If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over,
the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing
purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is
obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
      (5)   For the purposes of subsections (c)(3) and (c)(4) of this section,
storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right
or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated
pursuant to a contract for lease for any period of time for which any party to
the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
      (6)   Except as provided in subsection (c)(7), a retailer engaged in
business in the city shall not be required to collect use tax from the
purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers
the property into the city or participates within the city in making the sale
of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the
order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in
the city or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor,
subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
      (7)   "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any
retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to
Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code,
aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with
Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect
use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or
aircraft at an address in the city.
   (d)   Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against
that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a
district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part
1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to
the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is
subject to the use tax. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.120 Amendments.
   All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and
which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of
Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part
of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as
to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
   No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall
issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the
city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the
collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord.
654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.140 Citizens oversight committee.
   Prior to the operative date, the city council shall (a) adopt a resolution
establishing the composition of a committee of no more than five (5) residents
of La Mirada to review and report on the revenue and expenditure of funds from
the tax adopted by this chapter, (b) defining the scope of the committee's
responsibilities, and (c) appointing at least a quorum of the members of the
committee. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.150 Annual independent audits.
   The city shall ensure that annual independent audits are conducted to
account for the tax revenues received and expenditures made in relation to the
one percent (1.0%) transaction and use tax. Such audits will be provided to the
citizens oversight committee for their review. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
3.10.160 Termination date.
   The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall expire on the
fifth (5th) anniversary of the last day of the calendar quarter following the
operative date. (Ord. 654 § 1 (part), 2012).
Chapter 3.12
FUNDS
Sections:
   
3.12.010   Special gas tax street improvement fund created.
   
3.12.020   Depositions into gas tax street improvement fund.
   
3.12.030   Expenditures of the gas tax street improvement fund.
   
3.12.040   Capital outlay fund created.
   
3.12.050   Showing capital outlay fund on budget.
   
3.12.060   Transfers to capital outlay fund.
   
3.12.080   Capital outlays and utilities defined.
   
3.12.090   Powers, rights and duties of city council.
3.12.010 Special gas tax street improvement fund created.
To comply with the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 1 of Division 1 of the
Streets and Highways Code, there is hereby created in the city treasury a
special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund."
(Ord. 7 § 1, 1960).
3.12.020 Depositions into gas tax street improvement fund.
All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the
provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real
property or interests therein, or the construction, maintenance or improvement
of streets or highways other than state highways shall be paid into the fund.
(Ord. 7 § 2, 1960).
3.12.030 Expenditures of the gas tax street improvement fund.
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes
authorized by, and subject to all of the provisions of, Article 5 of Chapter 1
of Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code.
(Ord. 7 § 3, 1960).
3.12.040 Capital outlay fund created.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Article 4 of Chapter 4, Part 1, Division
2, Title 5 of the Government Code of the state of California, a capital outlay
fund is hereby established for the city.
(Ord. 29 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 8500).
3.12.050 Showing capital outlay fund on budget.
When any budget is adopted by the city council, all or part of the fund may be
shown in the budget as reserves for future expenditures in subsequent years and
when so shown shall be identified as to purpose, but need not be itemized.
(Ord. 29 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 8501).
3.12.060 Transfers to capital outlay fund.
At any time after the creation of the fund of the city council may transfer to
the fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of a
fiscal year.
(Ord. 29 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 8502)
3.12.080 Capital outlays and utilities defined.
"Capital outlays" does not include the construction, acquisition, extensions
of, or additions to utilities other than utilities for the furnishing of water
supply. "Utilities" does not include sewage or sanitation facilities or
airports.
(Ord. 29 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 8504).
3.12.090 Powers, rights and duties of city council.
The city council shall have and does retain all the rights, powers, authorities
and duties as set forth in Sections 53731 and 53732 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 29 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 8505).
Chapter 3.14
PURCHASING
Sections:
   
3.14.010   Adoption of purchasing system.
   
3.14.020   Purchasing officer.
   
3.14.030   Purchase procedure limits.
   
3.14.040   Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
   
3.14.050   Requisitions.
   
3.14.060   Emergency procedures.
   
3.14.070   Purchases without bidding.
   
3.14.080   Informal bidding procedure.
   
3.14.090   Formal bidding procedure.
   
3.14.100   Requirements for public projects.
   
3.14.110   Purchase orders.
   
3.14.120   Available funds.
   
3.14.130   Exemption from bidding--Governmental and professional services.
   
3.14.135   Specialized contracting procedures permitted.
   
3.14.140   Surplus supplies and equipment.
   
3.14.150   Recycled products.
3.14.010 Adoption of purchasing system.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies,
services and equipment to secure for the city supplies, services and equipment
at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise
positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the
purchasing function to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is
adopted.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.020 Purchasing officer.
There is created the position of purchasing officer. The purchasing officer
shall be the city manager, or his or her designated representative. The duties
of purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other office or
position.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.030 Purchase procedure limits.
Those monetary limits which define the appropriate purchasing procedures as set
forth in this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.040 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
The purchasing officer may authorize any city department to purchase or
contract for specified supplies, services and equipment independently of the
purchasing officer, provided that such purchases or contracts shall be made in
conformity with the procedures established by this chapter. Such authorization
by the purchasing officer may be either in writing or verbally, except that any
authorization in excess of the informal purchase limits shall be in writing.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.050 Requisitions.
Employees utilizing supplies and/or equipment shall submit requests for
supplies and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms.
Upon the express written authorization of the purchasing officer, designated
city departments may dispense with the submission of requisition forms for
purchases within the open market procedure limits.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.060 Emergency procedures.
With regard to public works purchases, if there is a great public calamity,
such as an extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic or other disaster, or if
it is necessary to do emergency work to prepare for national or local defense,
the city council may pass a resolution by a four-fifths vote of its members
declaring that the public interest and necessity demand the immediate
expenditure of public money to safeguard life, health, or property. Upon
adoption of the resolution, it may expend any sum required in the emergency
without complying with the provision of this chapter as they apply to such
public works purchases.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.070 Purchases without bidding.
Purchases of supplies, services, equipment and the sale of personal property
shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections
3.14.080,
3.14.090 and
3.14.140. Bidding shall be dispensed with only when no public work of total
value in excess of the public works bidding limit is involved and one of the
following conditions pertains:
   (1)   The amount involved is within open market purchasing policy limits;
   (2)   The purchasing officer determines that the commodity can be obtained
from only one vendor;
   (3)   There is a breakdown in essential machinery or, in an essential
service, or when unforeseen circumstances arise including delays by
contractors, delays in transportation, and unanticipated volume of work which
requires the immediate attention of a professional or immediate service/repair
in order to protect the public health, safety or welfare; or
   (4)   An essential operation affecting the preservation of life or property,
public health, safety or welfare would be greatly hampered if the prescribed
procedure would cause an undue delay in the procurement of the needed services
or materials.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.080 Informal bidding procedure.
Purchases of supplies, services and equipment of a value within the informal
purchasing limits may be made by the purchasing officer or designated city
department pursuant to Section
3.14.040, by observing the following procedures:
   (1)   Minimum Number of Bids. Purchases shall, wherever possible, be based
on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder.
   (2)   Inviting Informal Bids. The purchasing officer may solicit bids by
written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone or by public notice
posted on a public bulletin board in the La Mirada City Hall or by any other
means deemed effective.
   (3)   Written Informal Bids. Sealed written informal bids shall be submitted
to the purchasing officer.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.090 Formal bidding procedure.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases and contracts for
supplies and equipment of estimated value within the formal purchasing limits
shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the
procedure prescribed herein.
   (1)   Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general
description of the articles to be purchased, shall state where bid blanks and
specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. Notice
inviting bids shall be published at least ten days before the date of opening
of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a trade paper, magazine
or a newspaper of general circulation.
   (2)   Bidder's Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer,
bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; except that a successful
bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the
contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed,
unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal
or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the
next lowest responsible bidder.
   (3)   Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the
purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall
be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A
tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during
regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after
the bid opening.
   (4)   Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any
and all bids presented and readvertise for bids.
   (5)   Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to
the lowest responsible bidder, except as otherwise provided herein.
   (6)   Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount
or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will
not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the
one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie
bidders at the time of the bid opening.
   (7)   Performance Bonds. The city council or purchasing officer shall have
the authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such
amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the
city. If the city council or purchasing officer requires a performance bond,
the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.100 Requirements for public projects.
   A.   Notwith-standing any other provision of this chapter, contracts for
public projects, as defined herein, shall be awarded in accordance with the
Uniform Public Construction Cost Accounting Act, Public Contract Code § 22000
et seq., and in compliance with the provisions of this Section
3.14.100 .
   B.   Definitions. Unless otherwise provided by law, the following terms
shall have those definitions as are set forth next to each:
      1.   “Facility” means any plant, building, structure, ground facility,
utility system (subject to the limitation found in subsection B.2.c., below,
real property, streets and highways, or other public work improvement.
      2.   “Public project” means any of the following:
         a.   Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation,
improvement, demolition and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or
operated facility;
         b.   Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased or operated
facility;
         c.   In the case of a publicly owned utility system, 'public project'
includes only the construction, erection, improvement or repair of dams,
reservoirs, power plants and electrical transmission lines of two hundred and
thirty thousand volts and higher.
      3.   “Public project” does not include maintenance work. For purposes of
this section, “maintenance work” includes all of the following:
         a.   Routine, recurring and usual work for the preservation or
protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended
purposes;
         b.   Minor repainting;
         c.   Resurfacing of streets and highways at less than one inch;
         d.   Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming,
pruning, planting, replacement of plants and servicing of irrigation and
sprinkler systems;
         e.   Work performed to keep, operate and maintain publicly owned
water, power or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams,
reservoirs, power plants and electrical transmission lines of two hundred and
thirty thousand volts and higher.
   C.   Classification of projects.
      1.   The Director of Public Works shall review all City public projects
with respect to the monetary limits imposed by Public Contract Code § 22032, or
any successor provision thereto, and shall designate such projects as follows:
         a.   Projects that may be performed with the City's own forces by
force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.
         b.   Projects of one hundred thousand dollars or less may be let to
contract by informal bidding procedures.
         c.   Projects that may be let by contract after formal bidding, and
the Director shall accomplish such identified projects by formal bidding.
      2.   Projects shall not be split to avoid any of the bidding requirements
contained in Public Contract Code § 22000, et seq.
   D.   Informal bidding procedures.
      1.   Development, maintenance and use of list of qualified contractors.
         a.   The Director of Public Works shall develop a list of qualified
contractors eligible to bid on projects awarded by informal bidding, in
accordance with the provisions of Public Contract Code § 22034(a).
         b.   The list shall be organized in accordance with the license
classifications of the Contractor's State License Board.
         c.   Any licensed California contractor may request to be added to the
list of qualified contractors at any time by filing a completed application
with the Director of Public Works on a form provided by the Director. The
contractor will be added to the list if the contractor meets all criteria
established by the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission
("Commission").
      2.   Plans, specifications and working details. The Director of Public
Works shall prepare and approve plans, specifications and working details for
all contracts awarded by informal bidding to enable a qualified contractor to
perform the work required for each contract awarded by informal bidding.
      3.   Identifying and inviting bids.      
         a.   The Director of Public Works shall mail notice inviting informal
bids to all contractors on the list of qualified contractors for the category
of work being bid, and/or to all construction trade journals as specified by
the Commission pursuant to Public Contract Code § 22036.
         b.   The Director of Public Works shall complete the mailing of
notices inviting informal bids, as required by this subsection, not less than
ten calendar days before bids are due.
         c.   The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the projects in
general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and
state the time and place for the submission of bids.
      4.   Opening of informal bids and award of contract.
         a.   At the time provided in the notice inviting informal bids, the
City Clerk shall open all bids timely received. If a contract is awarded, it
shall be awarded by the City Manager to the lowest responsible and responsive
bidder. If two or more responsive bids are the same and lowest, the City
Manager may award the contract by drawing lots. If no bids are received, the
project may be performed by City forces, negotiated contract, or by any other
means provided by law, as the City Manager determines to be in the best
interest of the City.
         b.   If all competent bids received are in excess of one hundred
thousand dollars, the City Council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-
fifths vote, award the contract, at one hundred and ten thousand dollars or
less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines that the City's cost
estimate was reasonable.
   E.   Formal bidding procedures.
      1.   Contracts for public projects determined by the Director of Public
Works to require formal bidding pursuant to the provisions of Public Contract
Code § 22032 and subsection C.1 above, shall be formally bid and awarded or
rejected, in accordance with the provisions of Public Contract Code §§ 22037
and 22038.
      2.   The Public Works Director shall approve plans, specifications and
designs for all formally bid public projects.
      3.   If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded by the City Council to
the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. If two or more bids are the same
and the lowest, the City Council may accept either bid. If no bids are
received, the project may be performed by City forces, negotiated contract, or
by any other means provided by law, as the City Council determines to be in the
best interests of the City.
(Ord. 692 § 1, 2017; Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.110 Purchase orders.
Purchases of supplies and equipment, in excess of the open market purchase
policy limits, shall be made only by purchase order or another form of formal
contract.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.120 Available funds.
Except in the case of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any
purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered
appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.130 Exemption from bidding--Governmental and professional services.
The contracting of services from other governmental agencies and for
professional services shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections
3.14.080 and
3.14.090. For purposes of this chapter, "professional services" means the
services of attorneys, physicians, architects, engineers, consultants,
auditors, specialized printers or other individuals or organizations possessing
a high degree of professional, unique, specialized, technical skill or
expertise not adaptable to competitive bidding, or where the service involves a
contract for special activities, negotiations for the acquisition of land,
insurance bonds or any other service of a similar nature to the above, engaged
for a particular project or series of projects. Such contracts that exceed the
informal bidding limits must be approved by the city manager and the city
council prior to execution.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.135 Specialized contracting procedures permitted.
   (a)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city from using, and the
city is hereby authorized to use, specialized contracting procedures when
authorized by state law. Each such procedure need not be specifically
authorized herein. Such specialized procedures may include, but are not limited
to, prequalification of contractors or subcontractors and design-build
contracting procedures.
   (b)   The city manager is authorized to determine whether or not the needs
of any particular project warrant the use of legally available specialized
contracting procedures, or to delegate that determination to other city staff.
   (c)   The city manager is authorized to adopt and enforce all policies and
procedures necessary to effectively utilize any specialized contracting
procedures authorized by state law. All such policies and procedures shall be
written and available for review in the office of the city clerk.
   (d)   Where required by applicable state law, the policies and procedures
shall provide for a process to appeal an administrative decision. Failure to
file a timely appeal shall constitute a waiver of any and all rights to
challenge the administrative decision whether by administrative process,
judicial process, or any other legal process or proceeding.
(Ord. 596, §1, 2005)
3.14.140 Surplus supplies and equipment.
All departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in
such forms as he/she shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and
equipment which are no longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out.
The purchasing officer shall have authority to sell all supplies and equipment
which cannot be used by any department or which have become unsuitable for city
use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies and
equipment. Any such sales pursuant to this section shall be made in accordance
with Sections
3.14.070,
3.14.080 or
3.14.090, whichever is applicable.
(Ord. 407 § 2 (part), 1987).
3.14.150 Recycled products.
With respect to recycling, the city council may, by resolution, establish a
purchasing preference for products containing recycled materials where fitness
and quality is similar.
(Ord. 450 § 2, 1991).
Title 4
   BUSINESS PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:
   
4.02   General Provisions
   
4.04   Rules and Regulations
   
4.06   Businesses Requiring Permits
   
4.10   Massage Establishments and Therapists
   
4.15   Escort Bureaus
   
4.18   Outcall Dancers and Models
   
4.25   Sound-Amplifying Equipment on Vehicles
   
4.30   Taxicabs
   
4.35   Amusement and Entertainment
   
4.40   Bingo
   
4.45   Carnivals, Circuses, Sideshows and Rodeos
   
4.50   Franchises
   
4.55   Grant of CATV Franchise--California Cablesystems, Inc.
   
4.60   Sales of Goods or Merchandise from Vehicles
   
4.65   Film Permits
   
4.70   Sidewalk Vending
Chapter 4.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
4.02.010   Short title.
   
4.02.020   Purpose.
   
4.02.030   Permit required.
   
4.02.040   Compliance with business license law.
   
4.02.050   Permit fees.
4.02.010 Short title.
This title may be cited as the "Business Permit Law" of the city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.02.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this title is to provide a procedure by which certain specific
businesses may be approved which also may require special investigations or
require that certain conditions be attached in order to preserve the public
peace, health, safety, morals or welfare of the residents of the city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.02.030 Permit required.
   (a)   No person shall commence, transact or carry on any business as listed
in this title without first having procured a permit from the city.
   (b)   This title shall not be construed to require any person or company to
obtain a permit prior to doing business within the city if such requirement
conflicts with applicable statutes or constitutional provisions of the United
States or of the state of California.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part) , 1986).
4.02.040 Compliance with business license law.
All businesses requiring a permit pursuant to the terms of this title, unless
specifically exempted in this title, shall obtain and pay the fees applicable
for a license pursuant to the terms and provisions of Title 5 of this code.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.02.050 Permit fees.
Unless otherwise specifically stated in this title, the fee for filing an
application for a permit shall be fifty dollars payable in advance. This fee
shall be nonrefundable and shall be used to cover the administrative costs
incurred in investigating and processing the application for permit.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.04
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
4.04.010   Scope.
   
4.04.020   Definitions.
   
4.04.030   Application.
   
4.04.040   Investigation.
   
4.04.050   Application confidential.
   
4.04.060   Compliance with governmental regulations.
   
4.04.070   Permit not transferable.
   
4.04.080   Branch establishments.
   
4.04.090   Powers of finance director.
   
4.04.100   Revocation.
   
4.04.110   Suspension.
   
4.04.120   Appeal to permit review board.
   
4.04.130   Appeal to city council.
   
4.04.140   Misdemeanor.
   
4.04.150   Enforcement.
   
4.04.160   Modification of permits.
4.04.010 Scope.
The rules and regulations provided in this chapter shall be applicable to all
businesses requiring a permit pursuant to this title except insofar as they may
be inconsistent with the specific provisions and requirements for those certain
enumerated businesses listed separately in the succeeding chapters to this
title.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. Words and phrases used
in this title not specifically defined shall be construed according to the
context and approved use of the language.
   (1)   "City" means the city of La Mirada.
   (2)   "Finance director" means the finance manager of the city or his or her
designee.
   (3)   "Permit review board" shall be composed of the city manager or his or
her designee.
   (4)   "Person" as used in this title means and includes the individual
natural person, partnerships, joint ventures, societies, associations,
trustees, trusts, or any corporations, or any officers, agents, employees,
factors or any kind of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity,
acting either for himself, or for any person, under either personal appointment
or pursuant to law.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.030 Application.
All applications for permits pursuant to this title shall be in writing and
upon form issued by the finance director. The applicant, in addition, shall
submit any further information or evidence in writing as required by the
finance director. The application shall be verified or sworn under penalty of
perjury by the applicant and shall be filed with the finance director. The
permit fee as required by this title shall be submitted to the finance director
along with such application.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.040 Investigation.
The finance director shall, upon receipt of the application, forward copies of
the application, and any attachments, to every city department which would or
could be affected by such use. Each such department shall investigate and
respond in writing to the finance director with recommendations on the
application. Additionally, the finance director, where appropriate, may submit
the application to the local law enforcement agency to receive any comments and
recommendations with respect to the application.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.050 Application confidential.
All applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this section for the
purposes of obtaining a business permit shall be deemed confidential in
character and shall not be subject to public inspection. It shall be the duty
of the finance director to preserve and keep the statements so that contents
thereof may not be known except to persons required by law.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.060 Compliance with governmental regulations.
Every business requiring a permit pursuant to the terms of this title which
additionally requires any federal, state or local regulatory license or permit,
shall present evidence to the finance director of satisfactory compliance with
such regulations prior to the issuance of any business permit under this title.
Additionally, no permit shall be issued by the finance director to any business
which fails to present any land use permit required by the La Mirada Zoning
Ordinance or which has failed to comply with the provisions of any other
regulation of this code having to do with such business.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.070 Permit not transferable.
No permit issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.080 Branch establishments.
A separate permit shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location
of the business regulated pursuant to the terms of this title unless expressly
waived in writing by the city manager.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.090 Powers of finance director.
   (a)   The finance director, after review and investigation, may grant or
deny a permit application. Within sixty days after the receipt of the
application, the finance director shall mail to the applicant, postage prepaid,
notice as to whether the permit has been granted or denied. If the finance
director should deny the application, the notice shall also inform the
applicant as to the reasons why the permit was denied and inform the applicant
of their right to appeal before the permit review board as provided in this
chapter.
   (b)   The finance director may, if such permit is granted, impose such
terms, conditions and restrictions upon the operation and conduct of the
business as may be deemed necessary or expedient to protect the public peace,
health, safety, morals or welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (c)   The finance director also may, in those cases where it is deemed that
the public interest will be best served, refer the granting of the permit
directly to the permit review board or city council for hearing thereon without
taking further action.
   (d)   The decisions of the finance director with respect to the application
shall be final unless appealed to the permit review board as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.100 Revocation.
   (a)   Any permit granted or issued pursuant to the provisions of this title
may be revoked after an administrative hearing before the permit review board
or a public hearing before the city council. A permit may be revoked under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Where the permit review board of city council finds and determines
that the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare demand
revocation of the permit;
      (2)   Where the permittee has violated any provisions of this title or
any other provisions of this code;
      (3)   Where the permit has been granted pursuant to false or fraudulent
information contained in the application; and
      (4)   Where the permittee has violated any of the terms or conditions of
the permit.
   (b)   Notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, postage
prepaid, stating grounds for the revocation and providing a date within sixty
days of the mailing of such notice for an administrative hearing before the
permit review board or a public hearing before the city council.
   (c)   Written notice of the decision of the hearing shall be mailed to the
applicant within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. If the decision to
revoke is from a hearing before the permit review board, such notice of
decision shall also inform the permittee that the decision shall be final and
conclusive upon all matters in controversy unless an appeal is timely filed to
the city council pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.110 Suspension.
Pending a revocation hearing pursuant to the terms of this chapter, a permit
may be subject to immediate suspension if it is found necessary for the
protection of the public health, safety or welfare. Such suspension shall only
be instituted upon the recommendation of the local law enforcement agency or
upon the recommendation of the city council. In the event of such a suspension,
the city manager shall, within forty-eight hours after the suspension, cause to
be served upon the permit holder a written statement containing the grounds for
suspension and a notice of hearing to show cause before the city manager as to
why the license should not be suspended pending revocation hearings. The
hearing before the city manager shall be held not later than ten days following
the service of the notice.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.120 Appeal to permit review board.
   (a)   Right to Hearing. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the finance
director or of any officer of the city made pursuant to the provisions of this
title may request an administrative hearing before the permit review board
thirty days after notice of any such decision. An administrative hearing must
be applied for and concluded prior to an appeal before the city council
pursuant to Section
4.04.130, unless the city manager receives a written request from the city
council to allow an appeal on any such matter to be taken directly to the city
council.
   (b)   Failure to Request Hearing. In the event no request for administration
hearing is filed within the time prescribed in this section, the decision of
the finance director shall become final and conclusive.
   (c)   Hearing Procedures. A written request for such hearing shall be filed
with the city clerk, with such notice stating: (1) the name and address of the
applicant; (2) the date of the decision in question; (3) the reasons for the
hearing; and (4) the grounds relied upon for relief. The application shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars to cover the
administrative costs of the hearing.
   The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing not later than sixty days
following the date of application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be mailed to the applicant, postage prepaid, no later than ten days prior
to the date set for hearing. The notice may also designate certain records of
the applicant required to be produced at the time of the hearing.
   (d)   Hearing--Decision. At the hearing prescribed by this section, the
applicant and the city may submit any and all evidence as they believe to be
relevant to their respective positions. The board may require the presentation
of additional evidence from either the applicant or the city, or from both, and
may continue the hearing from time to time for the purpose of allowing the
presentation of additional evidence. Upon completion of the hearing, the board
may take any action with respect to the decision of the finance director as
evidence may require. Written notice of the decision of the board shall be
given to the applicant within ten days of the conclusion of the hearing. The
decision of the board shall be final and conclusive upon all matters in
controversy, unless an appeal is timely filed to the city council pursuant to
the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.130 Appeal to city council.
   (a)   Within twenty days of the date of mailing the notice of decision on
any hearing of the permit review board, a person who contests such decision may
appeal to the city council for the independent review of the matter at a public
hearing of the council. The procedures, timeliness and requirements for a
hearing before the permit review board pursuant to Section
4.04.120 shall apply to an appeal to the city council, with the additional
requirements that: (1) the appeal application shall also state the date that
the notice of decision was mailed; and (2) the appeal application shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars.
   (b)   The city council may consider any and all evidence of record presented
at the permit review board hearing, together with any supplementary report of
the staff necessary to clearly present the facts and circumstances of the case,
and any new information brought forth at the public hearing. The city council
may approve, reverse or modify the decision of the permit review board and the
decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.140 Misdemeanor.
Any person violating any of the provisions, or failing to comply with any of
the mandatory requirements of this title shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each
such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during
which any violation of any provision of this title is committed, continued or
permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986)
4.04.150 Enforcement.
An action at law or in equity may be commenced in the name of the city in any
court of competent jurisdiction against a permit holder to ensure compliance
with the terms and provisions of this title. All remedies prescribed under this
title shall be cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city
shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.04.160 Modification of permits.
Any permit may be modified or the terms and provisions of any permit modified,
amended or changed upon application to the finance director. Such application
for a modification shall be processed in the same manner as the original
application and shall be subject to the payment of fees and all the terms and
provisions imposed in this chapter in respect to the processing of the original
application.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.06
BUSINESSES REQUIRING PERMITS
Sections:
   
4.06.010   Applicability.
   
4.06.020   Amusement and entertainment.
   
4.06.030   Automobile repair shop.
   
4.06.040   Bingo.
   
4.06.050   Carnivals, circuses, sideshows and rodeos.
   
4.06.060   Escort bureaus.
   
4.06.080   Locksmiths.
   
4.06.090   Massage establishments.
   
4.06.100   Massage technicians.
   
4.06.110   Reserved.
   
4.06.120   Pawnshops and secondhand dealers.
   
4.06.130   Private patrol operator.
   
4.06.140   Sound trucks.
   
4.06.150   Taxicabs.
4.06.010 Applicability.
The following businesses shall be required to obtain and pay the fees for a
business permit before operating or conducting such business within the city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.020 Amusement and entertainment.
(See
Chapter 4.35).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.030 Automobile repair shop.
In addition to the application requirements as set forth by the finance
director, a person or business engaged in automobile repair shall present the
finance director with a valid registration certificate for such person or
business, issued pursuant to the provisions of California Business and
Professions Code Section 9880 et seq., prior to the granting of a permit
pursuant to this title.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.040 Bingo.
(See
Chapter 4.40).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.050 Carnivals, circuses, sideshows and rodeos.
(See
Chapter 4.45).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.060 Escort bureaus.
(See
Chapter 4.15).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.080 Locksmiths.
"Locksmith" means any person whose business, trade or occupation, in whole or
in part, is the making, furnishing or duplicating of keys for locks or similar
devices, or who constructs or reconstructs or repairs or adjusts locks, or who
opens and closes locks for others by mechanical means other than with the
regular keys furnished for that purpose by the manufacturer of the locks.
   In addition to all permit application requirements as set forth by the
finance director, every locksmith must keep a book which shall be open to
inspection by the local law enforcement agency in which the following must be
entered:
   (1)   The name and address of every person for whom a key is made by a code
or number; and
   (2)   The name and address of every person for whom a locked automobile,
building structure, house or store, whether vacant or occupied, is opened and a
key provided therefor. Additionally, it is unlawful for any locksmith to fail
to stamp the serial number of his permit upon any key made, repaired, sold or
released.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.090 Massage establishments.
(See
Chapter 4.10).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.100 Massage technicians.
(See
Chapter 4.10).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.110 Reserved.
4.06.120 Pawn shops and secondhand dealers.
A pawn shop or a dealer in secondhand goods shall be defined and shall conduct
its business in accordance with and subject to the requirements of California
Business and Professions Code Section 21625, et seq. Such business shall
present to the finance director a valid license issued pursuant to the
foregoing Business and Professions Code section, prior to the issuance of a
permit under this title. Because state law requires licensing of such
businesses every other year, the term of a permit granted pursuant to this
chapter shall be for two years and each license holder shall reapply every
other year after initial permit issuance for renewal in accordance with, and
subject to, all terms and conditions of this title.
(Ord. 491 § 7 (part), 1995; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.130 Private patrol operator.
   A private patrol operator, or operator of a private patrol service, shall be
defined as set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 7582.1
as a person, other than an armored contract carrier, who, for any consideration
whatsoever:
   Agrees to furnish, or furnishes, a watchman, guard, patrolperson, or other
person to protect persons or property or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking,
loss, embezzlement, misappropriation, or concealment of any goods, wares,
merchandise, money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers, or property of any
kind; or performs the service of a watchman, guard, patrolperson, or other
person, for any of these purposes.
   Along with all information as required by the finance director necessary to
obtain a private patrol operator permit, such business shall also present to
the finance director a valid private patrol operator's license issued in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 11.5 of Division 3 of the California
Business and Professions Code.
(Ord. 491 § 7 (part), 1995; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.140 Sound trucks.
(See
Chapter 4.25).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.06.150 Taxicabs.
(See
Chapter 4.30).
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.10
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND THERAPISTS
Sections:
   
4.10.010   Purpose--authority.
   
4.10.020   Definitions.
   
4.10.030   Massage therapist and massage practitioner certification..
   
4.10.040   Massage establishment permits.
   
4.10.050   Record keeping.
   
4.10.060   Health and safety requirements.
   
4.10.070   Inspections.
   
4.10.080   Hours of operation.
   
4.10.090   Department coordination with CAMTC.
   
4.10.100   Property owner responsibility.
   
4.10.110   Applicability of regulations to existing massage establishments,
therapists and practitioners.
4.10.010 Purpose--authority.
   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide for the orderly
regulation of massage therapists and massage establishments, in the interest of
the public health, safety and welfare. The city wishes both to recognize the
practice of massage as a valid professional field and to discourage
prostitution and other unlawful activity which otherwise may become associated
with some massage establishments.
   This chapter relies upon the State certification process of the California
massage therapy council, as set forth in California Business and Professions
Code § 4600, et seq. In addition, this chapter provides certain minimum
standards for the operation of massage establishments, their managing
employees, and massage therapists and practitioners.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority of Government Code §§ 51030
through 51034, Government Code § 37101, Business and Professions Code § 16000,
and California Constitution Article XI, Section 7.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.020 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter:
   (a)   “California Massage Therapy Council” or “CAMTC” means the California
massage therapy council created under Business and Professions Code Section
4602.
   (b)   “Certificate” means a certificate to perform massage issued by the
CAMTC.
   (c)   “Certificate holder” shall mean a certified massage therapist and/or a
certified massage practitioner.
   (d)   “Certified massage practitioner” or “practitioner” means a person who
is currently certified as a massage practitioner by the CAMTC pursuant to
Business and Professions Code Section 4604.2. A certified massage practitioner
who is an independent contractor is one who works at a massage establishment
(or has an outcall massage service), but is not a salaried employee and does
not share a percentage of massage therapy proceeds with the owner or operator
of a massage establishment.
   (e)   “Certified massage therapist” or “therapist” means a person who is
currently certified as a massage therapist by the CAMTC pursuant to Business
and Professions Code Section 4604. A certified massage therapist who is an
independent contractor is one who works at a massage establishment (or has an
outcall massage service), but is not a salaried employee and does not share a
percentage of massage therapy proceeds with the owner or operator of a massage
establishment.
   (f)   “Chief” means the deputy city manager or his designee.
   (g)   “Department” means the Public Safety Department of the city.
   (h)   “Hearing Officer” means the city manager or his designee.
   (i)   “Massage” or “bodywork” means the application of various techniques to
the muscular structure and soft tissues of the human body as defined in
Business and Professions Code § 4601(e). Massage and bodywork techniques may
include, but are not limited to, stroking, kneading, tapping, compression,
vibration, rocking, friction, pressure and similar techniques. Examples of
massage include Swedish massage, sports massage, shiatsu, polarity therapy,
rolfing, heller work, acupressure, and reflexology. Massage also includes
baths, administration of fomentation, electric or magnetic treatments, alcohol
rubs, or any other type of system for treatment or manipulation of the human
body with or without any character of bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish,
Japanese, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any
other type of bath. “Massage” does not include diagnosis, prescription,
intentional manipulation or adjustments of the skeletal structure, or any other
service, procedure or therapy which requires a state-issued license to practice
(chiropractic, osteopathy, orthopedics, physical therapy, podiatry, or
medicine. “Massage” does not include: massage of the face and scalp by state-
licensed barbers; massage of the scalp, face, neck, hands, feet below the calf,
or body extending from the clavicles upward by State-licensed cosmetologists;
massage of the face, neck, arms, or the body extending from the clavicles
upward; or, massage of the hands and feet below the calf by State-licensed
manicurists; provided that each is performing such activities in a structure,
facility, or place licensed by the city to provide such services.
   (j)   “Massage establishment” means a physical structure or place where
certified massage therapists and/or certified massage practitioners practice
massage as provided in Business and Professions Code Section 4601(f), or where
any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation engages in, conducts,
or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any
business of giving or providing massage, as defined herein. The following are
not considered massage establishments under this chapter: a State-licensed
hospital, nursing home, sanitarium, physiotherapy establishment, or other
state-licensed physical or mental health facility.
   (k)   “Outcall massage service” means a business which provides massage at a
location designated by the client or the massage practitioner or therapist,
other than at a massage establishment.
   (l)   “Permittee” means any person who has been granted a massage
establishment permit.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.030 Massage therapist and massage practitioner certification.
   (a)   No person may practice massage in the city who is not a certified
massage therapist or certified massage practitioner.
   (b)   Every certified massage therapist and certified massage practitioner
providing or offering massage in the city must:
      1.   Work at a city-permitted massage establishment as an employee or
independent contractor.
      2.   Obtain a city business license as an independent contractor if
providing outcall massage services for compensation.
   (c)   Other city permits. Massage therapists and practitioners must also
obtain a city business license and a home occupation permit if the therapist or
practitioner provides outcall massage services and lives in the city. If a
massage therapist is an independent contractor of a massage establishment, he
or she must obtain a city business license.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.040 Massage establishment permits.
   (a)   Massage establishment. No person may own or operate a massage
establishment in the city unless:
      1.   Each person administering massage (whether as an employee or
independent contractor) is either a certified massage therapist or a certified
massage practitioner.
      2.   The owner obtains, and continues to maintain, a current massage
establishment permit.
      3.   The massage establishment complies with all requirements of the city
zoning code. A massage establishment permit may be conditionally granted
subject to approval of a conditional use permit.
      4.   The owner obtains and maintains a valid city business license.
      5.   The massage establishment is not within 600 feet of the nearest
property line of any public or private school, church, temple, public or
private park, or other massage establishment.
   (b)   Massage establishment permit application procedure.
      1.   The owner of a proposed massage establishment shall be the only
person eligible to obtain a massage establishment permit for such business. The
owner shall not be eligible to obtain a massage establishment permit unless the
owner is at least eighteen (18) years of age. A separate permit is required for
each massage establishment location.
      2.   The following shall be submitted to the chief at the time of
application for a massage establishment permit:
         A.   A full, complete and truthful application form signed by: the
applicant and either the record owner of the property or the lessor of the
premises (if the business premises are leased to the applicant business) where
the massage establishment is to be conducted; a detailed site and floor plan of
the proposed massage establishment, showing all floor area to be used in the
provision of massage, as well as any and all other floor area to be used in
connection with the massage establishment's business. The application shall
include the applicant's full legal name, birth date, and contact information,
and such other information as the Department may require. Every person owning
any interest in the proposed massage establishment must file an application,
although only one permit will be issued at a time for a location.
         B.   A complete list of all services to be made available at the
massage establishment ("List of Services") shall be submitted with the
application. It is unlawful for any massage establishment to provide or allow
to be performed any kind of service not listed on the list of services unless a
revised list of services is provided to the chief not less than ten (10)
business days prior to commencing any such service. In the event that the list
of services or any part of the list is in other than the English language, the
applicant shall, at the applicant's cost and expense, provide an accurate
English language translation thereof. Such English translation shall be
attested to being a full, true and correct translation thereof under penalty of
perjury of the laws of the State of California.
         C.   Background check. Each applicant shall submit the following:
            i.   Information related to the applicant's business, occupation
and employment history for the ten (10) years preceding the date of
application, and the inclusive dates of same.
            ii.   The name and address of any and all businesses, including any
massage business, owned or operated by the applicant, the name of all partners
and co-owners in each business, and a description of any discipline, and permit
or license suspension or revocation for each such business.
            iii.   A description of any other business located in the city,
even if not massage-related, that is owned or operated by the applicant.
            iv.   Information regarding any felony or misdemeanor convictions
within the last five years, any outstanding warrants for arrest and any pending
criminal case as to the applicant and any person who will manage or provide
administrative services to the massage establishment.
            v.   Information as to whether or not the applicant or any person
who will manage or provide administrative services to the massage
establishment, is a registered sex offender.
            vi.   Fingerprints of the applicant and any person who will manage
or provide administrative services to the massage establishment, on a form
provided by the Department, or by livescan. Any fees for the fingerprints shall
be paid by the applicant.
         D.   Two (2) color photographs, taken within six (6) months prior to
the date of the application, that clearly show the face of the applicant and
any person who will manage or provide administrative services to the massage
establishment, respectively. Any fees for the photographs shall be paid by the
applicant.
         E.   A written description of the proposed massage establishment and
how it will satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
         F.   A written register of the massage therapists and practitioners
required by §
4.10.050.
         G.   A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of
perjury that all of the information submitted in connection with the
application is true and correct.
         H.   A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by resolution of
the city council.
         I.   The name of any and all employees and/or independent contractors,
other than certified massage therapists and practitioners, providing services
to the massage establishment, and their title and job descriptions.
      3.   The chief shall, within sixty (60) calendar days of the filing of a
complete application, approve and issue the massage establishment permit in the
name of the owner and massage establishment business, if the requirements of
this chapter have been met; otherwise the permit shall be denied. Notice of the
approval or denial of the permit shall be given to the applicant in writing by
first class mail, postage prepaid. If the application is denied, the chief
shall attach to the notice a statement of the reasons for the denial. The time
period set forth in this paragraph shall not be extended except upon the
written consent of the applicant. The decision of the chief is final. No
massage establishment location for which a permit has been denied, shall be
eligible for a massage establishment permit applied for less than six (6)
months after the date of the notice of denial.
      4.   Grounds for denial. The chief may deny a massage establishment
permit application if any of the following is true:
           A.   The applicant has been convicted within the last five years of
any felony or misdemeanor, or has an outstanding warrant for his or her arrest
or a pending criminal case, regarding an offense having a reasonable
relationship to the functions of a permittee.
         B.   The application is incomplete, or falsified in any respect.
         C.   The applicant, or any person who will manage or provide
administrative services to the massage establishment, is required to register
as a sex offender in any state.
         D.   If there has been a criminal investigation resulting in arrest
related to the operation of the massage establishment business within the last
five (5) years.
         E.   Within the previous year, a massage business at the same location
was closed due to criminal activity on the property, or had a conditional use
permit or other city approval relating to the provision of massage services
revoked.
         F.   Operation of a massage establishment at this location or
otherwise as set forth in the application, would violate any provision of this
chapter or the La Mirada Municipal Code.
   (c)   Permits nontransferable.
      1.   No person shall operate a massage establishment under the authority
of a massage establishment permit at any place other than the address of the
massage establishment stated in the application for the permit. The chief may
approve a change of location, provided the massage establishment complies with
all ordinances and regulations of the city.
      2.   No massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this chapter
shall be transferable to any other person or entity.
      3.   Any attempt to transfer a massage establishment permit is hereby
declared invalid and the permit shall automatically become void as of the date
of such attempted transfer.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall prevent the chief from approving a
second massage establishment permit for a single location provided that the
holder of the massage establishment permit previously approved for such
location consents in writing to the automatic expiration of such previously
approved permit upon the effective date of such second permit.
   (d)   Conditions of massage establishment permit.
      1.   Every massage establishment shall display at all times during
business hours the original permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter for such business. The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place
so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the massage
establishment. The massage establishment shall not operate under any other name
than the name set forth in the massage permit application.
      2.   If an individual's CAMTC certification is suspended or revoked or if
the individual is not CAMTC certified, the massage establishment may not allow
that person to provide massage services, including outcall massage services, at
or through the massage establishment business.
      3.   The massage establishment must notify the city immediately upon the
establishment's receipt of notice of any disciplinary action taken by the CAMTC
regarding any of the establishment's massage therapists or practitioners and
submit a copy of any notice or order to the chief.
      4.   Any act or omission of anyone providing a massage or performing any
other service at the establishment's location, whether as an employee or an
independent contractor, which constitutes a violation of this chapter or
grounds for revocation of a massage establishment permit, shall also be deemed
to be an act or omission of the permittee, the massage establishment and/or all
of its owner(s).
      5.   Every massage establishment must be operated at all times in
compliance with all federal, state and local laws, and the requirements of this
chapter.
      6.   All portions of the permitted massage establishment floor area
designated for the provision of actual massage services may be utilized for the
provision of massage only by certified massage therapists and practitioners
listed in the required register. No portion of any permitted massage
establishment floor area may be utilized by or for conducting any other massage
business unless a separate massage establishment permit is first obtained
permitting such business.
      7.   A copy of all massage therapists' and practitioners' certificates,
and photographs taken within the previous year, for massage therapists and
practitioners employed by or providing services to the massage establishment,
shall be conspicuously displayed in a location visible to customers upon entry
to the business.
      8.   Only services listed in the list of services may be provided. In the
event that the list of services or any part of the list posted is in other than
the English language, the permittee shall, at the permittee's cost and expense,
have copies available at the massage establishment that provide an accurate
English language translation thereof. Such English translation shall be
attested to being a full, true and correct translation thereof under penalty of
perjury of the laws of the State of California. No permittee or anyone acting
on behalf of a permittee shall advertise any services of the massage
establishment that are not expressly included in the current list of services.
      9.   If the massage establishment has a glass window or door at the
entrance to such establishment, and that window or door does not permit viewing
the entrance to a room where massage is provided, then that glass shall remain
clear and shall not be painted over, darkened or blocked by any cloth or
obstruction, so that the front area where patrons are greeted is visible from
outside of the establishment.
      10.   Exterior doors must be unlocked during business hours, unless the
massage establishment is owned by one individual with one or no employees or
independent contractors.
   (e)   Term of permit. A massage establishment permit issued under this
chapter shall be valid for twenty-four (24) months from the date of issuance
unless suspended or revoked.
   (f)   Renewal. A holder of a massage establishment permit issued under this
chapter shall submit an application for renewal no later than sixty (60)
calendar days prior to the expiration of the permit. The renewal application
shall be submitted together with a nonrefundable renewal fee in an amount
established by resolution of the city council. Applications for renewal of a
massage establishment permit shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures governing initial applications.
   (g)   Grounds for suspension or revocation. The chief may suspend or revoke
a massage establishment permit, based upon substantial evidence that any of the
following has occurred:
      1.   The permittee has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement
of material fact in any application, report or record required to be filed with
the city.
      2.   The permittee, or an employee, independent contractor, owner, agent,
partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the massage establishment
business has failed to comply with any of the requirements or conditions of
this chapter.
      3.   An individual who is not is a certified massage therapist or a
certified massage practitioner, or whose CAMTC certification is suspended or
revoked, has provided a massage at the massage establishment.
      4.   The permittee, or an employee, independent contractor, owner, agent,
partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the massage establishment
business has allowed or permitted, with or without personal knowledge, the
occurrence of criminal activity on the premises of the massage establishment
business.
      5.   One or more acts prohibited under California Penal Code §§ 266,
266a, 266e, 266f, 266g, 266h, 266i, 266j, 315, 316, 318, 647(b), or 653.22, or
any successor provisions thereto, have taken place on the premises of the
massage establishment, whether or not any criminal prosecution has been pursued
or conviction obtained for such acts, and whether or not they occurred with or
without the actual knowledge of the permittee.
      6.   The permittee, or an employee, independent contractor, owner, agent,
partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the massage establishment
business has committed a misdemeanor, felony or any violation of this chapter
in the conduct of the massage establishment business.
      7.   The permittee has been subject to a permanent injunction against the
conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to this code, or §§ 11225
through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or any similar provision of law in
any jurisdiction outside the State of California.
      8.   The permittee, or an employee, independent contractor, owner, agent,
partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the massage establishment
business has failed to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by
an authorized city official in connection with the conduct of a massage
establishment.
      9.   The permittee or anyone acting on behalf of the permittee has
refused to permit inspection by the city to verify compliance with all
requirements of the permit and/or this chapter.
   (h)   Procedure for suspension or revocation.
      1.   Upon determining that grounds for permit suspension or revocation
exist, the chief shall furnish written notice of the suspension or revocation
to the permittee. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the
last known address of the permittee, or shall be personally delivered to the
permittee, and shall include reasons for the suspension or revocation. Such
notice shall become effective within ten (10) days of the date of the notice,
unless the permittee files a written appeal with the city clerk prior to the
effective date. If a timely appeal is received, then the chief shall schedule a
hearing and provide written notice to the appellant setting forth the time and
place of the hearing. The notice of hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid,
addressed to the last known address of the appellant, or shall be personally
delivered to the appellant, at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
      2.   Hearings shall be conducted before a hearing officer having no
connection with the chief's determination to suspend or revoke the permit.
Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the
chief. All parties involved shall have a right to: (1) offer testimonial,
documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; (2) be represented by
counsel; and (3) confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence
may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are
accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this
section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party
or a witness.
      3.   If, after holding the hearing in accordance with this section, there
is a determination that there are sufficient grounds for disciplinary action,
the hearing officer shall impose one of the following penalties:
         A.   A warning;
         B.   Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six
(6) months; and
         C.   Revocation of the permit.
      4.   The hearing officer may, in conjunction with the issuance of a
warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take appropriate
corrective action. The hearing officer's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.050 Record keeping.
   (a)   The holder of a massage establishment permit shall maintain:
      1.   A current, written register of all certified massage therapists and
certified massage practitioners providing a massage at the establishment,
including independent contractors, and each such person's State certificate
number, home address, date of hiring, and whether the therapist or practitioner
will be performing outcall massages. An amended copy of the written register
shall be provided to the chief within five (5) days of the date of hiring, and
upon termination of services, with respect to each massage therapist and
practitioner at the establishment. Each register submittal shall be accompanied
by a statement, signed by the owner, stating under penalty of perjury under the
laws of the State of California that all of the information in the written
register is true and correct.
      2.   A daily, written register, approved in form by the chief, that
includes the name of each client, the assigned room (or location of outcall
massage service), the massage therapist or practitioner who treated the client,
a description of service(s) performed, the price of the services, including any
gratuity or tip, and the date and time of the appointment. The daily register
shall be completed by the close of business every day, and shall be available
for inspection by any city representative at all times during regular business
hours. The daily register shall be considered confidential, not for public
review, and may be inspected by the city only as part of a criminal
investigation or to determine compliance with this chapter. Each daily register
shall be retained for at least one (1) year.
   (b)   A massage therapist or practitioner registered pursuant to this
section is jointly responsible with the massage establishment permit holder for
compliance with subsection (a)2. of this section.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.060 Health and safety requirements.
   Each permittee, and any and all persons acting on behalf of the permittee,
shall conduct the massage establishment business in a safe and sanitary manner,
and shall:
   (a)   Comply with all applicable building, fire, safety, health, electrical,
plumbing, mechanical, heating and ventilating, and sanitation codes and other
laws applicable to the premises.
   (b)   Provide for the regular removal of garbage and refuse, and the safe
storage or removal of flammable materials.
   (c)   Maintain all equipment used to perform massage services in a safe and
sanitary condition, including the regular application of cleansers and
bacterial cleaning agents.
   (d)   Launder all materials furnished for the personal use of the client,
such as towels and linens, before each use. The massage establishment must
provide clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens; no common use or reuse of
these items is allowed.
   (e)    Maintain all bathroom and plumbing fixtures in a sanitary condition,
provide hot and cold running water, and comply with sanitation requirements of
the county health department.
   (f)   Provide a wash basin for therapists and employees, located within or
as close as practicable to the area devoted to the massage therapy services.
Each wash basin shall be equipped with hot and cold running water, soap in a
dispenser and sanitary towels.
   (g)   Provide either a separate room or dressing and locker facilities for
each client. However, dressing and undressing may occur in the same room as
massage therapy if the client is alone in the room with the door(s) closed and
opaque coverings are present on any windows while undressing or dressing. The
massage therapist or other clients may not be present in the same room when the
client is undressing.
   (h)   Maintain at least one closed cabinet or bin for clean linens and
towels, and another closed cabinet or bin for soiled linens and towels.
   (i)   Maintain all walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam
and vapor rooms, and all physical facilities in good repair and in clean and
sanitary condition. Walls in all rooms where water or steam baths or showers
are taken shall have washable, mold-resistant surfaces, wet and dry heat rooms,
steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, toilet rooms, showers and bathrooms, tanning
booths, whirlpool baths and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected
at least once per business day.
   (j)   Maintain all massage liquids, powders, creams, or other preparations
in clean, closed, labeled containers. Powders must be kept in clean shakers or
containers.
   (k)   Cover all massage tables with durable, washable plastic or some other
waterproof material; a clean sheet or heavy paper must be placed over any
table, floor or other area where the patron will lie. Pads of more than four
inches thick and more than four feet wide may not be used. Beds, mattresses and
waterbeds may not be used in the administration of a massage.
   (l)   In each room or cubicle where a massage is administered, have lighting
whenever the area is occupied equivalent to a minimum of an incandescent 25-
watt clear-glass light bulb.
   (m)   For a massage establishment in which the therapist or practitioner is
an employee, all massage services shall be paid for in the reception area, and
all tips, if any, shall be paid in the reception area. For a massage
establishment at which a therapist or practitioner is an independent
contractor, all massage services and all tips, if any, may be paid in the same
room where the massage occurred, provided the door to the room is fully open.
   (n)   Comply with the portions of the Massage Therapy Act (Business and
Professions Code § 4608) relating to the requirements that a certificate holder
display his or her original certificate wherever he or she provides massage for
compensation; and to have his or her identification card in his or her
possession while providing massage services for compensation.
   (o)   Comply with the portions of the Massage Therapy Act (Business and
Professions Code § 4609(a)) relating to sexual acts, including not allowing
certificate holders to engage in any form of sexual activity on the premises of
a massage establishment where a massage is provided for compensation, excluding
a residence; engage in sexual activity while providing massage services for
compensation; provide massage of the genitals or anal region; or to provide
massage of female breasts without the written consent of the person receiving
the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider.
   (p)   Comply with the portions of the Massage Therapy Act (Business and
Professions Code §§ 4608, 4609, 4611) relating to advertising, including
requiring certificate holders to include the name under which he or she is
certified and his or her certificate number in any and all advertising of
massage for compensation; not engage in sexually suggestive advertising related
to massage services; not hold him- or herself out as a certified massage
therapist or practitioner, or use terms such as "licensed" or "certified," that
implies that an uncertified person is certified as a massage therapist or
practitioner; not falsely state or advertise or put out any sign or card, or to
falsely represent to the public, that any individual is licensed, certified, or
registered as a massage therapist or practitioner if that individual is not so
certified.
   (q)   Comply with the portions of the Massage Therapy Act (Business and
Professions Code § 4609) related to dressing requirements, including dressing
while engaged in the practice of massage for compensation, or while visible to
clients in a massage establishment, in attire that is not: transparent, see-
through, or substantially exposes the certificate holder's undergarments; swim
attire, if not providing a water-based massage modality approved by CAMTC; in a
manner that exposes the certificate holder's breasts, buttocks, or genitals; in
a manner that constitutes a violation of § 314 of the Penal Code; or a manner
that has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire.
   (r)   Not serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages nor permit
the consumption of any drugs, except pursuant to a valid prescription.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.070 Inspections.
   The chief may inspect the premises at the time of permitting a massage
establishment, and may make periodic, reasonable inspections of the
establishment during normal business hours to assure compliance with CAMTC
requirements, this chapter and applicable fire, health and safety requirements.
If any fire, health or safety violations are found, the chief shall notify the
holder of the massage establishment permit in writing. The chief may give the
establishment ten (10) days to correct the violation(s), or, if the violation
(s) presents a danger to public health or safety, close the establishment until
the violation(s) is corrected.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.080 Hours of operation.
   No massage establishment and no registered massage therapist or practitioner
may provide massage service between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
Clients and visitors shall be excluded from a massage establishment during the
foregoing hours.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.090 Department coordination with CAMTC.
   The chief shall designate a person in the Public Safety Department to
coordinate with CAMTC, including maintaining a list of certified therapists and
practitioners practicing in the city, maintaining a list of massage
establishments operating in the city, receiving notices and information from
CAMTC, and notifying CAMTC of any arrest or conviction for violation of Penal
Code § 647 or other act punishable as a sexually related crime. (Business and
Professions Code § 4614.)
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.100 Property owner responsibility.
   Any place where lewdness, assignation or prostitution occurs is a public
nuisance which may be abated and permanently enjoined, and for which the city
may recover damages from the property owner, as well as from the person
conducting or maintaining the nuisance. (Penal Code §§ 11225 and 11226.)
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.110 Applicability of regulations to existing massage establishments,
therapists and practitioners.
   (a)   Any massage establishment that was validly permitted as of the date of
this section to operate as a massage establishment must apply for a massage
establishment permit within forty-five (45) days of the effective date of this
section. The requirement to have a conditional use permit shall not be imposed
in these instances. Every massage establishment permit issued prior to the
effective date of this section shall be null and void upon the forty-sixth
(46th) day from the effective date hereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an
application for a massage establishment permit pursuant to this section is
submitted prior to expiration of the current massage establishment permit, the
prior permit shall continue in effect until such time as a determination is
made by the chief on the new massage establishment permit application.
   (b)   Permits for uncertified massage therapists and massage practitioners
who are otherwise in compliance with all massage regulations in effect prior to
the adoption of this section, shall continue in effect until their normal
expiration, or for ninety (90) days following the effective date of this
section, whichever occurs latest.
(Ord. 681, § 2, 2016)
4.10.200 Certified massage therapists--massage certificate required.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of providing or
performing a massage unless such person holds a valid and current massage
certificate.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
ARTICLE III. OUT CALL MASSAGE SERVICE
4.10.300 Out call massage service--Massage certificate required.
   It is unlawful for any person to provide an out call massage service unless
such person is a certified massage therapist.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
ARTICLE IV. PROHIBITED CONDUCT, PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES
4.10.400 Prohibited conduct.
   It is unlawful for any certified massage therapist, or for any permittee to
permit or allow any certified massage therapist, to touch or massage the
genital area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron or for any
massage establishment to allow or permit such massage.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
4.10.410 Suspension pending revocation.
   When the grounds for revocation under this chapter are that the permittee
has engaged in or allowed illegal or dangerous conduct, the permit may be
suspended until the revocation hearing procedure has been completed.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
 4.10.420 Revocation--Massage establishment permit.
   The director may, after notice and hearing, revoke the massage establishment
permit of any person, firm, partnership or corporation holding the same upon
receipt of satisfactory evidence that:
   A.   The permittee has made a material misrepresentation on the permit
application;
   B.   The permittee, any managing responsible employee thereof or any person
enumerated in Section
4.10.040D.9. or Section
4.10.040D.10. of Article I hereof has been convicted of or entered a plea of
guilty or nolo contendere to any charge of a violation of any state, federal or
other governmental law similar to and including California Penal Code Section
290, any violation of any statute for which the permittee is required to
register pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290 or any such similar
registration law, or any crime that involves conduct which is a violation of
any state, federal or other governmental law similar to and including
California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647, or any
other crime involving the elements of the foregoing code sections, by way of
plea bargain, or any other crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral
turpitude, or any lesser included offense; or
   C.   The permittee, any managing responsible employee, or any employee,
representative, or agent of the permittee, or any certified massage therapist
employed by the permittee, has engaged in conduct constituting a violation of
this chapter or of any of the enumerated statutes or crimes set forth in
Section
4.10.420B., above. The director shall provide the permittee with written notice
of the revocation by U.S. mail, with a proof of service attached, addressed to
the street address of the massage establishment as shown on the application; or
   D.   The massage establishment no longer satisfies the approval requirements
set forth in Section
4.10.040, including, but not limited to, failure of a massage establishment to
use or employ only certified massage therapists to provide massage services.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
4.10.430 Permit denial/revocation appeal procedure.
   A.   The applicant or permittee, as the case may be, within ten business
days after the date of denial of an application for a permit under Article I
hereof, or notice of revocation, may file an appeal with the city clerk to be
taken to the hearing officer. In the event an appeal of a revocation is timely
filed, and the grounds for revocation are those set forth in Section
4.10.410, then a suspension of the permit shall be in effect until the final
decision has been rendered by the hearing officer.
   B.   If the applicant or permittee fails to timely file an appeal, then the
denial/revocation shall take effect immediately upon expiration of the appeal
filing period. No permit shall be revoked until after a hearing has been held
before the hearing officer to determine good cause for such revocation, or the
appeal filing period has lapsed. It is unlawful for any person to operate a
massage establishment or carry on the business of massage until the revoked
permit has been reinstated by the hearing officer.
   C.   Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and mailed at least
ten days prior to the date of the hearing, by U.S. mail, with a proof of
service attached, addressed to the address listed on the massage establishment
application. The notice shall state the grounds for denial or revocation, and
the time and place where such hearing will be held.
   D.   After said hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written decision
within ten business days from the date the matter is submitted for decision.
The action of the hearing officer shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
4.10.440 Burden of proof at hearing.
   Unless otherwise specifically provided by law, the burden is on the city in
any hearing under this Article IV to prove that the determination of the
director that is being appealed is reasonable, and not an abuse of discretion.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
4.10.450 Penalties for violation of chapter.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate
any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provisions
of this chapter or failing to comply with any of the requirements thereof shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished
by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding
six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each and every person, firm,
partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
4.10.460 Civil remedies available.
   The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
4.10.470 Severability.
   The city council declares that, should any article, provision, section,
paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter be or declared invalid by any final
court action in a court of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any
preemptive legislation, including, but not limited to, any provision contained
in California Business and Professions Code Section 4600, et seq., the
remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences and words of this chapter
shall remain in full force and effect. The provisions of California Business
and Professions Code Sections 4600 through 4613 shall be deemed to govern over
any conflicting provisions contained in this chapter.
(Ord. 645, § 2, 2011).
Chapter 4.15
ESCORT BUREAUS
Sections:
   
4.15.010   Purpose and intent.
   
4.15.020   Definitions.
   
4.15.030   Permit required.
   
4.15.040   Permit--Term.
   
4.15.050   Permit renewal.
   
4.15.060   Exception.
   
4.15.070   Application for permit--Contents--Renewals-Required fees.
   
4.15.080   Employment and activities of escorts.
   
4.15.090   Escorts--Permit required.
   
4.15.100   Term of permit.
   
4.15.110   Employee permit renewal.
   
4.15.120   Permit identification card.
   
4.15.130   Escort permit--Renewal application.
   
4.15.140   Prohibited activities.
   
4.15.150   Sale or transfer.
   
4.15.160   Change of location or name.
   
4.15.170   Prohibited conduct.
   
4.15.180   Suspension or revocation of a permit.
   
4.15.190   Conducting as a nuisance.
   
4.15.200   Applicability of regulations to existing business.
4.15.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of the city council, by the adoption of this
chapter, that the operation of an escort bureau, as defined in this chapter,
should be regulated for the protection of the public from the perils of fire,
hazard to health, and for the preservation of the peace and welfare of the
community.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
   (a)   "Business or occupation" means that term as is defined in Section
5.02.030 of this code.
   (b)   "Escort" means any person who, for pecuniary compensation:
      (i)   Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons to, from or
about social affairs, entertainments, places of public assembly or places of
amusement located or situated within the city;
      (ii)   Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons in or about
any place of public or private resort or within any private quarters located or
situated within the city;
      (iii)   Escorts, accompanies or consorts with other persons in or about
any business or commercial establishment, or part or portion thereof, located
or situated within the city.
   (c)   "Escort bureau" means any business, agency or self- employed or
independent escort who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to
furnish escorts.
   (d)   "Pecuniary compensation" means any commission, fee, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward or any other form or consideration.
   (e)   "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or
association.
   (f)   "Profit interest" means any interest or share in the present or
prospective profit of an escort bureau.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.030 Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or
upon any premises or real property, located or situated within the city, the
activities of an escort bureau, unless there has been granted to such person a
valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. A separate permit
shall be required for each location within the city at which an escort bureau
is to be established.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.040 Permit--Term.
The term of an escort bureau permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall
be for a period of one year.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.050 Permit renewal.
An escort bureau permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of not to
exceed one year on written application to the sheriff made at least ninety days
prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The application for
renewal of a permit shall contain all of the information required by Section
4.15.070 of this chapter and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986)
4.15.060 Exception.
The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon
and shall not be construed as applying to a person in the lawful business of an
employment agency licensed under the laws of the state.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.070 Application for permit--Contents--Renewals-Required fees.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renew an existing permit,
to operate an escort bureau, shall make application to the sheriff or his
designated representative. Prior to submitting such application for a permit or
renewal of a permit, a nonrefundable fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars,
shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the
investigation and report required by this chapter. The department of finance
shall issue a receipt showing that such application or renewal fee has been
paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied by the applicant to the
sheriff at the time such application is filed. Permit issuance or renewal fees
required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee
required under any other chapter of this code.
   (b)   Neither the filing of an application for a permit or renewal thereof,
nor payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize the conducting of
an escort bureau until such permit has been granted or renewed.
   (c)   Each applicant for an escort bureau permit, or renewal thereof, shall
furnish the following information:
      (1)   The present or proposed address where the business is to be
conducted;
      (2)   The full true name under which the business will be conducted;
      (3)   The full true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (4)   The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers
of the applicant;
      (5)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five-
year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application and the
inclusive dates of each such address;
      (6)   California driver's license or identification number and Social
Security number of the applicant;
      (7)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen
years of age;
      (8)   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date of
birth;
      (9)   Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches
in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application;
      (10)   The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant
for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application;
      (11)   The permit history of the applicant, for the five- year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city,
county, state or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit issued
by such agency revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational
license or permit revoked or suspended due to misconduct as described in
subsection (h) of this section;
      (12)   All criminal convictions suffered by the applicant, including
ordinance violations but excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense
designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor offense), stating the
date, place, nature and sentence of each such conviction;
      (13)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or
charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names,
residence addresses and dates of birth of each of its current officers and
directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in
the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set
forth the names, residence addresses and dates of birth of each of the
partners, including limited partners and profit interest holders. If the
applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the
certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or
more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection
pertaining to corporations shall apply. The corporation or partnership
applicant shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its
responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign
all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter,
but only one application fee shall be charged;
      (14)   A definition of the service to be provided;
      (15)   The true names and residential addresses of all persons employed
or intended to be employed as escorts;
      (16)   Such other identification and/or information as the sheriff may
require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth
in the application.
   (d)   The applicant, or a designated responsible managing officer, if the
applicant is a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the
sheriff's department for the city and produce proof that the required
application or renewal fee has been paid and shall present the application
containing the information and supporting documentation required by subsection
(c) of this section.
   (e)   The sheriff may require the applicant, or the designated responsible
managing officer, if the applicant is a partnership or corporation, to appear
in person at the sheriff's department in order to be photographed and
fingerprinted.
   (f)   When any change occurs regarding the written information required by
subsection (c) of this section to be included in the application, the applicant
or permit holder, as the case may be shall give written notification of such
change to the sheriff within five business days after such change.
   (g)   The sheriff shall have a reasonable period of time in which to
investigate the application and background of the applicant. The sheriff, or
his representative, shall, within thirty days after the date of the filing of
the application, render a written recommendation to the city administrator, as
to approval or denial of the application for the permit or renewal thereof.
   (h)   The finance director after receipt of the application and
aforementioned recommendation from the sheriff, shall grant the permit, or
renewal thereof, only if he finds that all of the following requirements have
been met:
      (1)   The required fees have been paid;
      (2)   The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this
chapter;
      (3)   The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation
of fact in the application;
      (4)   The applicant if an individual; or any of the directors, officers
or stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation;
or any of the partners, including limited partners, the holder of any lien of
any nature--if a natural person, or profit interest holder, manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the existing or proposed
escort bureau, or a natural person employed or contracted with to be an escort
or to provide escort services; has not been convicted or pleaded nolo
contendere or guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime involving criminal
misstatement or sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses
listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7,
Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, and subsection (a), (b), (c), (d) or (h)
of Section 647 of the Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering,
prostitution or lewd conduct, or has knowingly permitted, through an act of
omission or commission, his or her employee or agent, while so employed, to
engage in any type of criminal misstatement or sexual misconduct offense,
whether misdemeanor or felony (under such circumstances, the conduct of the
employee or agent, if such resulted in a conviction or a plea of nolo
contendere or guilty, will be considered imputed to the principal and shall be
grounds for permit denial);
      (5)   The escort bureau, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with
all applicable city, county and state laws, including but not limited to
health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards; and
      (6)   The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business is at least eighteen years of age.
   (i)   If the finance director does not find that all of the requirements set
forth in subsections (h)(1), through (h)(6) of this section have been met, he
shall deny application for the permit or renewal thereof. In the event the
application for the permit or renewal thereof is denied by the city manager,
written notice of such denial shall be given within ten business days to the
applicant, specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of
the application for the permit, or renewal thereof, shall be deemed to have
been served if it in fact is personally served on the applicant or when
deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the
applicant at the residence address set forth in the application for the permit
or renewal thereof. Any applicant whose application for an escort bureau, or
renewal thereof, has been denied by the finance director, may appeal such
denial as provided in Section
4.04.130 of this title.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.080 Employment and activities of escorts.
   (a)   No holder of an escort bureau permit shall employ as an escort any
person under eighteen years of age.
   (b)   No holder of an escort bureau permit shall furnish any escort to, or
accept employment from any patron, customer or person to be escorted, who is
under eighteen years of age, except at the special instance and written request
of a parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the person upon
whose behalf the escort is engaged. The written request shall be carried by the
escort during the period so employed.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.090 Escorts--Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an escort unless there has been
granted to such person a valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Such permit shall be issued to the address of the employer of the
escort, who must in turn also hold a valid escort bureau permit issued by the
city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.100 Term of permit.
The term of an escort permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall be for
a period of one year.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.110 Employee permit renewal.
An escort permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which has
not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of one year on
written application to the sheriff made at least ninety days prior to the
expiration date of the current valid permit. The application for renewal of a
permit shall contain all of the information required in Section
4.15.120 of this chapter, and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.120 Permit identification card.
Each escort permit holder shall be issued an identification card which will
also serve as an escort permit. The permit holder shall carry such card upon
his or her person when acting as an escort and produce the same for inspection
upon request. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the sheriff any
escort permit issued by the city upon the final suspension, revocation or
expiration of such permit, or upon leaving employment as an escort.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.130 Escort permit--Renewal application.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renewal of an existing
permit, to act as an escort, shall make application to the sheriff or his
designated representative. Prior to submitting such application for a permit or
renewal of a permit, a nonrefundable fee, of one hundred twenty-five dollars,
shall be paid to the department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the
investigation and report required by this chapter. The department of finance
shall issue a receipt showing that such permit application or renewal fee has
been paid. The receipt, or a copy thereof, shall be supplied by the applicant
to the sheriff at the time such application is filed. Permit fees required
under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required
under any other chapter of this code.
   (b)   Neither the filing of an application for a permit, or renewal thereof,
nor the payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize a person to
act as an escort until such permit has been granted or renewed.
   (c)   Each applicant for an escort permit, or renewal thereof, shall furnish
the information required by subsections (c)(1) through (c)(12) of Section
4.15.070 of this chapter, and shall, in addition, furnish the following
information:
      (1)   Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is employed, or has been
offered employment, by an escort bureau holding a valid permit issued by the
city, including the name and address of the employer or prospective employer
and the fact that such employment or continued employment is contingent upon
the issuance of such permit; and
      (2)   Such other identification and information as the sheriff may
require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set forth
in the application.
   (d)   The sheriff may require the applicant to appear in person at the
sheriff's department in order to be photographed or fingerprinted.
   (e)   The sheriff shall have a reasonable period of time in which to
investigate the application and background of the applicant. The sheriff, or
his representative, shall, within thirty days after the date of the filing of
the application, render a written recommendation to the finance director as to
approval or denial of the applicant for the permit or renewal thereof.
   (f)   The finance director, after receipt of the application and
aforementioned recommendation, from the sheriff, shall grant the permit, or
renewal thereof, only if he finds that all of the requirements of subsections
(h)(1) through (h)(3) of Section
4.15.070 of this chapter have been met and, in addition, if he finds that the
following additional requirements have been met:
      (1)   The applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has not been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere or
guilty to a misdemeanor or felony crime involving criminal misstatement or
sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal
Code Section 290, Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections
314 through 318, and subsection (a), (b), (c), (d) or (h) of Section 647 of the
Penal Code, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd
conduct.
   (g)   If the finance director does not find that all of the requirements set
forth in subsection (f) of this section have been met, he shall deny the
application for the permit or renewal thereof. In the event the application for
the permit, or renewal thereof, is denied by the finance director, written
notice of such denial shall be given within ten business days to the applicant
specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the
application for the permit, or renewal thereof shall be deemed to have been
served if it, in fact, is personally served on the applicant or when deposited
in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant
at his or her residence address as set forth in the application for the permit
or renewal thereof. Any applicant whose application for an escort permit, or
renewal thereof, has been denied by the city manager, may appeal such denial as
provided in Section
4.04.130 of this code.
   (h)   When any change occurs regarding the written information required by
subsection (c) of this section, the applicant or permit holder, as the case may
be, shall give written notification of such change to the sheriff within five
business days after such change.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.140 Prohibited activities.
No holder of an escort permit shall escort, offer to escort or perform any
activity described in this chapter to any person under eighteen years of age,
except at the special instance and written request of the parent, guardian or
other person in lawful custody of the person on whose behalf the escort is
engaged. The written request shall be carried by the escort during the period
so employed.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.150 Sale or transfer.
Unless prior application is made, thereafter approved, and a permit issued
thereon, upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an escort bureau, the
permit shall immediately become null and void. A new application shall be made
by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the escort bureau. A
fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars shall be payable for each such
application. Any application involving the sale or other transfer of any
interest in an existing escort bureau, as well as any permit which may
thereafter be granted, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.160 Change of location or name.
   (a)   A holder of a valid escort bureau permit shall notify, in writing, the
sheriff and finance director of any change in the business location. Such
notification shall be made at least ten business days prior to such change.
   (b)   No permit holder shall operate an escort bureau under any name or
designation not specified in the permit.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.170 Prohibited conduct.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars
or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Revocation or suspension of a permit issued under this chapter
shall not be a defense against prosecution.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.180 Suspension or revocation of a permit.
If the finance director finds that any person holding an escort bureau permit
under the provisions of this chapter has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or conducts such business in a manner as would have been grounds for
denial of a permit as set forth in subsection (h) of Section
4.15.070 of this chapter, or if the finance director finds that any person
holding an escort permit is engaging in behavior or actions which violate any
of the provisions of this chapter or which would have been grounds for denial
of a permit as set forth in subsection (f) of Section
4.15.130 of this chapter, he may suspend or revoke the permit. No such
suspension or revocation shall become effective until the permit holder has
been notified in writing of the right of such permit holder to appeal the
suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.04 of this
code. Notification of the permit holder shall be made either by personal
delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the permit holder at such permit holder's residence address as set
forth on the application for a permit or renewal thereof. If a timely appeal is
filed, the suspension or revocation shall be stayed and shall become effective
only upon decision of the city council. Otherwise, the suspension or revocation
shall become effective after the timely appeal period has expired.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.190 Conducting as a nuisance.
Any escort bureau operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions
of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance
and the city attorney may in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal
action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or
proceedings, for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner
provided by law, and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court
or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove
such establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating,
conducting or maintaining an escort bureau contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.15.200 Applicability of regulations to existing business.
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and
businesses described in this chapter whether the described activities in this
chapter were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance
enacting this chapter into law. All such persons and businesses shall have
thirty days from such effective date to apply for an escort business permit.
The finance director shall issue a permit within the time period set forth in
Section
4.15.070(g) and (h) only if all requirements of that section are met.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.18
OUTCALL DANCERS AND MODELS
Sections:
   
4.18.010   Purpose.
   
4.18.020   Definitions.
   
4.18.030   Outcall dance service permit required.
   
4.18.040   Term of permit.
   
4.18.050   Renewal conditions.
   
4.18.060   Exemptions.
   
4.18.070   Application and permit issuance conditions.
   
4.18.080   Dancers--Employment restrictions.
   
4.18.090   Outcall dancer permit required.
   
4.18.100   Term of outcall dancer permit.
   
4.18.110   Renewal of outcall dancer permit.
   
4.18.120   Identification card requirements.
   
4.18.130   Outcall dancer permit--Application and issuance conditions.
   
4.18.140   Outcall dancers--Unlawful activities.
   
4.18.150   Sale or transfer requirements.
   
4.18.160   Change of location or name.
   
4.18.170   Suspension and revocation of permits.
4.18.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of the city council, by the adoption of this
chapter, to regulate the provision of outcall dance and modeling services, as
defined, for the protection of the public from hazards to health, and for the
preservation of the peace and welfare of the community.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply;
   (a)   "Compensation" means any commission, fee, gratuity, profit, reward, or
any other form of consideration or thing of value.
   (b)   "Finance director" means the finance director of the city of La
Mirada, or any designee thereof.
   (c)   "Outcall dancer" means any person who as an agent, employee, or
independent contractor, for any form of compensation, dances or models or
offers to dance or model, in or upon any place or premises in the city of La
Mirada not open to the general public including, but not limited to, any
private residence within the city.
   (d)   "Outcall dance service" means any business, agency or self-employed or
independent person, regardless of business office location, that furnishes or
offers to furnish any outcall dancer(s) for any form of compensation.
   (e)   "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, business entity,
corporation or association.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.030 Outcall dance service permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to, or offer to, engage in, provide, furnish,
conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises or real property located or
situated within the city of La Mirada, the activities of an outcall dance
service, unless there has been granted to such person a valid permit pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter. If proposed to be located within the city, a
separate permit shall be required for each location at which an outcall dance
service is desired to be operated.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.040 Term of permit.
The term of an outcall dance service permit, unless sooner suspended or
revoked, shall be for a period of one year.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.050 Renewal conditions.
An outcall dance service permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period
not to exceed one year on written application to the finance director made at
least ninety days prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The
application for renewal of a permit shall contain all of the information
required by Section
4.18.070 of this chapter and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.060 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons dancing or modeling
at, or to any person or business providing dancers or models to, any bona fide
and recognized school of art or other duly licensed educational institution.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.070 Application and permit issuance conditions.
   (a)    Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renew an existing permit
to operate an outcall dance service, shall make application to the finance
director. When submitting such application for a permit or renewal of a permit,
a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be
paid to the finance department to defray the cost of the investigation and
report required by this chapter. The permit and issuance or renewal fees
required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee
required under any other chapter of this code.
   (b)   Neither the filing of an application for a permit or renewal thereof,
nor payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize the conducting of
an outcall dance service until such permit has been granted or renewed.
   (c)   Each applicant for an outcall dance service permit, or renewal
thereof, shall furnish the following information:
      (1)   The present or proposed address where the business is to be
conducted;
      (2)   The full, true name under which the business will be conducted;
   For purposes of subsections 3 through 12, below, the term "applicant" shall
also mean and include each natural person possessing a ten percent or greater
ownership interest in the outcall dance service, and the information described
shall be provided by each such owner.
      (3)   The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (4)   The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers
of the applicant;
      (5)   Each residence and business address of the applicant for the five-
year period immediately preceding the date of filing of the application and the
inclusive dates of each such address;
      (6)   California driver's license or identification number and social
security number of the applicant;
      (7)   Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen
years of age;
      (8)   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date of
birth;
      (9)   Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches
in size, taken within the six-month period immediately preceding the date of
the filing of the application;
      (10)   The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant
for the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application;
      (11)   The permit history of the applicant, for the five- year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including
whether such applicant, in previously operating in this or any other city,
county, state, or territory, has ever had any similar license or permit revoked
or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit
revoked or suspended;
      (12)   All misdemeanor and felony criminal convictions suffered by the
applicant, including the date, place, nature and sentence of each such
conviction;
      (13)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation
shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or
charter, together with the state and date of incorporation, and the names,
residence addresses and dates of birth of each of its current officers and
directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in
the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership or other form of business
entity, the applicant shall set forth the names, residence addresses and dates
of birth of each of the owners and partners, including limited partners, and
any other persons possessing any ownership interest of any nature. If the
applicant is a limited partnership, the applicant shall furnish a copy of the
certificate of limited partnership as filed with the county clerk. If one or
more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection
pertaining to corporations shall apply. The corporation or partnership
applicant shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its
responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign
all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter,
but only one application fee shall be charged;
      (14)   A description of the services to be provided;
      (15)   The true names and residential addresses of all persons employed
or intended to be employed as outcall dancers;
      (16)   Such other identification and/or information as the finance
director may require in order to discover the truth of the matters set forth in
the application.
   (d)   The applicant, if a natural person, or a designated responsible
managing officer if the applicant is a business entity, shall personally appear
at the finance department and produce proof that the required application or
renewal fee has been paid, and shall present the application containing the
information and supporting documentation required by subsection (c) of this
section.
   (e)   The finance director may require the applicant, if a natural person,
any person possessing a ten percent or greater ownership interest in the
outcall dance service, or the designated responsible managing officer, if the
applicant is a business entity, to appear in person at the Los Angeles County
sheriff's department, Norwalk Station, in order to be photographed and
fingerprinted.
   (f)   When any change occurs regarding the written information required by
subsection (c) of this section to be included in the application, the applicant
or permit holder, as the case may be, shall give written notification of such
change to the finance director within five business days after such change.
   (g)   The sheriff's department shall have a reasonable period of time in
which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The
sheriff's department shall, within sixty days after the date of the filing of
the application, render a written recommendation to the finance director, as to
approval or denial of the application for the permit or renewal thereof.
   (h)   The finance director, within ten days after receiving the application
and aforementioned recommendation from the sheriff's department, shall grant
the permit, or renewal thereof, only if it is found that all of the following
requirements have been met;
      (1)   The required fees have been paid;
      (2)   The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this
chapter.
      (3)   The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation
of fact in the application;
      (4)   The applicant or any owner, if an individual; or any of the
directors, officers or stockholders holding more than ten percent of the stock
of the corporation; or any of the partners including limited partners, the
holder of any lien of any nature, if a natural person, or profit interest
holder, manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
existing or proposed outcall dancer service, or a natural person employed or
contracted with to be a dancer or to provide dance services, has not been
convicted of any misdemeanor or felony crime within the previous ten years
involving fraud or sexual misconduct including, but not limited to, all
offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290, Penal Code Section 311.2 through
311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318, Penal Code Section 647, subsections
(a), (b), (d), (h) or (k), Penal Code Section 647.6, or any offenses involving
pimping, pandering, prostitution or lewd conduct; or has knowingly permitted,
through an act of omission or commission, his or her employee, contractor or
agent, while so employed, to engage in any type of fraud or sexual misconduct
offense, whether misdemeanor or felony (under such circumstances, the conduct
of the employee, contractor or agent, if such resulted in a conviction, will be
considered imputed to the principal and shall be grounds for permit denial);
      (5)   If proposed to be located within the city of La Mirada, the outcall
dance service, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable
city, county and state laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, fire
and safety requirements and standards;
      (6)   The applicant, manager or other person principally in charge of the
operation of the business is at least eighteen years of age; and
      (7)   If located, or proposed to be located in another city or
unincorporated county area, evidence satisfactory to the finance director that
the applicant possesses any and all licenses, permits and/or approvals
necessary to operate an outcall dance service in such city or county area.
   (i)   If the finance director does not find that all of the requirements set
forth in subsections (h)(1) through (h)(7) of this section have been met within
ten days after receiving the aforementioned recommendation from the sheriff's
department, he or she shall deny the application for the permit or renewal
thereof. In the event the application for the permit or renewal thereof is
denied, written notice of such denial shall be given within ten business days
to the applicant, specifying the ground or grounds of such denial. Notice of
denial of the application for the permit, or renewal thereof, shall be deemed
to have been served when it is personally served on the applicant, or when
deposited in the United States mail with postage prepaid and addressed to the
applicant at the address set forth in the application for the permit or renewal
thereof. Any applicant whose application for an outcall dance service, or
renewal thereof, has been denied by the finance director, may appeal such
denial to the city manager as provided in Chapter 4.04 of this title. No
applicant or permittee whose application is denied or revoked may reapply less
than one year after the effective date of such denial or revocation.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.080 Dancers--Employment restrictions.
   (a)   No holder of an outcall dance service permit shall employ as an
outcall dancer any person under eighteen years of age.
   (b)   No holder of an outcall dance service permit shall furnish or offer to
furnish any outcall dancer to or accept employment from any patron, customer or
person who is under eighteen years of age, except at the special instance and
written request of a parent, guardian or other person in lawful custody of the
person upon whose behalf the outcall dancer is engaged.
   (c)   No holder of an outcall dance service permit shall employ a person who
does not possess a valid outcall dancer permit issued by the city.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.090 Outcall dancer permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to act as an outcall dancer unless there has been
granted to such person a valid permit, pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter. Such permit shall be jointly issued to the outcall dancer and employer
of the outcall dancer, or to the outcall dancer if self-employed, who must in
turn also hold a valid outcall dance service permit issued by the city pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.100 Term of outcall dancer permit.
The term of an outcall dancer permit, unless sooner suspended or revoked, shall
be for a period of one year.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.110 Renewal of outcall dancer permit.
An outcall dancer permit, issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
which has not been suspended or revoked, may be renewed for a period of one
year on written application to the finance director made at least ninety days
prior to the expiration date of the current valid permit. The application for
renewal of a permit shall contain all of the information required in Section
4.18.130 of this chapter, and shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.120 Identification card requirements.
Each outcall dancer permit holder shall be given an identification card, which
will also serve as the outcall dancer permit. The permit holder shall have such
card in his or her immediate possession when acting as an outcall dancer or
model and produce the same for inspection upon request. Each permittee shall at
all times maintain in his or her possession while performing outcall dancer and
model services a valid California driver's license or other form of picture
identification. Each permit holder shall immediately surrender to the finance
director, any outcall dancer or model permit issued by the city upon the final
suspension, revocation, or expiration without renewal of such permit, or upon
leaving employment as an outcall dancer or model.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.130 Outcall dancer permit application and issuance conditions.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renewal of an existing
permit, to act as an outcall dancer, shall make application to the finance
director. When submitting such application for a permit or renewal of a permit,
a nonrefundable fee, as established by resolution of the city council, shall be
paid to the department of finance to defray the cost of investigation and
report required by this chapter. The permit and issuance or renewal fees
required under this chapter shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee
required under any other chapter of this code.
   (b)   Neither the filing of an application for a permit, or renewal thereof,
nor the payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize a person to
act as an outcall dancer until such permit has been granted or renewed.
   (c)   Each applicant for an outcall dancer permit, or renewal thereof, shall
furnish the information required by subsections (c)(1) through (c)(12) of
Section
4.18.070 of this chapter, and shall, in addition, furnish the following
information:
      (1)   Satisfactory evidence that the applicant is employed, self-
employed, or has been offered employment by an outcall dance service holding a
valid permit issued by the city, including the name and address of the employer
or prospective employer and the fact that such employment or continued
employment is contingent upon the issuance of said permit; and
      (2)   Such other identification and information as the finance director
may require in order to discover the truth of the matters required to be set
forth in the application.
   (d)   The finance director may require the applicant to appear in person at
the Los Angeles County sheriff's department, Norwalk Station, in order to be
photographed or fingerprinted.
   (e)   The sheriff's department shall have a reasonable period of time in
which to investigate the application and background of the applicant. The
sheriff's department shall, within sixty days after the date of the filing of
the application, render a written recommendation to the finance director as to
approval or denial of the application for the permit or renewal thereof.
   (f)   The finance director, within ten business days after receiving the
application and aforementioned recommendation from the sheriff's department,
shall grant the permit, or renewal thereof, only if he or she finds that all of
the requirements of subsections (h)(1) through (h)(3) of Section
4.18.070 of this chapter have been met and, in addition, if he or she finds
that the following additional requirements have been met:
      (1)   The applicant is at least eighteen years of age;
      (2)   The applicant has not been convicted of a misdemeanor or felony
crime within the previous ten years involving fraud or sexual misconduct
including, but not limited to, all offenses listed in Penal Code Section 290,
Penal Code Sections 311.2 through 311.7, Penal Code Sections 314 through 318,
Penal Code Section 647, subsections (a), (b), (d), (h) or (k), Penal Code
Section 647.6, or any offenses involving pimping, pandering, prostitution or
lewd conduct.
   (g)   If the finance director does not find that all of the requirements set
forth in subsection (f) of this section have been met, he or she shall deny the
application for the permit or renewal thereof. In the event the application for
the permit, or renewal thereof, is denied, written notice of such denial shall
be given within ten business days to the applicant specifying the ground or
grounds of such denial. Notice of denial of the application for the permit, or
renewal thereof, shall be deemed to have been served when it is personally
served on the applicant or when deposited in the United States mail with
postage prepaid and addressed to the applicant at his or her residence address
as set forth in the application for the permit or renewal thereof. Any
applicant, whose application for an outcall dancer permit, or renewal thereof,
has been denied by the finance director, may appeal such denial as provided in
Chapter 4.04 of this title.
   (h)   When any change occurs regarding the written information required by
subsection (c) of this section, the permit holder shall give written
notification of such change to the finance director within five business days
after such change.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.140 Outcall dancers--Unlawful activities.
No holder of an outcall dancer permit shall provide or offer to provide
services as an outcall dancer to any person under eighteen years of age, except
at the special instance and written request of the parent, guardian or other
person in lawful custody of the person on whose behalf the dancer is engaged.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.150 Sale or transfer requirements.
Unless prior application is made, thereafter approved, and a permit issued
thereon, upon the sale or transfer of any interest in an outcall dance service
the permit therefor shall immediately become null and void. A new application
shall be made by any person, firm or entity desiring to own or operate the
outcall dance service. A fee as established by resolution of city council shall
be payable for each such application. Any application involving the sale or
other transfer of any interest in an existing outcall dance service, as well as
any permit which may thereafter be granted, shall be subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.160 Change of location or name.
   (a)   A holder of a valid outcall dance service permit shall notify, in
writing, the finance director and director of planning of any change in the
business location. Such notification shall be made at least ten business days
prior to such change. Permittee shall be required to obtain any other permits
and approvals required by this code or any other law or regulation.
   (b)   No permit holder shall operate an outcall dance service under any name
or designation not specified in the permit.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
4.18.170 Suspension and revocation of permits.
   (a)   If the finance director finds that any person holding an outcall dance
service permit under the provisions of this chapter has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or conducts such business in a manner as would have
been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in subsection (h) of Section
4.18.070 of this chapter, or if the finance director finds that any person
holding an outcall dancer permit is engaging in behavior or actions which
violate any of the provisions of this chapter, code, or state law, or which
would have been grounds for denial of a permit as set forth in subsection (f)
of Section
4.18.130 of this chapter, he or she may suspend or revoke the permit.
   (b)   No such suspension or revocation shall become effective until the
permit holder has been notified in writing of the right of such permit holder
to appeal the suspension or revocation pursuant to the provisions of Chapter
4.04 of this title. Notification to the permit holder shall be made either by
personal delivery or by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
addressed to the permit holder at such permit holder's residence address as set
forth on the application for a permit or renewal thereof.
   (c)   If a timely appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation shall be
stayed pending a final determination of the appeal, unless the suspension or
revocation is based upon the arrest of a permit holder. In such instances, the
permit may be immediately suspended pending notice to the permit holder and
timely filing of an appeal. If no appeal is timely filed, the suspension or
revocation shall become effective upon expiration of the appeal period.
Following hearing of any appeal, the city manager may sustain, modify, or
reverse, with or without conditions, the decision to suspend or revoke.
(Ord. 532A § 3 (part), 1999).
Chapter 4.25
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT ON VEHICLES
Sections:
   
4.25.010   General.
   
4.25.020   Definitions.
   
4.25.030   Commercial use of sound amplifying equipment-- Registration.
   
4.25.040   Commercial use of sound amplifying equipment-- General regulations.
   
4.25.050   Hours.
   
4.25.060   Non-commercial use of sound amplifying equipment.
   
4.25.070   Exemptions.
   
4.25.080   Fees.
   
4.25.090   Penalties.
4.25.010 General.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to operate, or cause to be used or operated, on any public or
private street or publicly owned property in the city, any sound amplifying
equipment, as defined, except when used or operated in compliance with this
chapter.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
   'Person' includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any individual, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership,
society or any other form of entity, association or organization.
   'Sound amplifying equipment' includes any machine or device that is located
within, upon or otherwise attached to a vehicle, as defined in the California
Vehicle Code, and used to amplify the human voice, music or any other sounds,
for the purpose of attracting individuals, or drawing individuals' attention,
to such vehicle.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006)
4.25.030 Commercial use of sound amplifying equipment-- Registration.
   (a)   No person shall use or cause to be used any sound amplifying equipment
on any public or private street or publicly owned property in the city for or
in connection with any commercial purpose including the sale of, or any offer
to sell, any tangible item or service, without first filing a written
registration, in duplicate, with the city clerk and any registration fee
adopted by resolution of the city council. The registration shall be signed
under penalty of perjury and shall include the following:
      (1)   Name and home address of the registrant;
      (2)   Address and telephone number of the registrant's place of business;
      (3)   Make, model and license plate number of all vehicles to be used by
the registrant;
      (4)   Name and address of the legal and registered owner of the vehicle
(s);
      (5)   Name and address of the person having direct charge of the vehicle
(s);
      (6)   Name, age, address and California driver's license number of all
persons who will use or operate the vehicle(s);
      (7)   A general description of the area or areas of the city in which the
vehicle(s) will be used;
      (8)   The proposed hours of operation of the vehicle(s);
      (9)   A general description of the sound amplifying equipment to be used,
including size and number of speakers;
      (10)   The number of days that the vehicle(s) will be operated;
      (11)   The maximum output wattage of the sound amplifying equipment to be
used, and the approximate maximum distance that the sound will travel from the
vehicle;
      (12)   A general description of the type of sound to be transmitted from
the vehicle;
      (13)   The purpose for using the sound amplifying equipment including a
general description of the goods or services to be offered or sold; and
      (14)   The type of ownership of the business; i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
   (b)   All persons who have filed a registration form pursuant to this
chapter, shall amend the registration within forty-eighty hours to reflect any
change in the information therein furnished.
   (c)   The city shall return to each applicant one copy of the application
accepted for filing, that has been acknowledged by city stamp or other official
marking. Such copy shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound
amplifying equipment while the equipment is in operation, and such copy shall
be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the city upon request.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.040 Commercial use of sound amplifying equipment-- General regulations.
   (a)   In no event shall it to be permissible to operate any sound amplifying
equipment that can be heard in excess of one hundred feet in any direction or
that is unreasonably loud and/or disturbing to persons of normal sensibilities
within the area of audibility, while on any public or private street or
publicly owned property in the city.
   (b)   The only sounds permitted to be emanated from sound amplification
equipment are music and/or human voice.
   (c)   Sound amplification equipment shall not be operated within one hundred
yards of any hospital, hospice, rest home, public library or public or private
school.
   (d)   Sound amplification equipment shall not be operated unless the vehicle
is operating at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when such truck
is stopped or impeded by traffic and is otherwise in compliance with the
California Vehicle Code. Where stopped by traffic, such sound amplification
equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop.
   (e)   Each person or business granted a permit pursuant to the terms of this
chapter shall present the sound amplification equipment proposed to be operated
to the city for inspection by the finance director, or his or her designee, to
determine whether the sound volume is within the appropriate standards as set
forth in this section.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.050 Hours.
Sound amplifying equipment is permitted to be operated within the city between
the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. only of any day.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.060 Non-commercial use of sound amplifying equipment.
The non-commercial use of sound amplifying equipment is subject to the
requirements set forth in Sections
4.25.030(a) and (c) and
4.25.040(a), (b), and (c) of this chapter.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.070 Exemptions.
The following uses of sound amplifying equipment and activities are exempt from
the provisions of this chapter:
   (a)   Vehicle sound systems, horns, radios and similar devices located
within or upon the vehicle, to the extent the sound from any such device is
regulated by, and the device is used in accordance with, provisions of the
California Vehicle Code;
   (b)   Use of sound amplifying equipment when used and heard only by
occupants of private premises on which the vehicle is located;
   (c)   Warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or any warning
device on other vehicles when used for traffic safety purposes or any other
device when used by a public safety officer for official purposes;
   (d)   Use of equipment by any duly authorized facility operator, tenant or
lessee as an integral part of any event at stadiums, athletic facilities, or
parks;
   (e)   Use of equipment or machinery as part of construction, alteration,
repair, grading or improvement of any building, structure, road or improvement
to real property for which a permit has been issued by the city or state or
federal government;
   (f)   Use of equipment or machinery operated by city employees, agents or
franchisees, in the course of performing maintenance, construction, trash
collection or other municipal services;
   (g)   Use of sound amplifying equipment as part of vending from a vehicle
for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to Chapter 4.60 of this code;
   (h)   Use of sound amplifying equipment as part of any parade sponsored or
conducted by the city, or any parade that is conducted in compliance with all
local, state and federal laws; and
   (i)   Use of sound amplifying equipment where such use is otherwise
expressly permitted by law.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.080 Fees.
Written registration shall be accompanied by non-refundable registration fee in
such amount as established by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
4.25.090 Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and shall be punished for a first violation by a fine not exceeding
one hundred dollars, and for committing the same offense a second time within
one year by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars, and for committing the
same offense a third or any subsequent time within one year, by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars.
(Ord. 604 § 2 (part), 2006).
Chapter 4.30
TAXICABS
Sections:
   
4.30.010   Purpose.
   
4.30.020   Approved vehicles--Affixing license.
   
4.30.030   Substitution of vehicles.
   
4.30.040   Change of corporation directors.
   
4.30.050   Insurance required.
   
4.30.060   Amount of insurance.
   
4.30.070   Undertaking or bond--Amount.
   
4.30.080   Two policies.
   
4.30.090   Notice of cancellation.
   
4.30.100   Taxi stands.
   
4.30.110   Rates.
   
4.30.120   Accepting passengers.
   
4.30.130   Driver to operate taxicab.
   
4.30.140   Unauthorized driver forbidden.
   
4.30.150   Passengers--Failure to pay.
   
4.30.160   Acceptance of passengers.
   
4.30.170   Direct route.
   
4.30.180   Exclusive rights of passengers.
   
4.30.190   Application.
4.30.010 Purpose.
No person shall operate a taxicab within the city without first complying with
the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.020 Approved vehicles--Affixing license.
Upon obtaining a taxicab operator's license, the licensee shall submit such
license to the law enforcement agency and bring all of the vehicles licensed
thereby to a place designated by the law enforcement agency. The law
enforcement agency shall attach and seal a license plate or decal to the rear
of the body of each vehicle covered by the license, if such vehicle meets all
requirements as specified in this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.030 Substitution of vehicles.
If a taxicab operator desires to substitute one vehicle in place of another and
if such vehicle to be substituted complies with the taxicab operator's license
and the taxicab operator brings both the vehicle under the license and the
vehicle to be substituted to a place designated by the law enforcement agency,
the law enforcement agency may remove the license plate or decal from the
licensed vehicle and place it on the vehicle to be substituted. If the law
enforcement agency finds that it is impossible or impracticable to bring the
licensed vehicle to the place designated, he may permit the licensee to detach
the license plate or decal therefrom, by breaking the seal and removing the
screws, and may waive the requirement that such vehicle be brought to such
designated place. Under no other circumstances may this seal or decal be broken
or removed by anyone but the law enforcement agency or other designated agency
or officer of the city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.040 Change of corporation directors.
A taxicab operator's license which is issued to a corporation shall be valid so
long as the directors of such corporation remain the same as shown on its
application for such license.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.050 Insurance required.
The finance director shall not issue any taxicab operator's license until the
applicant first files with the finance director an undertaking or a policy of
insurance or a financial statement and excess policy of insurance which
undertaking, policy or undertaking and policy shall comply with the provisions
of this code and shall first be approved by the city attorney.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.060 Amount of insurance.
The policy of insurance required before a taxicab operator's license can be
issued shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result to
any person or property from the operation of any taxicab used by the taxicab
operator in his business as such. The maximum amount of recovery in such policy
shall not be less than the following sums:
   (1)   For the injury to any one person, or the death of any one person in
any one accident, five hundred thousand dollars;
   (2)   For the injury to two or more persons, or the death of two or more
persons, or the injury to one person or more, and the death of one person or
more, in any one accident, one million dollars;
   (3)   For the injury or destruction of property in any one accident, two
hundred thousand dollars.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.070 Undertaking or bond--Amount.
   (a)   The undertaking required before a taxicab operator's license can be
issued shall be conditioned that the taxicab operator shall pay all damages to
person or property for the amount of which he may become liable arising out of
the conduct of the business of taxicab operator, and that any person having
such a cause of action against the principal may join the surety as a party
defendant or in his own name sue separately the surety on such undertaking.
   (b)   The amount of the undertaking shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   Ten thousand dollars for the taxicab;
      (2)   An additional four thousand dollars for each additional taxicab up
to and including a total of five taxicabs;
      (3)   An additional two thousand dollars each for the sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth and tenth taxicabs;
      (4)   An additional one thousand dollars for each additional taxicab over
ten.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.080 Two policies.
In place of one insurance policy the applicant may file not more than two
insurance policies, one a policy of primary insurance and the second a policy
of excess insurance, if the total insurance resulting from such policies is
equal to, or greater than, that required by Section
4.30.060.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.090 Notice of cancellation.
If any taxicab operator or driver has any notice or information of a change or
cancellation of any insurance policy which policy is required under this
chapter he shall give immediate notice to the finance director or the law
enforcement agency of such change or cancellation.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.100 Taxi stands.
Taxi stands shall be at only those locations approved by the permit review
board. The permit review board may require the consent of the owner of any
property adjacent to the taxi stand before approving such taxi stand.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.110 Rates.
   (a)   The permit review board shall approve minimum and maximum rates which
may be charged by the permittee. The approval shall designate whether the rates
are flat rates or mileage rates. The approval shall designate whether or not
the rates shall be computed on a meter basis. A taxicab operator shall not
charge in any case any more or less than the rates specified in his permit.
   (b)   Every taxicab operator shall post and maintain in that part of every
taxicab which he operates which is most conspicuous to the passengers thereof,
in letters and figures which are clearly legible and not less than one-quarter
inch high, the schedule of rates permitted by his license.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.120 Accepting passengers.
Every taxicab operator and every taxicab driver shall accept any passenger,
unless:
   (1)   He has no facilities available; or
   (2)   The transportation requested is such that the driver or operator may
not legally accept such passenger; or
   (3)   The proposed passenger refuses or says that he will refuse or cannot
pay the fare; or
   (4)   The proposed passenger is drunk, disorderly or for other reasons not a
fit passenger.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.130 Driver to operate taxicab.
A taxicab operator shall not permit any person to operate a taxicab unless such
person is the employee of the taxicab operator and has a taxicab driver's
permit, or license as required by this title.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.140 Unauthorized driver forbidden.
A person other than the owner or employee of the owner shall not drive or
operate any taxicab.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.150 Passengers--Failure to pay.
A person shall not:
   (1)   Fail or refuse to pay the fare authorized by the taxicab operator's
license for which he has become liable; or
   (2)   Accept a ride in any taxicab without having on his person sufficient
funds to pay the authorized fare unless prior to accepting such ride, he
informs the driver of the taxicab that he does not have such funds; or
   (3)   Accept a ride in any taxicab with the intent to defraud the operator
or driver thereof or not to pay the full fare authorized.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.160 Acceptance of passengers.
A taxicab driver shall not stop for or accept any passenger except:
   (1)   Within the area specified in the license for the taxicab which he is
driving;
   (2)   A taxicab driver who has driven a passenger to any place may wait for
and accept such passenger. If the taxicab driver for any reason moves the
taxicab from the location where he had left the passenger, this section does
not apply.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.170 Direct route.
Every taxicab driver shall carry his passengers to their point of destination
by the most direct practical route unless specifically directed otherwise by
such passengers.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.180 Exclusive rights of passengers.
When a taxicab is engaged, the occupants shall have the exclusive right to the
full and free use of the passenger compartment. No taxicab operator or taxicab
driver may solicit or carry additional passengers unless the taxicab operator's
license expressly permits the carrying of additional passengers, and then only
to the extent expressly permitted.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.30.190 Application.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain a permit, or renew an existing permit,
to operate a taxicab, shall make application to the finance director. Prior to
submitting such application for a permit or renewal of a permit, a
nonrefundable fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars shall be paid to the
department of finance to defray, in part, the cost of the investigation and
report required by this chapter. The department of finance shall issue a
receipt showing that such application or renewal fee has been paid. Permit
issuance or renewal fees required under this chapter shall be in addition to
any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this code.
   (b)   Neither the filing of an application for a permit or renewal thereof,
nor payment of an application or renewal fee, shall authorize the operation of
a taxicab until such permit has been granted or renewed.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.35
AMUSEMENT AND ENTERTAINMENT
Sections:
   
4.35.010   Permit required.
   
4.35.020   Entertainment defined.
   
4.35.030   Exclusions.
   
4.35.040   Application for permit.
   
4.35.050   Investigation and hearing.
   
4.35.060   Notice of hearing.
   
4.35.070   Action at hearing.
   
4.35.080   Denial of application.
   
4.35.090   Conditions imposed on permit.
   
4.35.100   Suspension or revocation of permit.
   
4.35.110   Time to approve or deny.
   
4.35.120   Term of permit.
   
4.35.130   Reserved.
   
4.35.140   Judicial review.
4.35.010 Permit required.
No person shall operate, conduct, or manage any business in which any form of
entertainment is provided or proposed to be provided without first obtaining an
entertainment permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No
entertainment permit will be granted where the structure in which the
entertainment is proposed to be conducted is located within one hundred feet of
any residential zone.
(Ord. 552 § 2, 2000: Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.020 Entertainment defined.
"Entertainment" means every form of live entertainment, music, solo band or
orchestra, act, play, burlesque show, fashion show, review, pantomime, scene,
song or dance, act or song, and dance act, or any other act or performance
participated in by one or more persons for the purpose of holding the attention
of, gaining the attention and interest of, diverting or amusing guests or
patrons, and shall include any of such forms of live entertainment when used in
connection with, or as a means to attract the patronage or hold the attention
of such guests or patrons for the purpose of advertisement, demonstration,
display or sale of goods, wares, merchandise or services.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.030 Exclusions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to require a permit for the
following:
   (1)   For the use of a radio or music recording machine, juke box in any
establishment;
   (2)   For any entertainment provided for members and their guests at a
private club where admission is not open to the public;
   (3)   For entertainment conducted in connection with a regularly established
motion picture theater, recreation park, circus or fairground;
   (4)   For entertainment conducted by or sponsored by any bona fide club,
society or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable,
dramatic or literary purposes having an established membership and which holds
meetings other than such entertainment at regular intervals, when proceeds, if
any, arising from such entertainment are used for the purpose of such club,
society or association;
   (5)   For entertainment solely consisting of the playing of a single,
unamplified musical instrument for the amusement of guests or patrons of an
establishment;
   (6)   For entertainment conducted solely on or at any premises or location
which is owned or operated by, or leased by, to or from the United States,
state of California, county of Los Angeles, or any agency or subdivision
thereof.
(Ord. 552 § 3, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.040 Application for permit.
Each applicant for an entertainment permit shall file a written application,
signed under penalty of perjury, with the finance director, providing the
following:
   (1)   The name and permanent address of applicant;
   (2)   The name and proposed business address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its
articles of incorporation and the applicant shall show the name and residence
address of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder owning not less
than twenty-five percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a
partnership, the application shall show the names and residence addresses of
each of the members, including limited partners;
   (3)   A detailed description of the proposed entertainment, including type
of entertainment, number of persons engaged in the entertainment, and any
further information as the city may deem necessary;
   (4)   Days and hours during which the entertainment is proposed to be
conducted;
   (5)   The name or names of the person or persons having the management or
supervision of applicant's business and of any entertainment;
   (6)   A statement of the nature and character of applicant's business, if
any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment;
   (7)   Whether or not any person or persons managing or supervising the
applicant's business have been convicted of any crime, the nature of such
offense, date of conviction, and the sentence imposed therefor;
   (8)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity of the person or
persons managing or supervising that applicant's business, as the city may deem
necessary;
   (9)   A nonrefundable administration fee in such amount as may be
established by resolution of the city council;
   (10)   A diagram of the interior premises showing the precise location of
the proposed entertainment and a site plan showing the precise location of the
structure in which the entertainment is proposed to be conducted including all
structures within three hundred feet;
   (11)   A written statement or other evidence satisfactory to the finance
director establishing that the owner of the premises upon which the
entertainment is proposed to be conducted consents to the provision of live
entertainment thereon, as applied for by the applicant; and
   (12)   Evidence satisfactory to the finance director establishing that the
applicant has or will have in effect at all times while the proposed
entertainment is being conducted, commercial general liability insurance
coverage limits as required by the city providing protection to members of the
public while on the permitted premises.
(Ord. 552 § 4, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 (part), 1986).
4.35.050 Investigation and hearing.
After a complete application for an entertainment permit has been filed with
the finance director, he shall cause an investigation of such application to be
made, and if found to comply with the requirements of this chapter, it shall be
forwarded to the permit review board for review. Within forty-five days of
receipt of the application by the city, the permit review board shall provide
its recommendation to the city council, and the finance director shall set the
matter for public hearing and provide written notice to the applicant of the
date and time of such hearing.
(Ord. 552 § 5, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.060 Notice of hearing.
After the finance director has set the application for hearing, he shall cause
notice of the hearing to be given to all property owners within three hundred
feet of the proposed or actual location of the applicant's business. For the
purposes of this section, notice to property owners shall be sufficient if
given to those property owners who appear as such on the last equalized
assessment roll on file with the city. Additionally, the finance director shall
cause a public notice to be posted at the location where the business or
entertainment is to be conducted. All notices provided for in this section
shall be in the form and manner as determined by the finance director. The
applicant shall bear all costs and expenses in mailing, printing, publishing
and posting such notices and shall pay such costs to the city prior to the time
set for public hearing as to his application. Failure to pay such costs by the
applicant shall be grounds to deny his application.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.070 Action at hearing.
At the time and place set for public hearing, the city council shall consider
all facts and evidence relevant to the nature and location of the proposed
entertainment and the ability and qualifications, including but not limited to,
any prior related history, of those who will conduct, manage, or supervise the
proposed entertainment.
(Ord. 552 § 6, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.080 Denial of application.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall grant or deny the
application. The city council shall deny the application if it finds any of the
following:
   (1)   The conduct of the establishment or the granting of the application
would tend to adversely affect the public health, safety, or welfare; or
   (2)   The establishment has been, is being, or would likely be, operated in
an illegal, improper, or disorderly manner; or
   (3)   The applicant, owner, or any other person associated with the
applicant or owner as principal or partner, or in a position or capacity
involving partial or total control over the conduct of the establishment, has,
within the previous ten years been convicted of any offense involving the
presentation, exhibition, or performance of entertainment found by a court to
be obscene, or of any other crime involving fraud or deceit upon any member of
the public, in conjunction with the operation of a similar kind of
establishment or the provision of entertainment; or
   (4)   That granting the application would tend to create or contribute to a
public nuisance; or
   (5)   That the operation of the establishment would tend to interfere with
the peace and quiet of, or would otherwise tend to adversely affect, any
residential neighborhood, business or other lawful use of property. For
purposes of this subsection, the city council may consider the proximity of
other permittees and if another permittee is determined to be located within
one thousand feet of the location of the proposed entertainment, it shall deny
the permit unless it finds that the granting of an additional permit will not
tend to adversely affect any lawful use of property; or
   (6)   That the granting of the application would tend to have a substantial
adverse impact on traffic flow anywhere in the city; or
   (7)   Existing, available parking is or would be insufficient if the
application is granted.
(Ord. 552 § 7, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.090 Conditions imposed on permit.
After the public hearing as to any application, the city council in granting
any permits may also impose such reasonable conditions as to the use or extent
of such permit as it deems appropriate.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.100 Suspension or revocation of permit.
After notice and hearing, the city council may suspend or revoke any permit
granted pursuant to this chapter if the city council finds and determines that
any permittee, his agent or employee, or any person connected or associated
with the permittee as partner, director, officer, general manager or other
person who is exercising managerial authority of, or in behalf of the
permittee, or any entertainer, acting under the authority of such permit:
   (1)   Made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact
in the application for permit, or any report or record required to be filed
pursuant to this chapter; or
   (2)   Violated any provision of this chapter, statute, ordinance, or
regulation related to the permitted activity or is conducting, or has
conducted, the operation of the establishment in such a manner as to constitute
a violation of the La Mirada Municipal Code; or
   (3)   Is convicted of any offense involving the presentation, exhibition, or
performance of entertainment found by a court to be obscene, or of any crime
involving fraud or deceit upon any member of the public, in conjunction with
the operation of the establishment or the permitted activity; or
   (4)   Violated any rules, regulations or conditions adopted by the city
council relating to the permittee's business or permit; or
   (5)   Conducted a permitted business in a manner contrary to the peace,
health, safety and general welfare of the public; or
   (6)   Has otherwise engaged in any activity which would constitute grounds
for denial of a permit under this chapter.
(Ord. 552 § 8, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.110 Time to approve or deny.
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, each deemed complete application
for an entertainment permit shall be finally approved or denied within sixty
days of receipt by the finance director.
(Ord. 552 § 9, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Exh. A (part), 1986).
4.35.120 Term of permit.
Except as provided herein, each permit granted hereunder shall be valid for a
period of four years following the date of approval. Upon expiration, a new
permit is required to be applied for and received in order to continue to
provide entertainment at the authorized location. Each permit is issued to the
applicant business entity. No entertainment permit is transferable. Each
current permit shall terminate and be void immediately upon: (i) a change of
ownership or sale or other transfer of the business entity to which the permit
was issued. A “change of ownership” includes, but is not limited to, sale or
conveyance of more than fifty percent (50%) ownership interest in the business
entity to which the permit was issued; or, (ii) relocation of the business
where the permit authorized entertainment.
(Ord. 732 § 1, 2024; Ord. 552 § 10, 2000; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.35.130 Reserved.
4.35.140 Judicial review.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, any interested party may seek
judicial review of a final city decision regarding the issuance, denial,
suspension or revocation of a permit to conduct an activity protected by the
First Amendment of the United States Constitution in accordance with the terms
and procedures set forth in the California Code of Civil Procedure Section
1094.8.
(Ord. 552 § 11, 2000).
Chapter 4.40
BINGO
Sections:
   
4.40.010   Organizations eligible for city permit to conduct bingo games.
   
4.40.020   Application for permit.
   
4.40.030   Applicant must be qualified.
   
4.40.040   Contents of application.
   
4.40.050   Investigation of applicant.
   
4.40.060   Contents of permit.
   
4.40.070   Summary suspension of permit pending opportunity for hearing--
Misdemeanor to continue after suspension--Revocation.
   
4.40.080   Revocation of permit--Alternative procedure.
   
4.40.090   Appeal of revocation to city council.
   
4.40.100   Definitions.
   
4.40.110   Maximum amount of prize.
   
4.40.120   Profits to be kept in separate fund or account.
   
4.40.130   Financial interest in permittee only.
   
4.40.140   Exclusive operation by permittee.
   
4.40.150   Bingo games open to public.
   
4.40.160   Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
   
4.40.170   Bingo games conducted only at permittee's property.
   
4.40.180   Minors not to participate.
   
4.40.190   Intoxicated persons not to participate.
   
4.40.200   Hours of operation.
   
4.40.205   Special permit for extended operations.
   
4.40.210   Participant must be present.
   
4.40.220   Receipt of profit by a person a misdemeanor under state law.
   
4.40.230   City may enjoin violation.
   
4.40.240   Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
4.40.010 Organizations eligible for city permit to conduct bingo games.
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by
Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 23701l of the
California Revenue and Taxation Code, and mobilehome park associations and
senior citizens organizations, are eligible to apply to the city for a permit
to conduct bingo games in the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 326.5
of the California Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter, provided:
   (1)   The proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes;
   (2)   Such organization or association has owned or leased property within
the city for at least two years prior to the time that the organization or
association files its application for a permit and has used or maintained said
property during the two-year period in the conduct of its affairs; or
   (3)   If such organization or association has not owned or leased property
for at least two years, that the city council finds after review and comment
from city staff that:
      (A)   Such organization or association is otherwise qualified to receive
a permit, and
      (B)   Such organization or association acts in some capacity for or on
behalf of the city.
(Ord. 491 § 8 (part), 1995; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.020 Application for permit.
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such permit to conduct bingo games in
the city shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the
finance director on a form to be provided by the finance director. The issuing
authority shall be in the finance director. The license issued shall be for a
term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and annual fee.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.030 Applicant must be qualified.
No permit shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an
eligible organization under Section
4.40.010 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.040 Contents of application.
   (a)   Application for a permit shall contain the following:
      (1)   The name of the applicant, organization and a statement that
applicant is an eligible organization under Section 4.40.010;
      (2)   The name and signature of at least two officers, including the
presiding officer, of the corporation or community chest and the trustee of any
trust;
      (3)   The particular property within the city, including the street
number owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office
or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on
which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy
capacity of such place;
      (4)   Proposed day of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games;
      (5)   That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict
accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code
and this chapter as they may be amended from time to time and agrees that the
license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city administrator upon
violation of any such provisions.
   (b)   The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of
perjury.
   (c)   A permit fee of fifty dollars shall accompany each application.
   (d)   The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate
of determination of exemption under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, or a letter of good standing from the exemption division of the franchise
tax board of Sacramento, showing exemption under said Section 23701d, or
evidence establishing the existence of a mobile home park association or senior
citizen organization as provided in Section
4.40.010.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.050 Investigation of applicant.
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the finance director
shall refer the same to interested departments of the city, including but not
limited to, the city manager, city attorney, sheriff's department, planning
department and the fire department for investigation as to whether or not all
the statements in the application are true and whether or not the property of
the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on
which bingo games may lawfully be conducted, as to fire, occupancy and other
applicable restrictions.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.060 Contents of permit.
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under the law to
conduct bingo games in the city, the finance director shall issue a permit to
said applicant, which shall contain the following information:
   (1)   The name and nature of the organization to whom the permit is issued;
   (2)   The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;
   (3)   The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be
conducted;
   (4)   The date of the expiration of such permit;
   (5)   The day of the week and the hours when the bingo game will be
conducted;
   (6)   Such other information including conditions as may be necessary or
desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.070 Summary suspension of permit pending opportunity for hearing--
Misdemeanor to continue after suspension--Revocation.
   (a)   Whenever it appears to the sheriff's department that the permittee is
conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
the sheriff's department shall have the authority to summarily suspend the
permit and order the permittee to immediately cease and desist any further
operation of any bingo game.
   (b)   Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary
suspension thereof under subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not
exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a
period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (c)   The order issued under subsection (a) of this section shall also
notify the permittee that it shall have five days from the date of such order
to request a hearing before the city manager to determine whether such permit
shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city
manager within said five-day period, shall result in a revocation of the
permit.
   (d)   Upon such request by the permittee whose permit has been suspended
under subsection (a) of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such
permit shall be revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten
days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended permittee may
appear before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the
permit should not be revoked. No permit shall be revoked under this section
unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given
at least ten days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States
mail a notice directed to such suspended permittee at the address given in the
application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the
basis of the suspension and revocation.
   (e)   Any organization whose permit is revoked under this section shall not
conduct any bingo game in the city until such time as the city council, on
appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.080 Revocation of permit--Alternative procedure.
   (a)    Whenever it appears to the finance director that the permittee is
conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter,
or that the permit was obtained by fraudulent representation, or that the
manner in which the bingo games are being operated violates any provision of
state law, or interferes with the use and enjoyment of adjacent nearby
properties, the permit may be revoked; provided, however, the permittee may
appear before the city manager at a time fixed by the city manager for the
purpose of presenting evidence why the permit should not be revoked. No permit
shall be revoked under this section unless written notice shall have first been
given at least ten days prior to the hearing thereof by depositing in the
United States mail a notice directed to said permittee at the address given in
the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground(s) advanced
as the basis of the revocation; provided further, that the city manager may
attach conditions to the permit as will make the conduct of bingo games
compatible with the use of the adjacent and nearby properties.
   (b)   Any organization whose permit is revoked under this section shall not
conduct any bingo game in the city unless and until the city council, on
appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the city manager.
(Ord. 491 § 8 (part), 1995; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.090 Appeal of revocation to city council.
   (a)   Any holder of a permit whose permit is revoked or conditioned under
this chapter shall have the right, within ten days after receiving notice in
writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the city council. Such
appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The
city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within sixty days after its
receipt by the city, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the
appellant to be given at least ten days written notice of such hearing. At the
hearing the appellant or its authorized representative shall have the right to
present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his
appeal. The determination of the city council on the appeal shall be final.
   (b)   Any organization whose permit is finally revoked may not again apply
for a permit to conduct bingo games in the city for a period of one year from
the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is
cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701d of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a permit upon proof of
reinstatement of such exemption.
   (c)   The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of
two hundred dollars.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.100 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   (1)   "Bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the
basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or
symbols selected at random;
   (2)   "Bingo game" means any one game occurring as a portion of all bingo
activities during a given day during which bingo is permitted to be conducted
by a given organization pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.110 Maximum amount of prize.
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall
not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each
separate game which is held.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.120 Profits to be kept in separate fund or account.
All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or
account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. The
permittee shall keep full and accurate record of the income and expenses
received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct promotion,
supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this
chapter. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right
to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and permittee shall
fully cooperate with the city by making such record available.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.130 Financial interest in permittee only.
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the
permittee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.140 Exclusive operation by permittee.
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the permittee
organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any
bingo game. Only the permittee shall operate such game or participate in the
promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.150 Bingo games open to public.
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the
permittee organization.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.160 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any
bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such
game is conducted as determined by the fire department and building department
of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Permittee shall
not reserve seats or space for any person.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.170 Bingo games conducted only on permittee's property.
A permittee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it,
and which property is used by such organization for an office for performance
of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The permit issued
under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games
only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In
the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place
for performance of the purposes for which the permittee is organized, the
permit shall have no further force or effect. A new permit may be obtained by
an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again
owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the
purposes for which the organization is organized.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.180 Minors not to participate.
No person under the age of eighteen years of age shall be allowed to
participate in any bingo game.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.190 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
No person who is obviously intoxicated or who has alcoholic beverages in his
possession shall be allowed to participate in or be present in any room where a
bingo game is being conducted.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.200 Hours of operation.
No permittee shall conduct any bingo activities permitted by this chapter more
than twice during any continuous seven-day period, nor for more than a total of
four hours during any such continuous seven-day period, nor shall a bingo game,
or any portion or portions thereof, be conducted prior to twelve noon or after
twelve midnight of any day. Under special circumstances, the city council may
approve an extension of operations as provided in Section
4.40.205.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.205 Special permit for extended operations.
   (a)    Should any organization desire to conduct a bingo game for such a
period that changes or extends the permitted hours of operation as set forth in
Section
4.40.200 during any week because of unusual and/or nonrecurring circumstances,
the city council may approve a special permit subject to such conditions as the
city council deems appropriate.
   (b)   Such request for a special permit shall be directed to the city
council in writing and indicate specific reasons for such request.
   (c)   No more than two special permits for any one organization shall be
approved by the city council in any six-month period.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.210 Participant must be present.
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is
physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being
conducted.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.220 Receipt of profit by a person a misdemeanor under state law.
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for
any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized
under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed
ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the
city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.230 City may enjoin violation.
The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a
violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.40.240 Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.45
CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES, SIDESHOWS AND RODEOS
Sections:
   
4.45.010   Permit required.
   
4.45.020   Carnival, circus, sideshow or rodeo defined.
   
4.45.030   Exemptions.
   
4.45.040   Application for permit.
   
4.45.050   Investigation and hearing.
   
4.45.060   Notice of hearing.
   
4.45.070   Action of hearing.
   
4.45.080   Denial of application.
   
4.45.090   Conditions imposed on permit; appeal.
   
4.45.100   Bond required.
   
4.45.110   Fees.
4.45.010 Permit required.
No person shall operate any carnival, circus, sideshow or rodeo without first
obtaining a permit so to do as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.020 Carnival, circus, sideshow or rodeo defined.
"Carnival, circus, sideshow or rodeo" means any place of amusement erected,
maintained or established for recreation, amusement or entertainment where the
public is invited or allowed to assemble and where are exhibited or conducted
any feats of horsemanship, shows, games, contests, rides, mechanical
amusements, fun houses, animal shows, clowns, acrobats, displays, amusement
devices or games, or such other forms of skill or amusement as are commonly
provided for in circuses, carnivals or rodeos.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.030 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any carnival or sideshow
conducted and operated solely by the membership of a bona fide club, church,
society, association or school group, organized or incorporated for benevolent,
charitable, religious, dramatic or educational purposes and proceeds, if any,
arising from such sideshow or carnival are used exclusively for the purposes of
such club, church, society or association.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.040 Application for permit.
All applicants for a carnival, circus, sideshow or rodeo permit must provide
the following information:
   Applicants for a permit shall file a written signed and verified application
with the finance director showing:
   (1)   The name and permanent address of the applicant;
   (2)   Location where the applicant proposes to conduct the carnival, circus,
sideshow or rodeo;
   (3)   The applicant's status, if any, as a nonprofit, charitable, religious
or eleemosynary corporation or association;
   (4)   The purpose for which the applicant is primarily existing and for
which it was organized;
   (5)   The name and addresses of the principal officers or board of directors
of the corporation or association;
   (6)   A detailed description of the proposed carnival, circus, sideshow or
rodeo including type of entertainment or shows, number of persons engaged in
the entertainment, and any other information about the proposed activity as the
finance director may deem necessary;
   (7)   The date, hours and location where the carnival, circus, sideshow or
rodeo is proposed to be conducted and the admission fee, if any, to be charged;
   (8)   A statement of the nature and character of applicant's business, if
any, to be carried on in conjunction with such entertainment;
   (9)   Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of
the person or persons having the management or supervision of the carnival,
circus, sideshow or rodeo, as the finance director may deem necessary;
   (10)   The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee of one hundred
twenty-five dollars, together with a public hearing fee of two hundred dollars.
Each such fee shall be nonrefundable.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.050 Investigation and hearing.
After the application for a carnival, sideshow, circus or rodeo permit has been
filed with the finance director, he or she shall cause an investigation to be
made of such application, and after such investigation has been completed he
shall cause the application to be set for hearing before the city council and
shall notify the applicant of the date of such hearing.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.060 Notice of hearing.
After the finance director has set the application for hearing he shall cause
notice of the hearing to be given to all property owners within five hundred
feet of the proposed actual location of the applicant's business. For the
purposes of this section, notice to property owners shall be sufficient if
given to those property owners who appear as such on the last equalized
assessment roll on file with the city. Additionally, the finance director shall
cause a public notice to be posted at the location where the business or
entertainment is to be conducted. All notices provided for in this section
shall be in the form and manner as determined by the finance director. The
applicant shall bear all costs and expenses in mailing, printing, publishing
and posting such notices and shall pay such costs to the city prior to the time
set for public hearing as to his application. Failure to pay such costs by the
applicant shall be grounds to deny his application.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.070 Action of hearing.
At the time and place set for public hearing as to any application, the city
council shall hear and determine all the facts and evidence relevant to the
nature and location and duration of the proposed activity.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.080 Denial of application.
At the conclusion of the hearing before the city council, the city council
shall grant or deny the application. The city council may deny the application
if it shall find and determine any of the following:
   (1)   The conduct of the establishment or the granting of the application
would be contrary to the public health, safety, morals or welfare for any
reason; or
   (2)   That granting the application would create a public nuisance; or
   (3)   That the normal operation of the proposed circus, carnival, sideshow
or rodeo would interfere with the peace and quiet of any surrounding
residential neighborhood;
   (4)   The applicant does not have the required qualifications as defined in
Section
4.45.040.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.090 Conditions imposed on permit; appeal.
   (a)   After the public hearing as to any application, the city council in
granting any permit may also impose such reasonable conditions as to the use,
extent or duration of such permit as it deems appropriate.
   (b)   The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.100 Bond required.
Prior to the issuance of any permit as provided for in this chapter, each
applicant shall post a cash bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars with the
city. The condition of the cash bond shall be that the applicant shall well and
faithfully comply with all the provisions of this chapter, the laws of the
state, and of the city ordinances and each and every condition and regulation
of the city which might be imposed as to the permit granted to the applicant.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.45.110 Fees.
The payment of the fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any
and all business license fees as required by this code.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.50
FRANCHISES
Sections:
I. CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
   
4.50.010   Title.
   
4.50.020   Purpose and intent.
   
4.50.030   Defined terms and phrases.
   
4.50.040   Authority and findings.
   
4.50.050   Franchise terms and conditions.
   
4.50.060   Franchise applications and renewal.
   
4.50.070   Contents of cable television franchise agreements.
   
4.50.080   Consumer protection and service standards.
   
4.50.085   Special provisions applicable to holders of state video franchises.
   
4.50.090   Applicability.
   
4.50.100   Application required.
   
4.50.110   Review of the application.
   
4.50.120   Agreement required.
   
4.50.130   Other multichannel video programming distributors.
   
4.50.140   Video providers-Registration--Customer service standards.
   
4.50.150   Telecommunications service provided by telephone corporations.
   
4.50.160   Findings--Policies and procedures.
   
4.50.170   Defined terms and phrases.
   
4.50.180   Violations--Enforcement.
   
4.50.190   Severability.
II. SOUTHWEST SUBURBAN WATER
   
4.50.240   Definitions.
   
4.50.250   Franchise granted.
   
4.50.260   Term.
   
4.50.270   Payment to city.
   
4.50.280   Filing of statement of gross receipts.
   
4.50.290   Exclusive right of grantee.
   
4.50.300   Filing of written acceptance.
   
4.50.310   Rights of eminent domain reserved to city.
   
4.50.320   Right to improve streets reserved to city.
   
4.50.330   Conditions of franchise.
   
4.50.340   Forfeiture of franchise upon noncompliance.
   
4.50.350   Payment of publication and posting expenses by grantee.
I. CABLE, VIDEO, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
4.50.010 Title.
This Part I is known and may be cited as the "Cable, Video, and
Telecommunications Service Providers Ordinance" of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.020 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The city council finds and determines as follows:
      (1)   The development of cable, video and telecommunications services and
systems may provide significant benefits for, and have substantial impacts
upon, the residents of the city.
      (2)   Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated
with cable, video and telecommunications services and systems, the public
convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by establishing
regulatory powers to be exercised by the city.
      (3)   This Part I adopts provisions that authorize the city to regulate
cable, video and telecommunications service providers to the extent authorized
by federal and state law, including but not limited to the Federal Cable
Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Federal Cable Television Consumer
Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Federal Telecommunications Act of
1996, applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and
applicable California statutes and regulations.
      (4)   The cable, video and telecommunications services that are addressed
in this ordinance include services provided by cable television systems, open
video systems, master antenna television systems, satellite master antenna
television systems, direct broadcast satellite systems, multichannel multipoint
distribution systems, local multipoint distribution systems, and other
providers of video programming, whatever their technology as well as voice and
data services provided by telephone corporations.
   (b)   The purpose and intent of this Part I is to provide for the attainment
of the following objectives:
      (1)   To enable the city to discharge its public trust in a manner
consistent with rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies,
industry competition, and technological development;
      (2)   To authorize and to manage reasonable access to the city's public
rights-of-way and public property for cable, video and telecommunications
purposes on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis;
      (3)   To obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the city and its
residents for authorizing the private use of the public rights-of-way and
public property;
      (4)   To promote competition in cable, video and telecommunications
services, minimize unnecessary local regulation of cable, video and
telecommunications service providers, and encourage the delivery of advanced
and competitive cable, video and telecommunications services on the broadest
possible basis to local government and to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the city;
      (5)   To establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for
the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable, video
and telecommunications service providers;
      (6)   To encourage the deployment of advanced cable, video and
telecommunications infrastructure that satisfies local needs, delivers enhanced
government services and provides informed consumer choices in an evolving
cable, video and telecommunications marketplace.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.030 Defined terms and phrases.
Various terms and phrases used in this Part I are defined below in Section
4.50.170.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
ARTICLE 2. CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEMS
4.50.040 Authority and findings.
   (a)   In accordance with applicable federal and state law, the city is
authorized to grant one or more non-exclusive franchises to construct,
reconstruct, operate and maintain cable television systems within the city
limits.
   (b)   The city council finds that the development of cable television and
related telecommunications services may provide significant benefits for, and
substantial impacts upon, the residents of the city. Because of the complex and
rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the city council
further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best
be served by establishing regulatory powers to be exercised by the city. This
Article 2 is intended to specify the means for providing to the public the best
possible cable television and related telecommunications services, and every
franchise issued in accordance with this Article 2 is intended to achieve this
primary objective. It is the further intent of this Article 2 to adopt
regulatory provisions that will enable the city to regulate cable television
and related telecommunications services to the maximum extent authorized by
federal and state law.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.050 Franchise terms and conditions.
   (a)   Franchise Purposes. A franchise granted by the city under the
provisions of this Article 2 may authorize the grantee to do the following:
      (1)   To engage in the business of providing cable service and such other
telecommunications services as may be authorized by law and which grantee
elects to provide to its subscribers within the designated franchise service
area;
      (2)   To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct,
replace, maintain, and retain, cable lines, related electronic equipment,
supporting structures, appurtenances and other property in connection with the
operation of the cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and across
streets or other public places within the designated franchise service area;
      (3)   To maintain and operate the franchise properties for the
origination, reception, transmission, amplification and distribution of
television and radio signals, and for the delivery of cable services and such
other services as may be authorized by law.
   (b)   Franchise Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct,
install, or operate a cable television system within any street or public way
in the city without first obtaining a franchise under the provisions of this
Article 2
   (c)   Term of the Franchise.
      (1)   A franchise granted under this Article 2 will be for the term
specified in the franchise agreement, commencing upon the effective date of the
ordinance or resolution adopted by the city council that authorizes the
franchise.
      (2)   A franchise granted under this Article 2 may be renewed upon
application by the grantee in accordance with the then-applicable provisions of
state and federal law and this Article 2.
   (d)   Franchise Territory. A franchise is effective within the territorial
limits of the city, and within any area added to the city during the term of
the franchise, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution
granting the franchise or in the franchise agreement.
   (e)   Federal or State Jurisdiction. This Article 2 will be construed in a
manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, and it applies to
all franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this Part I, to
the extent authorized by applicable law.
   (f)   Franchise Non-Transferable.
      (1)   Grantee may not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet, or dispose
of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary
sale, contract, consolidation, or otherwise, the franchise or any of the rights
or privileges therein granted, without the prior written consent of the city
council and then only upon such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by
the city council, which consent may not be unreasonably denied or delayed.
      (2)   The requirements of subsection (f)(1) apply to any change in
control of grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to the
ownership of major stockholder or partnership interests, but includes actual
working control in whatever manner exercised. If grantee is a partnership or a
corporation prior authorization of the city council is required where ownership
or control of twenty five percent or more of the partnership interests or of
the voting stock of grantee, or any company in the tier of companies
controlling the grantee, whether directly or indirectly, is acquired by a
person or a group of persons acting in concert, none of whom, singularly or
collectively owns or controls those partnership interests or that voting stock
of the grantee, or grantee's upper tier of controlling companies, as of the
effective date of the franchise.
      (3)   Grantee must notify the city in writing of any foreclosure or
judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the grantee's franchise property,
or upon the termination of any lease or other interest covering all or a
substantial part of that franchise property. That notification will be
considered by the city as notice that a change in control of ownership of the
franchise has taken place, and the provisions of this paragraph that require
the prior written consent of the city council to that change in control of
ownership will apply.
      (4)   For the purpose of determining whether it will consent to an
acquisition, transfer, or change in control, the city may inquire as to the
qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party, and grantee
must assist the city in that inquiry. In seeking the city's consent to any
change of ownership or control, grantee or the proposed transferee, or both,
must complete Federal Communications Commission Form 394 or its equivalent.
This application must be submitted to the city not less than one hundred twenty
days prior to the proposed date of transfer. The transferee must establish that
it possesses the legal, financial, and technical capability to operate and
maintain the cable system and to comply with all franchise requirements during
the remaining term of the franchise. If the legal, financial, and technical
qualifications of the proposed transferee are determined to be satisfactory,
then the city will consent to the transfer of the franchise.
      (5)   Any financial institution holding a pledge of the grantee's assets
to secure the advance of money for the construction or operation of the
franchise property has the right to notify the city that it, or a designee
satisfactory to the city, will take control of and operate the cable television
system upon grantee's default in its financial obligations. Further, that
financial institution must also submit a plan for such operation within ninety
days after assuming control. The plan must insure continued service and
compliance with all franchise requirements during the period that the financial
institution will exercise control over the system. The financial institution
may not exercise control over the system for a period exceeding eighteen months
unless authorized by the city, in its sole discretion, and during that period
of time it will have the right to petition the city to transfer the franchise
to another grantee.
      (6)   Grantee must reimburse the city for the city's reasonable review
and processing expenses incurred in connection with any transfer or change in
control of the franchise. These expenses may include, without limitation, costs
of administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the
proposed transferee, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all
costs incurred by these experts), notice and publication costs, and document
preparation expenses. The total amount of these reimbursable expenses may be
subject to maximum limits that are specified in the franchise agreement between
the city and the grantee. No reimbursement may be offset against any franchise
fee payable to the city during the term of the franchise.
   (g)   Geographical Coverage.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, grantee must
design, construct, and maintain the cable television system to have the
capability to pass every dwelling unit and commercial building in the franchise
service area, subject to any service-area line extension requirements or
territorial restrictions set forth in the franchise agreement.
      (2)   After service has been established within all or any part of the
franchise service area by activating trunk or distribution cables, grantee must
provide service to any requesting subscriber within that activated part of the
service area within seven days from the date of request, provided that the
grantee is able to secure on reasonable terms and conditions all rights-of-way
necessary to extend service to that subscriber within that seven-day period.
   (h)   Non-exclusive Franchise. Every franchise granted is non-exclusive. The
city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional
franchises for a cable television system that it deems appropriate, subject to
applicable state and federal law. If an additional franchise proposed to be
granted to a subsequent grantee, a noticed public hearing must first be held if
required by the provisions of Government Code § 53066.3.
   (i)   Multiple Franchises.
      (1)   The city may grant any number of franchises, subject to applicable
state and federal law. The city may limit the number of franchises granted,
based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of applicable law
and the following specific local considerations:
         (A)   The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple
cables in addition to the cables, conduits, and pipes of the existing utility
systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, and sewerage;
         (B)   The benefits that may accrue to subscribers as a result of cable
system competition, such as lower rates and improved service;
         (C)   The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents' property, and the
disruption arising from numerous excavations within the public rights-of-way.
      (2)   The city may require that any new grantee be responsible for its
own underground trenching and the associated costs if, in the city's opinion,
the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot reasonably accommodate
additional cables.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.060 Franchise applications and renewal.
   (a)   Filing of Applications. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a
cable television system must file an application with the city. A reasonable
non-refundable application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution
of the city council must accompany the application. That application fee
deposit will cover all anticipated costs associated with reviewing and
processing the application, including without limitation costs of
administrative review, financial, legal, and technical evaluation of the
applicant, consultants (including technical and legal experts and all costs
incurred by those experts), notice and publication requirements, and document
preparation expenses. If actual costs exceed the application fee deposit, the
applicant must pay the difference to the city within thirty days following
receipt of an itemized statement of those costs.
   (b)   Applications - Contents. An application for an initial franchise for a
cable television system must contain, as applicable:
      (1)   A statement describing the proposed franchise service area;
      (2)   A resume of the applicant's prior history, including the experience
and expertise of the applicant in the cable television industry;
      (3)   A list of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by each
stockholder, if a closely-held corporation. If the applicant is a publicly-
owned partnership or corporation, each owner of 10 percent or more of the
partnership interests, or of the issued and outstanding capital stock, must be
identified. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the following
information must be provided: the address of its principal executive office;
the name and business or residence address of each member and of each holder of
an economic interest in the limited liability company, together with the
contribution and the share in profits and losses of each member and holder of
an economic interest; the name and business or residence address of any manager
or managers and the chief executive officer, if any, appointed or elected in
accordance with the articles of organization or operating agreement;
      (4)   A list of officers, directors, and managing employees of the
applicant, together with a description of the background of each such person;
      (5)   The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the
applicant, or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in
whole or in part, or that is owned or controlled in whole or in part by the
applicant;
      (6)   A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a
certified public accountant or otherwise certified to be true, complete, and
correct;
      (7)   The proposed construction and service schedule, the proposed rate
structure for cable services, and the proposed commitment to provide public,
educational, and governmental access capacity, services, facilities and
equipment;
      (8)   Any additional information that the city deems to be reasonably
necessary.
   (c)   Consideration of Initial Applications.
      (1)   Upon receipt of an application for an initial franchise, the city
manager or the city managers designee must prepare a report and make
recommendations to the city council concerning that application.
      (2)   A public hearing will be noticed prior to any initial franchise
grant, at a time and date approved by the city council. Within thirty days
after the close of the hearing, the city council will make a decision, based
upon the documents and testimony received at the hearing, as to whether the
franchise should be granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The
city council may grant one or more franchises, or may decline to grant any
franchise.
   (d)   Franchise Renewal. Franchise renewals will be processed in accordance
with then applicable law and with the renewal terms, if any, of the franchise
agreement. The city and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal
negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise. A non-refundable
renewal application fee deposit in an amount established by resolution of the
city council must accompany the renewal application or the renewal request.
That renewal application fee deposit will cover all anticipated costs
associated with reviewing and processing the renewal application including the
review of grantee's prior compliance with the franchise, the ascertainment of
the community's cable-related needs and interests, the engagement of technical
and legal consultants, and expenses related to negotiations and document
preparation. If actual costs exceed the renewal application fee deposit, the
grantee must pay the difference to the city within 30 days following receipt of
an itemized statement of those costs.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.070 Contents of cable television franchise agreements.
   (a)   The provisions of a franchise agreement for the operation of a cable
television system may relate to or include, without limitation, the following
subject matters:
      (1)   The nature, scope, geographical area and duration of the franchise;
      (2)   The applicable franchise fee to be paid to the city, including the
percentage amount, the method of computation and the time for payment;
      (3)   Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of
state and federal laws and regulations pertaining to the operation of the cable
television system;
      (4)   Requirements relating to the construction, upgrade, or rebuild of
the cable television systems as well as the provision of special services, such
as outlets for public buildings, emergency alert capability and parental
control devices;
      (5)   Requirements relating to the maintenance of a performance bond, a
security fund, a letter of credit, or similar assurances to secure the
performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise agreement;
      (6)   Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance,
workers' compensation insurance and indemnification;
      (7)   Requirements relating to consumer protection and customer service
standards, which requirements may include, without limitation, those set forth
in Section
4.50.080 of this Article 2;
      (8)   Requirements relating to the grantee's support of local cable
usage, including the provision of public, educational, and governmental access
channels, the coverage of public meetings and special events and financial
support for the required access channels;
      (9)   Requirements relating to construction, operation and maintenance of
the cable television system within the public rights-of-way, including
compliance with all applicable building codes and permit requirements of the
city, the abandonment, removal, or relocation of facilities and compliance with
FCC technical standards;
      (10)   Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures,
reporting, periodic audits and performance reviews, the inspection of grantee's
books and records, and reimbursement for technical audits and franchise fee
audits under specified circumstances;
      (11)   Acts or omissions constituting material breaches of or defaults
under the franchise agreement, and the applicable penalties or remedies for
such breaches or defaults, including fines, penalties, liquidated damages,
suspension, revocation, and termination;
      (12)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or other transfer
or change in control of the franchise;
      (13)   The grantee's obligation to maintain continuity of service and to
authorize, under certain specified circumstances, the city's operation and
management of the cable system;
      (14)   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies, and procedures
as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and
that will, in the judgment of city staff and the city council, best serve the
public interest and protect the public health, welfare, and safety.
   (b)   If there is any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of a
franchise agreement authorized by the city council and provisions of this
Article 2, the provisions of the franchise agreement will control.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.080 Consumer protection and service standards.
   (a)    General Standards. A grantee must meet or exceed all applicable
consumer protection and service standards that are customary in the cable
television industry and that are recommended or required by the following:
      (1)   Federal statutes, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the
Federal Communications Commission, including the following:
         (A)   The provisions of Section 76.309(c) of Title 47 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as it now exists or may later be amended;
         (B)   The provisions of Section 76.630 of Title 47 of the Code of
Federal Regulations, as it flow exists or may later be amended;
         (C)   The provisions of Section 551 of Title 47, United States Code,
as it now exists or may later be amended.
      (2)   The provisions of California Government Code Sections 53054, et
seq., entitled the "Cable Television and Video Provider Customer Service and
Information Act;"
      (3)   The provisions of California Government Code Section 53088, et
seq., entitled the "Video Customer Service Act;"
      (4)   The provisions of California Civil Code Section 1722(b)(1) - (6)
relating to service or repair transactions between cable television companies
and their subscribers.
   (b)   Franchise Agreement. Unless preempted by paramount federal law, the
consumer protection and service standards referenced above in paragraph (a)
that are the most stringent, and that afford the greatest degree of protection
to consumers, will be specified in the cable television franchise agreement and
will apply, without limitation, to all video, voice, and data services that are
provided by the grantee to its subscribers within the franchise service area.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.085 Special provisions applicable to holders of state video franchises.
   (a) Fee for Support of Local Cable Usage. A fee paid to the city is hereby
established for the support of public, educational, and governmental access
facilities and activities within the local franchise service area. Unless a
higher percentage is authorized by applicable state or federal law, this fee
shall be one percent of a state video holder's gross revenue, as defined in
California Public Utilities Code Section 5860.
   (b)   Franchise Fee. A state video franchise holder operating in the city
shall pay to the city a franchise fee that is equal to five percent of the
gross revenues of that state video franchise holder. The term "gross revenues"
shall be defined as set forth in Public Utilities Code Section 5860.
   (c)   Audit Authority. Not more than once annually, the city may examine and
perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise
to ensure compliance with all applicable statutes and regulations related to
the computation and payment of franchise fees.
   (d)   Customer Service Penalties under State Video Franchises.
      (1)   The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all
applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards
pertaining to the provision of video service.
      (2)   The city shall monitor a state video franchise holder's compliance
with state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city will
provide to the state video franchise holder written notice of any material
breaches of applicable customer service and protection standards, and will
allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from receipt of the notice
to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within
this thirty-day time period will be subject to the following monetary penalties
to be imposed by the city in accordance with state law:
         (A)   For the first occurrence of a violation, a monetary penalty of
five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in
effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.
         (B)   For a second violation of the same nature within twelve months,
a monetary penalty of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the
violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each
violation.
         (C)   For a third or further violation of the same nature within
twelve months, a monetary penalty of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be
imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven
thousand five hundred dollars for each violation.
      (3)   A state video franchise holder may appeal a monetary penalty within
sixty days after it is assessed by the city. After relevant evidence and
testimony is received, and staff reports are submitted, the city council will
vote to either uphold or vacate the monetary penalty. The city council's
decision on the imposition of a monetary penalty shall be final.
   (e)   City Response to State Video Franchise Applications.
      (1)   Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the
city must concurrently provide to the city complete copies of any application
or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities
Commission. One complete copy must be provided to the city manager.
      (2)   The city will provide any appropriate comments to the California
Public Utilities Commission regarding an application or an amendment to an
application for a state video franchise.
   (f)   PEG Channel Capacity. A state video franchise holder that uses the
public rights-of-way shall designate sufficient capacity on its network to
enable the carriage of at least three public, educational, or governmental
(PEG) access channels.
      (1)   PEG access channels shall be for the exclusive use of the city or
its designees to provide public, educational, or governmental programming.
      (2)   Advertising, underwriting, or sponsorship recognition may be
carried on the PEG access channels for the purpose of funding PEG-related
activities.
      (3)   The PEG access channels shall be carried on the basic service tier.
      (4)   To the extent feasible, the PEG access channels shall not be
separated numerically from other channels carried on the basic service tier,
and the channel numbers for the PEG access channels shall be the same channel
numbers used by the incumbent cable operator unless prohibited by federal law.
      (5)   After the initial designation of PEG access channel numbers, the
channel numbers shall not be changed without the prior written consent of the
city, unless the change is required by federal law.
      (6)   Each PEG access channel shall be capable of carrying a National
Television System Committee (NTSC) television signal.
   (g)   Interconnection. Where technically feasible, a state video franchise
holder and incumbent cable operator shall negotiate in good faith to
interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG access channel
programming. Interconnection may be accomplished by direct cable, microwave
link, satellite, or other reasonable method of connection. State video
franchise holders and incumbent cable operators shall provide interconnection
of the PEG access channels on reasonable terms and conditions and may not
withhold the interconnection. If a state video franchise holder and an
incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection
agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the state
video franchise holder to interconnect its network with the incumbent's network
at a technically feasible point on the holder's network as identified by the
holder. If no technically-feasible point for interconnection is available, the
state video franchise holder shall make an interconnection available to the
channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the
interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state
video franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed
to by the parties.
   (h)   Emergency Alert System and Emergency Overrides. A state video
franchise holder must comply with the emergency alert system requirements of
the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be
distributed over the holder's network. Provisions in city-issued franchises
authorizing the city to provide local emergency notifications shall remain in
effect, and shall apply to all state video franchise holders in the city for
the duration of the city-issued franchise, or until the term of the franchise
would have expired had it not been terminated pursuant to subdivision (m) of
Section 5840 of the California Public Utilities Code, or until January 1, 2009,
whichever is later.
   (i)   Encroachment Permit Applications and Appeal Procedures.
      (1)   As used in this paragraph (i), the term "encroachment permit" means
any permit issued by the city relating to construction or operation of
facilities in public rights-of-way by the holder of a state video franchise.
      (2)   The city shall either approve or deny an application from a holder
of a state video franchise for an encroachment permit within sixty days of
receiving a completed application.
      (3)   If the city denies an application for an encroachment permit, the
city shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of the denial, furnish to
the applicant written notice of the reason for the denial. An applicant may
appeal the city's denial of an encroachment permit application to the city
council in accordance with the following procedures:
         (A)   No notice of appeal will be processed unless filed within ten
days after service of written notice of the decision from which the appeal is
taken; provided that if written notice of the decision has not been served, the
appellant may, within ten days after being apprised of that decision, demand
service of written notice and will have ten days following that service in
which to file the notice of appeal.
         (B)   The notice of appeal must specify the specific decision from
which the appeal is taken, the specific grounds for the appeal, and the relief
or action requested from the city council.
         (C)   The notice of appeal must be accompanied by such fee as may have
been established by resolution of the city council.
         (D)   Upon the timely filing of a notice of appeal in proper form, the
city clerk will schedule the matter for hearing by the city council at a
regular meeting, but not later than forty-five days after receipt of the notice
of appeal. The city clerk will cause the notice of hearing to be given to the
appellant not less than ten days prior to the hearing, unless that notice is
waived in writing by the appellant. The city clerk will also cause a copy of
the notice of appeal and the hearing to be transmitted to the city official or
body whose decision is being appealed.
         (E)   At the time of consideration of the appeal by the city council,
the appellant will be limited to a presentation on the specific grounds of
appeal and related matters set forth in its notice of appeal. The appellant
will have the burden of persuading the city council that the decision appealed
from should be reversed or modified.
         (F)   The city council may continue the hearing on the appeal from
time to time as may be deemed necessary. The city council may, by resolution,
affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the decision appealed from and
may take any action that might have been taken in the first instance by the
city official or body from whose decision the appeal has been taken.
         (G)   The decision of the city council will be deemed final and
conclusive upon adoption of the resolution. A copy of the resolution adopted by
the city council will be served upon the appellant by placement in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant's last known address.
(Ord. 704 § 1, 2017; Ord. 617 § 1, 2008).
ARTICLE 3. OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS
4.50.090 Applicability.
The provisions of this Article 3 apply to an open video system operator, as
defined below in Section
4.50.170, that intends to deliver video programming to consumers in the city
over an open video system.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.100 Application required.
   (a)   Before commencing the delivery of video programming services to
consumers in the city over an open video system, the open video system operator
must file an application with the city. That application must include or be
accompanied by the following, as applicable:
      (1)   The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the
applicant;
      (2)   Copies of FCC Form 1275, all "Notices of Intent" filed under 47 CFR
76.1 503(b)(1), and the Order of the FCC, all of which relate to certification
of the applicant to operate an open video system in the city in accordance with
Section 653 (a)(1) of the Communications Act and the FCC's facilities;
      (3)   The area or areas of the city that the applicant desires to serve;
      (4)   A description of the open video system services that will be
offered by the applicant over its existing or proposed facilities;
      (5)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
applicant to deliver the open video system services;
      (6)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience, and expertise regarding the ownership and
operation of the open video system described in the application;
      (7)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles that demonstrate the applicant's financial ability to:
         (A)   Construct, operate, maintain and remove any new physical plant
that is proposed to be constructed in the city;
         (B)   Comply with the city's public, educational, and governmental
access requirements as specified below in Section
4.50.120(b)(4);
         (C)   Comply with the city's requirement that gross revenue fees be
paid in the maximum amount authorized under federal law, as specified below in
Section
4.50.120(b)(2).
      (8)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the city that the applicant intends to use, to
purchase, or to lease;
      (9)   If the applicant's operation of the open video system will require
the construction of new physical plant and facilities in the city, the
following additional information must be provided:
         (A)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates;
         (B)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications, and a network map
of any new facilities to be constructed in the city, in sufficient detail to
identify:
            (i)   The location and route requested for the applicant's proposed
facilities;
            (ii)   The locations, if any, for interconnection with the
facilities of other telecommunications service providers;
            (iii)   The specific structures, improvements, facilities, and
obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to add, remove, or relocate
on a temporary or permanent basis.
         (C)   The applicant's statement that, in constructing any new physical
plant, the applicant will comply with all applicable ordinances, rules, and
regulations of the city, including the payment of all required permit and
processing fees.
      (10)   The information and documentation that is required to be submitted
to the city by a video provider, as specified below in paragraph (b) of Section
4.50.140;
      (11)   Such additional information as may be requested by the city
manager;
      (12)   A non-refundable filing fee in an amount established by resolution
of the city council.
   (b)   If any item of information specified above in paragraph (a) is
determined under paramount federal or state law to be unlawful, the city
manager is authorized to waive the requirement that such information be
included in the application.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.110 Review of the application.
Within thirty days after receipt of an application filed under Section
4.50.100 that is deemed to be complete, the city manager will give written
notice to the applicant of the city's intent to negotiate an agreement setting
forth the terms and conditions under which the operation of the proposed open
video system will be authorized by the city. The commencement of those
negotiations will be on a date that is mutually acceptable to the city and to
the applicant.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.120 Agreement required.
   (a)   No video programming services may be provided in the city by an open
video system operator unless the operator and the city have executed a written
agreement, which may be designated as a franchise, setting forth the terms and
conditions under which the operation of the proposed open video system will be
authorized by the city.
   (b)   The agreement between the city and the open video system operator may
contain provisions that relate to the following subject matters, to the extent
that such provisions and subject matters are not pre-empted by federal law or
regulations:
      (1)   The nature, scope, and duration of the agreement, including
provisions for its renewal or extension;
      (2)   The obligation of the open video system operator to pay to the
city, at specified times and in lieu of the franchise fees permitted under
Section 622 of the Communications Act, fees on the gross revenue received by
the operator, as authorized by 47 CFR 76.1511, in accordance with the following
standards and procedures:
         (A)   The amount of the fees on the gross revenue will be the maximum
amount authorized by Section 653(c)(2)(B) of the Communications Act, which is
the rate imposed by the city on the existing franchised cable operator.
         (B)   The term "gross revenue" has the meaning set forth in 47 CFR
76.1511, and includes: (1) all gross revenue received by an open video system
operator or its affiliates, including all revenue received from subscribers and
all carriage revenue received from unaffiliated video programming providers;
and (2) all advertising revenue received by the operator or its affiliates in
connection with the provision of video programming, where such revenue is
included in the calculation of the cable franchise fee paid to the city by the
franchised cable operator. The term "gross revenue" does not include revenue,
such as subscriber or advertising revenue, collected by unaffiliated video
programming providers.
      (3)   The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with
requirements relating to information collection and record keeping, accounting
procedures, reporting, periodic audits and inspection of records in order to
ensure the accuracy of the fees on the gross revenue that are required to be
paid as specified above in subsection 2;
      (4)   The obligation of the open video system operator to meet the city's
requirements with respect to public, educational and governmental access
channel capacity, services, facilities, and equipment, as provided for in 47
CFR 76.1505. In this regard, the following standards and procedures are
applicable:
         (A)   The open video system operator is subject to the same public,
educational and governmental access requirements that apply within the cable
television franchise service area with which its system overlaps.
         (B)   The open video system operator must ensure that all subscribers
receive all public, educational, and governmental access channels within the
franchise service area in which the city's subscribers are located.
         (C)   The open video system operator may negotiate with the city to
establish the operator's obligations with respect to public, educational and
governmental access channel capacity services, facilities, and equipment. These
negotiations may include the city's franchised cable operator if the city, the
open video system operator, and the franchised cable operator so desire.
         (D)   If the open video system operator and the city are unable to
reach an agreement regarding the operator's obligations with respect to public,
education and governmental access channel capacity, services, facilities and
equipment within the city's jurisdictions then the following obligations will
be imposed:
            (i)   The open video system operator must satisfy the same public,
educational and governmental access obligations as the city's franchised cable
operator by providing the same amount of channel capacity for public,
educational and governmental access and by matching the city's franchised cable
operator's annual financial contributions in support of public, educational and
governmental access services, facilities and equipment that are actually used
by the city. For in-kind contributions such as cameras or production studios,
the open video system operator may satisfy its statutory obligation by
negotiating mutually agreeable terms with city's franchised cable operators so
that public, educational and governmental access services to the city are
improved or increased. If such terms cannot be agreed upon, the open video
system operator must pay to the city the monetary equivalent of the franchised
cable operator's depreciated in-kind contribution, or, in the case of
facilities, the annual amortization value. Any matching contributions provided
by the open video system operator must be used to fund activities arising under
Section 611 of the Communications Act.
            (ii)   The city will impose upon the open video system operator the
same rules and procedures that it imposes upon the franchised cable operator
with regard to the open video system operator's use of channel capacity
designated for public, educational and governmental access use when that
capacity is not being used for such purposes.
         (E)   The city's franchised cable operator is required under federal
law to permit the open video system operator to connect with its public,
educational and governmental access channel feeds. The open video system
operator and the franchised cable operator may decide how to accomplish this
connection, taking into consideration the physical and technical
characteristics of the cable and the open video systems involved. If the
franchised cable operator and the open video system operator cannot agree on
how to accomplish the connection, the city has the right to decide. The city
may require that the connection occur on city-owned property or on public
rights-of-way.
         (F)   All costs of connection to the franchised cable operator's
public, educational and governmental access channel feed must be borne by the
open video system operator. These costs will be counted towards the open video
system operator's matching financial contributions set forth above in
subparagraph(D)(i).
         (G)   The city will not impose upon the open video system operator any
public, educational, or governmental access obligations that are greater than
those imposed upon the franchised cable operator.
         (H)   If there is no existing franchised cable operator, the
provisions of 47 CFR 76.1606(d)(6) will be applicable in determining the
obligations of the open video system operator.
         (I)   The open video system operator must adjust its system to comply
with new public, educational and access obligations imposed on the city's
franchised cable operator following a renewal of the cable television
franchise; provided, however, that the open video system operator will not be
required-to displace other programmers using its open video system to
accommodate public, educational and governmental access channels. The open
video system operator must comply with such new public, educational and
governmental access obligations whenever additional capacity is or becomes
available, whether it is due to increased channel capacity or to decreased
demand for channel capacity.
      (5)   If the city and the open video system operator cannot agree on the
application of the FCC's rules regarding the open video system operator's
obligations to provide public, educational and governmental access under the
provisions of subsection (4) set forth above, then either party may file a
complaint with the FCC in accordance with the dispute resolution procedures set
forth in 47 CFR 76.1514. No agreement will be executed by the city until the
dispute has been finally resolved;
      (6)   If the open video system operator intends to maintain an
institutional network, as defined in Section 611(f) of the Communications Act,
the city will require that educational and governmental access channels be
designated on that institutional network to the same extent that those channels
are designated on the institutional network of the city's franchised cable
operator;
      (7)   The authority of an open video system operator to exercise
editorial control over any public, educational, or governmental use of channel
capacity will be restricted in accordance with the provisions of 47 CFR 76.1505
(f);
      (8)   The obligation of the open video system operator to comply with all
applicable federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations
relating to customer service standards, including the Cable Television and
Video Customer Service and Information Act (Government Code §§ 53054 et seq.),
the Video Customer Service Act (Government Code §§ 53088 et seq.), and Section
6-2.08 of Article 2 of this Part I;
      (9)   If new physical plant is proposed to be constructed within the
city, the obligation of the open video system operator to comply with the
following rights-of-way use and management responsibilities that are also
imposed by the city upon other cable television and telecommunications service
providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner:
         (A)   Compliance with all applicable city codes, including
applications for excavation, encroachment and construction permits and the
payment of all required permit and inspection fees;
         (B)   The coordination of construction activities;
         (C)   Compliance with established standards and procedures for
constructing lines across private property;
         (D)   Compliance with all applicable insurance and indemnification
requirements;
         (E)   The repair and resurfacing of construction- damaged streets;
         (F)   Compliance with all public safety requirements that are
applicable to cable television and telecommunications service providers using
public property or public rights-of-way.
      (10)   Acts or omissions constituting breaches or defaults of the
agreement, and the applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other
remedies, including fines or the suspension, revocation, or termination of the
agreement;
      (11)   Requirements relating to the sale, assignment, or transfer of the
open video system;
      (12)   Requirements relating to the open video system operator's
compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules and
regulations pertaining to the operation of the open video systems;
      (13)   Such additional requirements, conditions, terms, policies and
procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the city and the open video system
operator and that will, in the judgment of the city council, best serve the
public interest and protect the public health, welfare and safety.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
ARTICLE 4. OTHER VIDEO AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES AND SYSTEMS
4.50.130 Other multichannel video programming distributors.
The term "cable system" as defined in federal law and as set forth in Section
4.50.170 below, does not include a facility that serves subscribers without
using any public rights-of-way. Consequently, the categories of multichannel
video programming identified below are not deemed to be "cable systems" and are
therefore exempt from the city's franchise requirements and from certain other
local regulatory provisions authorized by federal law, provided that their
distribution or transmission facilities do not involve the use of the city's
public rights-of-way:
   (a)   Multichannel multipoint distribution service ("MMDS"), also known as
wireless cable, which typically involves the transmission by an FCC-licensed
operator of numerous broadcast stations from a central location using line-of-
sight technology;
   (b)   Local multipoint distribution service ("LMDS"), another form of over-
the-air wireless video service for which licenses are auctioned by the FCC, and
which offers video programming, telephony and data networking services;
   (c)   Direct broadcast satellite ("DBS"), also referred to as "direct-to-
home satellite services," which involves the distribution or broadcasting of
programming or services by satellite directly to the subscriber's premises
without the use of ground receiving or distribution equipments except at the
subscriber's premises or in the uplink process to the satellite. Local
regulation of direct-to-home satellite services is further proscribed by the
following federal statutory provisions:
      (1)   47 U.S.C. § 303(v) confers upon the FCC exclusive jurisdiction to
regulate the provision of direct-to-home satellite services;
      (2)   Section 602 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 states that a
provider of direct-to-home satellite service is exempt from the collection or
remittance, or both, of any tax or fee imposed by any local taxing jurisdiction
on direct-to-home satellite service. The terms "tax" and "fee" are defined by
federal statute to mean any local sales tax, local use tax, local intangible
tax, local income tax, business license tax, utility tax, privilege tax, gross
receipts tax, excise tax, franchise fees, local telecommunications tax, or any
other tax, license, or fee that is imposed for the privilege of doing business,
regulating, or raising revenue for a local taxing jurisdiction.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.140 Video providers--Registration--Customer service standard.
   (a)   Unless the customer protection and customer service obligations of a
video provider, as that term is defined in Section
4.50.170, are specified in a franchise, license, lease, or similar written
agreement with the city, a video provider must comply with all applicable
provisions of the following state statutes:
      (1)   The Cable Television and Video Customer Service and Information Act
(Government Code §§ 53054 et seq.);
      (2)   The Video Customer Service Act (Government Code §§ 53088 et seq.);
   (b)   All video providers that are operating in the city on the effective
date of this Part I, or that intend to operate in the city after its effective
date, must register with the city; provided, however, that this registration
requirement is not applicable to any video provider that has executed a
franchise, license, lease or similar written agreement with the city. The
registration form must include or be accompanied by the following:
      (1)   The video provider's name, address, and local telephone numbers;
      (2)   The names of the officers of the video provider;
      (3)   A copy of the video provider's written policies and procedures
relating to customer service standards and the handling of customer complaints,
as required by Government Code §§ 53054 et seq. These customer service
standards must include, without limitation, standards regarding the following:
         (A)   Installation, disconnection, service and repair obligations,
employee identification and service call response time and scheduling;
         (B)   Customer telephone and office hours;
         (C)   Procedures for billing, charges, refunds, and credits;
         (D)   Procedures for termination of service;
         (E)   Notice of the deletion of a programming service, the changing of
channel assignments, or an increase in rates;
         (F)   Complaint procedures and procedures for bill dispute resolution;
         (G)   The video provider's written commitment to distribute annually
to the city, and to its employees and customers, a notice describing the
customer service standards specified above in subparagraphs (A) through (F).
This annual notice must include the report of the video provider on its
performance in meeting its customer service standards, as required by
Government Code § 53055.2.
      (4)   Unless a video provider is exempt under federal law from its
payment, a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the city
council to cover the reasonable costs incurred by the city in reviewing and
processing the registration form;
      (5)   In addition to the registration fee specified above in subsection
(4), the written commitment of the video provider to pay to the city, when due,
all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by the city in resolving any
disputes between the video provider and its subscribers, which dispute
resolution is mandated by Government Code § 53088.2(o).
   (c)   The city council may establish by ordinance a schedule of monetary
penalties for the material breach by a video provider of its obligations under
subparagraphs (a) through (n) of Government Code § 53088.2. As used herein, the
term "material breach" means any substantial and repeated failure to comply
with the consumer service standards set forth in Government Code § 53088.2. The
provisions of that ordinance must be consistent with the provisions of
Government Code § 53088.2. The schedule of monetary penalties may also impose a
penalty, as authorized by Government Code § 53056(a), for the failure of a
video provider to distribute the annual notice required by Government Code §
53055.1, which penalty may not exceed $500 for each year in which the notice is
not distributed as required by state statute.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.150 Telecommunications service provided by telephone corporations.
   (a)   The city council finds and determines as follows:
      (1)   The federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 preempts and declares
invalid all state rules that restrict entry or limit competition in both local
and long-distance telephone service.
      (2)   The California Public Utilities Commission ("CPUC") is primarily
responsible for the implementation of local telephone competition, and it
issues certificates of public convenience and necessity to new entrants that
are qualified to provide competitive local telephone exchange services and
related telecommunications service, whether using their own facilities or the
facilities or services provided by other authorized telephone corporations.
      (3)   Section 234(a) of the California Public Utilities Code defines a
"telephone corporation" as every corporation or person owning, controlling,
operating, or managing any telephone line for compensation within this state.
      (4)   Section 616 of the California Public Utilities Code provides that a
telephone corporation may condemn any property necessary for the construction
and maintenance of its telephone line.
      (5)   Section 2902 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes
municipal corporations to retain their powers of control to supervise and
regulate the relationships between a public utility and the general public in
matters affecting the health, convenience and safety of the general public,
including matters such as the use and repair of public streets by any public
utility and the location of the poles, wires, mains, or conduits of any public
utility on, under, or above any public streets.
      (6)   Section 7901 of the California Public Utilities Code authorizes
telephone and telegraph corporations to construct telephone or telegraph lines
along and upon any public road or highway along or across any of the waters or
lands within this state and to erect poles, posts, piers, or abutments for
supporting the insulators, wires, and other necessary fixtures of their lines,
in such manner and at such points as not to incommode the public use of the
road or highway or interrupt the navigation of the waters.
      (7)   Section 7901.1 of the California Public Utilities Code confirms the
right of municipalities to exercise reasonable control as to the time, place,
and manner in which roads, highways, and waterways are accessed, Which control
must be applied to all entities in an equivalent manner. Nothing in Section
7901.1 adds to or subtracts from any existing authority that municipalities
have with respect to the imposition of fees.
      (8)   Section 50030 of the California Government Code provides that any
permit fee imposed by a city for the placement, installation, repair, or
upgrading of telecommunications facilities, such as lines, poles, or antennas,
by a telephone corporation that has obtained all required authorizations from
the CPUC and the FCC to provide telecommunications services, must not exceed
the reasonable costs of providing the service for which the fee is charged, and
must not be levied for general revenue purposes.
   (b)   In recognition of and in compliance with the statutory authorizations
and requirements set forth above in paragraph (a), the following regulatory
provisions are applicable to a telephone corporation that desires to provide
telecommunications service by means of facilities that are proposed to be
constructed within the city's public rights-of-way:
      (1)   The telephone corporation must apply for and obtain, as may be
applicable, an excavation permit, an encroachment permit, or a building permit
("ministerial permit").
      (2)   In addition to the information required by this code in connection
with an application for a ministerial permit, a telephone corporation must
submit to the city the following supplemental information:
         (A)   A copy of the certificate of public convenience and necessity
issued by the CPUC to the applicant, and a copy of the CPUC decision that
authorizes the applicant to provide the telecommunications service for which
the facilities are proposed to be constructed in the city's public rights-of-
way. Any applicant that, prior to 1996, provided telecommunications service
under administratively equivalent documentation issued by the CPUC may submit
copies of that documentation in lieu of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity.
         (B)   If the applicant has obtained from the CPUC a certificate of
public convenience and necessity to operate as a "competitive local carrier,"
the following additional requirements are applicable:
            (i)   As required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC, the
applicant must establish that it has timely filed with the city a quarterly
report that describes the type of construction and the location of each
construction project proposed to be undertaken in the city during the calendar
quarter in which the application is filed, so that the city can coordinate
multiple projects as may be necessary.
            (ii)   If the applicant's proposed construction project will extend
beyond the utility rights-of-way into undisturbed areas or other rights-of-way,
the applicant must establish that it has filed a petition with the CPUC to
amend its certificate of public convenience and necessity and that the proposed
construction project has been subjected to a full-scale environmental analysis
by the CPUC, as required by Decision No. 95-12-057 of the CPUC.
            (iii)   The applicant must inform the city whether its proposed
construction project will be subject to any of the mitigation measures
specified in the Negative Declaration "Competitive Local Carriers (CLCS)
Projects for Local Exchange Communication Service throughout California or to
the Mitigation Monitoring Plan adopted in connection with Decision No. 95-12-
057 of the CPUC. The city's issuance of a ministerial permit will be
conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with all applicable mitigation
measures and monitoring requirements imposed by the CPUC upon telephone
corporations that are designated as "competitive local carriers."
   (c)   The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later
acquire with respect to the regulation of any cable or telecommunications
service that is provided or proposed to be provided by a telephone corporation.
These reserved rights may relate, without limitation, to the imposition of
reasonable conditions in addition to or different from those set forth in this
section, the exaction of a fee or other form of consideration or compensation
for use of public rights-of-way, and related matters provided, however, that
such regulatory rights and authority must be consistent with federal and state
law that is applicable to cable or telecommunications services provided by
telephone corporations.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
ARTICLE 5. USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
4.50.160 Findings--Policies and procedures.
   (a)   The city council finds and determines that numerous and repetitive
excavations in the public rights-of-way diminish the useful life of the surface
pavement and generally cause adverse negative impacts for local residents,
local businesses, and vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The city council
further finds and determines that the utility substructure in the public
rights-of-way is subject to potential adverse negative impacts as a consequence
of new economic and regulatory policies that foster increased competition
between various utility service providers, including telephone corporations,
and between other service providers, such as cable system operators. In order
to mitigate these potential adverse negative impacts, the following policies
are adopted:
      (1)   The city manager is directed to develop and to implement public
rights-of-way policies and procedures that incorporate, to the extent
reasonably feasible and consistent with all applicable laws and regulations,
the following requirements that are intended to encourage the shared use by
utility and other service providers of existing facilities in the public
rights-of-way:
         (A)   A requirement that utility and other service providers
requesting permits review information provided by the city that identifies the
location of facilities, such as underground conduits, that are available for
shared use, and the owners of those facilities;
         (B)   A requirement that utility and other service providers
requesting permits submit a written statement that describes in reasonable
detail the efforts made to obtain from other utility service providers the
right to use excess capacity within existing facilities, and to thereby avoid
the construction of new facilities;
         (C)   A requirement that utility and other service providers occupying
the public rights-of-way submit annually to the city a map, which may be in a
uniform electronic data format to be specified by the city, that shows the
location of their respective facilities in the public rights-of-way.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an updated annual map need not be provided
unless there are changes to the location of the service provider's facilities
in the public rights-of-way;
         (D)   Such additional requirements as will encourage utility and other
service providers to share excess capacity within previously-constructed
facilities and to coordinate the construction of new facilities so as to
minimize the number of excavations in the public rights-of-way.
      (2)   The city manager is directed to ensure that all utility and other
service providers, including telephone corporations and cable system operators,
comply with all local design, construction, maintenance and safety standards
that are consistent with state and federal laws and regulations and that are
contained within, or are related to, any permit that authorizes the
construction of facilities within the public rights-of-way, including all
applicable insurance provisions.
      (3)   Based upon the city's projected plans for street construction or
renovation projects, the city manager is authorized to establish on a quarterly
basis one or more construction time periods or "windows" for the installation
of facilities within the public rights-of-way. Cable system operators,
telephone corporations, and other utility service providers that submit
applications for permits to construct facilities after a predetermined date may
be required to delay such construction until the next quarterly "window" that
is established by the city.
   (b)   The city council finds and determines that the installation in the
public rights-of-way of numerous aboveground facilities by utility service
providers, including telephone corporations, and other service providers may
create safety hazards and adverse visual impacts. Consequently, the Public
Works Department is authorized to impose reasonable conditions in order to
mitigate those potential adverse impacts that may result, whether on an
individual or a cumulative basis, from permitted aboveground facilities. Those
conditions may include or relate to, without limitation, the following:
      (1)   Prior to issuance of the requisite permits, all above-ground
facilities proposed to be installed by a utility or other service provider in
the public rights-of-way must be clearly delineated on the plans when they are
submitted for the city's review;
      (2)   The design and installation by qualified professionals of
landscaping and barriers to minimize public view of above-ground facilities
whose location has been approved by the city;
      (3)   The maintenance of all above-ground facilities in good condition,
including compliance with the city's ordinances regarding graffiti removal. In
this regard, a utility or other service provider may be required to affix to
its above-ground facilities a coded label or marker that identifies the
specific facility and sets forth a telephone number that may be called to
report any damage, destruction, or graffiti vandalism involving that facility;
      (4)   The placement of above-ground facilities, such as overhead drops,
as close as possible to other utility drops, consistent with all applicable
electrical codes;
      (5)   Reasonable limitations upon the number of above- ground facilities
that may be installed within a designated geographical area;
      (6)   Reasonable limitations upon the dimensions or volume, or both, of
above-ground facilities;
      (7)   The specification of colors of above-ground facilities reasonably
requested by the city to ensure that these facilities blend with the
surrounding environment to the maximum extent possible;
      (8)   Such additional conditions regulating the time, place, and manner
of installations of above-ground facilities as will reasonably mitigate
potential safety hazards and adverse visual impacts attributable to these
facilities.
   (c)   The city reserves all rights that it now possesses or may later
acquire to adopt and implement citywide requirements for the under grounding of
above-ground facilities, or any portion thereof, in a competitively neutral and
non-discriminatory manner. To the extent authorized by law, all utility and
other service providers will be required to comply with those requirements at
their sole expense.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
ARTICLE 6. DEFINITIONS
4.50.170 Defined terms and phrases.
   (a)   For the purposes of this Part I, the words, terms, phrases and their
derivations set forth in this Part I have the meanings set forth below. Words
used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular
include the plural number.
      (1)   "Cable service" means the one-way transmission to subscribers of
video programming, or other programming services, and subscriber interaction,
if any, that is required for the selection or use of that video programming or
other programming service. For the purposes of this definition, "video
programming" means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable
to programming provided by, a television broadcast station; and "other
programming service" means information that a cable system operator makes
available to all subscribers generally.
      (2)   "Cable system," or "cable communications system" or "cable
television system," means a facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term "cable system" does not include:
         (A)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (B)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (C)   A facility of a common carrier that is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act, except that such
facility will be considered a cable system (other than for purposes specified
in Section 621(c) of the Communications Act) to the extent such facility is
used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless
the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
         (D)   An open video system that complies with Section 653 of the
Communications Act; or
         (E)   Any facilities of an electric utility that are used solely for
operating its electric utility system.
      (3)   "Cable system operator" means any person or group of persons:
         (A)   Who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable
system; or
         (B)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of that cable system.
      (4)   "City" means the city of La Mirada as represented by its city
council or by any delegate acting within the scope of its delegated authority.
      (5)   "CFR" means the Code of Federal Regulations. Thus, the citation of
"47 CFR 80.1" refers to Title 47, part 80, section 1, of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
      (6)   "Communications Act" means the Communications Act of I 934 (47
U.S.C. §§ 153 et seq.), as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and
the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
      (7)   "FCC" or "Federal Communications Commission" means the federal
administrative agency, or any lawful successor, that is authorized to regulate
telecommunications services and telecommunications service providers on a
national level.
      (8)   "Franchise" means an initial authorization, or the renewal of an
initial authorization, granted by the city council, whether such authorization
is designated as a franchise, agreement, permit, license, resolution, contract,
certificate, or otherwise, that authorizes the construction or operation of a
cable system or an open video system.
      (9)   "Franchise fee" means any fee or assessment of any kind that is
authorized by state or federal law to be imposed by the city on a grantee as
compensation in the nature of rent for the grantee's use of the public rights-
of-way. The term "franchise fee" does not include:
         (A)   Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability (including
any such tax, fee, or assessment imposed on both utilities and grantees or
their services);
         (B)   Capital costs that are required by the franchise to be incurred
by a grantee for public, educational, or governmental access facilities;
         (C)   Costs or charges that are incidental to the award or enforcement
of the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties, or liquidated damages; or
         (D)   Any fee imposed under Title 17, United States Code.
      (10)   "Franchise service area" or "service area" means the entire
geographic area of the city as it is now constituted, or may in the future be
constituted, unless otherwise specified in the ordinance or resolution granting
a franchise, or in a franchise agreement.
      (11)   "Grantee" means any person that is awarded a franchise in
accordance with this chapter, and that person's lawful successor, transferee,
or assignee.
      (12)   "Gross annual cable service revenues" means the annual gross
revenues derived from the grantee's operations of its cable television system
to provide cable services within the city, excluding uncollected bad debt,
refundable deposits, rebates or credits, and further excluding any sales,
excise, or other taxes or charges that are required to be collected for direct
pass-through to the local, state or federal government. Revenues identified and
collected from subscribers as franchise fees may not be excluded from a
grantee's gross annual cable service revenues.
      (13)   "Multichannel video programming distributor" or "video programming
distributor" means a person such as, but not limited to, a cable system
operator, an open video system operator, a multichannel multipoint distribution
service, a direct broadcast satellite service, or a television receive-only
satellite program distributor, who makes available multiple channels of video
programming for purchase by subscribers or customers.
      (14)   "Open video system" means a facility consisting of a set of
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service, including video
programming, and that is provided to multiple subscribers within the city,
provided that the FCC has certified that such system is authorized to operate
in the city and complies with 47 CFR 1500 entitled "Open Video Systems."
      (15)   "Open video system operator" means any person or group of persons
who provides cable service over an open video system and directly or through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that open video system,
or otherwise controls or is responsible for the management and operation of
that open video system.
      (16)   "Person" means an individual, partnership, limited liability
company, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental
entity.
      (17)   "Public, educational or government access facilities" or "PEG
access facilities," means the total of the following:
         (A)   Channel capacity designated for noncommercial public,
educational, or government use; and
         (B)   Facilities and equipment for the use of that channel capacity.
      (18)   "Subscriber" or "customer" or "consumer" means any person who, for
any purpose, subscribes to the services provided by a multichannel video
programming distributor and who pays the charges for those services.
      (19)   "Street" or "public right-of-way" means each of the following that
has been dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority or by
others and is located within the city limits: streets, roadways, highways,
avenues, (lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way, and similar
public property that the city from time to time authorizes to be included
within the definition of a street.
      (20)   "Telecommunications" means the transmission, between or among
points specified by the user, of information of the users choosing, without
change in the form or content of the information as sent and received.
      (21)   "Telecommunications equipment" means equipment, other than
customer premises equipment, used by a telecommunications service provider to
provide telecommunications service, including software that is integral to that
equipment.
      (22)   "Telecommunications service" means the offering of
telecommunications directly to the public for a fee, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the
equipment or facilities that are used.
      (23)   "Telecommunications service provider" means any provider of
telecommunications service.
      (24)   "U.S.C. §" means the United States Code. Thus, the citation of "47
U.S.C. § 153" refers to Title 47, section 153, of the United States Code.
      (25)   "Video programming provider" means any person or group of persons
who has the right under the federal copyright laws to select and to contract
for the carriage of specific video programming on a cable system or an open
video system.
      (26)   "Video provider" means any person, company, or service that
provides one or more channels of video programming to a residence, including a
home, multi-family dwelling complex, congregate-living complex, condominium,
apartment, or mobile home, where some fee is paid for that service, whether
directly or as included in dues or rental charges, and whether or not public
rights-of-way are used in the delivery of that video programming. A "video
provider" includes, without limitation, providers of cable television service,
open video system service, master antenna television, satellite master antenna
television, direct broadcast satellite, multipoint distribution services, and
other providers of video programming, whatever their technology.
   (b)   Unless otherwise expressly stated, words, terms, and phrases not
defined in this Part I will be given their meaning as used in Title 47 of the
United States Code, as amended, and, if not defined in that code, their meaning
as used in Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
ARTICLE 7. VIOLATIONS; SEVERABILITY
4.50.180 Violations--Enforcement.
   (a)   Any person who violates any provision of this Part I is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.08 of Title 1 of
this code.
   (b)   The misdemeanor penalty specified above in paragraph (a) is not
applicable to a violation of any provision of this Part I for which another
sanction or penalty may be imposed under any franchise, license, lease, or
similar written agreement between the city and a multichannel video programming
distributor or telecommunications service provider.
   (c)   The city may initiate a civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction to enjoin any violation of this Part I.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
4.50.190 Severability.
If any provision of this Part I is determined by any court of competent
jurisdiction, or by any federal or state agency having jurisdiction over its
subject matter, to be invalid and in conflict with any paramount federal or
state law or regulation now or hereafter in effect, or is determined by that
court or agency to require modification in order to conform to the requirements
of that paramount law or regulation, then that provision will be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent part of this Part I, and such determination
will not affect the validity and enforceability of any other provisions. If
that paramount federal or state law or regulation is subsequently repealed or
amended so that the provision of this Part I determined to be invalid or
subject to modification is no longer in conflict with that law or regulation,
then that provision will again become effective and will thereafter be binding
on the city and any affected cable or telecommunications service provider;
provided, however, that the city must give the affected cable or
telecommunications service provider 30 days written notice of that change
before requiring compliance with that provision, or such longer period of time
as may be reasonably required for the cable or telecommunications service
provider to comply with that provision.
(Ord. 568 § 2 (part), 2001).
II. SOUTHWEST SUBURBAN WATER
4.50.240 Definitions.
Whenever in Sections
4.50.250 through
4.50.350 the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, it
is intended that they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions, unless in the given instance, the context wherein
they are used shall clearly import a different meaning:
   (a)   "Grantee" means the city of La Mirada, a municipal corporation of the
state, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated forms.
   (b)   "City" means the city of La Mirada, a municipal corporation of the
state, in its present, incorporated form or in any later reorganized,
consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated forms.
   (c)   "Streets" means the public streets, ways, alleys and places except
state freeways, as the same now or may hereafter exist within the city.
   (d)   "Pipes and appurtenances" means pipes, pipelines and distribution and
transmission systems consisting of mains, distribution and transmission pipes
and other properties and facilities, together with services, traps, manholes
and other necessary or appropriate appurtenances, for the purpose of
transmitting and distributing water.
   (e)   "Use" or "lay and use" means to lay, construct, erect, install,
operate, maintain, use, repair, replace, relocate, or remove.
(Ord. 383 § 2, Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.250 Franchise granted.
The right, privilege and franchise, subject to each and all of the terms and
conditions contained in Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350, and pursuant to and upon the terms and conditions of Division 3,
Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state (the "Franchise Act of
1937"), is granted to Southwest Suburban Water, a corporation organized and
existing under and by virtues of the laws of the state, to use and to lay and
use pipes, conduits and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing water
for any and all purposes, in, along, across, upon and under the public streets,
ways, alleys and places as they now exist or may hereafter exist within the
city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.260 Term.
The term of this franchise shall be twenty- five years from and after the date
of which the ordinance granting the franchise becomes effective.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.270 Payment to city.
For each full or fractional calendar year of the life of this franchise, the
grantee shall pay to the city at the times hereinafter specified, in lawful
money of the United States, the sum annually which shall be equivalent to two
percent of the gross annual receipts of the grantee arising from the use,
operation or possession of this franchise; provided, however, that such payment
shall in no event be less than one percent of the gross annual receipts of the
grantee derived from the sale of water within the limits of the city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.280 Filing of statement of gross receipts.
The grantee shall file with the city administrator, within three months after
the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the
date of the granting of this franchise, and within three months after the
expiration of each subsequent calendar year or fraction thereof during which
this franchise is in effect, a verified statement showing in detail for the
term of the franchise in such calendar or fractional year, as the case may be,
the total gross receipts of the grantee arising from the use, operation, or
possession of this franchise and the total gross receipts of the grantee
derived from the sale of water within the city. The grantee shall pay to the
city within fifteen days after the time for filing said statement, in lawful
money of the United States, the percentage required by Section
4.50.270 of its gross receipts for the calendar year or fractional year,
covered by said statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by the grantee to
file the verified statement, or to pay the percentage, at the times or in the
manner hereinabove provided, shall constitute grounds for the declaration of a
forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of the grantee under Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.290 Exclusive right of grantee.
This grant is made in lieu of all other franchises, rights, or privileges owned
by the grantee to lay and use pipes and appurtenances in the streets of the
city for transmitting and distributing water and the acceptance of the
franchise hereby granted shall operate as:
   (1)   An abandonment within the limits of the city of all such other
franchises, rights and privileges in lieu of which this franchise is granted;
and
   (2)    An agreement to comply with the terms and conditions of Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.300 Filing of written acceptance.
The franchise granted under Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350 shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof has been
filed by the grantee with the city clerk of the city. When so filed, such
acceptance shall constitute a continuing agreement of the grantee that if and
when city thereafter annexes or consolidates with additional territory, any and
all franchises, rights and privileges owned by the grantee therein shall
likewise be deemed to be abandoned as to all streets within the limits of such
territory.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.310 Rights of eminent domain reserved to city.
The franchise granted under Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350 shall not in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of
the city to acquire the property of the grantee hereof either by purchase or
through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing contained in
Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350 shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge, either
for a term or in perpetuity, the city's right of eminent domain in respect to
the grantee or any public utility; nor shall this franchise ever be given any
value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any
character in excess of the costs due the grantee of the necessary publication
and any other sum paid by it to the city therefor at the time of the
acquisition thereof.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.320 Right to improve streets reserved to city.
The city reserves the right to improve any street or portion thereof over and
within the area for which said franchise is granted, including the change of
grade, relocation of right-of-way, realignment of right-of-way, change in
width, construction or reconstruction of any such street, or any portion
thereof. Within thirty days after receipt by the grantee of a notice in writing
from the city of the fact that work is to be done pursuant to any such reserved
right and specifying the general nature of the work and the area in which the
same is to be performed, the grantee shall do all things necessary to protect
its franchise properly during the progress of such work and, if ordered by the
city council, the grantee shall disconnect, remove, or relocate its pipes and
appurtenances within the street to such extent, in such manner, and for such
period as shall be necessary to permit the performance of such work in an
economical manner, and in accordance with generally recognized engineering and
construction methods, and to permit the maintenance, operation and use of the
street as so improved. The grantee shall relocate customer service lines for
the full width of the right-of-way and reconnect in a workmanlike manner. All
of such things shall be done and the work shall be performed by the grantee at
its sole costs and expense. In the event that the city hereafter constructs,
installs, reconstructs or repairs any bridge or artificial support in or
underlying any street in which any pipes or appurtenances of the grantee are
located, and in the event that the cost thereof is increased in order to
provide for the installation, maintenance or operation of any such pipes or
appurtenances in or on the street area on which said bridge or other artificial
support covers or underlies, then the grantee shall pay to the city the full
amount of such increase of cost, upon completion of such construction,
installation or repair. Any damage done directly or indirectly to any such
public improvement by the grantee, in exercising directly or indirectly any
right, power or privilege under this franchise, or in performing any duties
under or pursuant to the provisions of this franchise, shall be promptly
repaired by the said grantee at its sole cost and expense.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.330 Conditions of franchise.
The grantee of this franchise shall:
   (a)   Construct, install and maintain all pipes and appurtenances in
accordance and in conformity with all of the applicable ordinances and rules
and regulations heretofore or hereafter adopted by the city council in the
exercise of its police powers and not in conflict with the paramount authority
of the state, and as to state highways, subject to the provisions of general
laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities therein; in
constructing, installing and maintaining the pipes and appurtenances, the
grantee shall make and backfill all excavations in such manner and way as to
leave the surface of the public street, alley, highway, or public place in as
good condition as it was prior to said excavation, as well as to conform to the
statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city as they now exist or may
hereafter be amended with respect to the securing of permits for excavations,
filling and obstructions of the city and state highways;
   (b)   Pay to the city, on demand, the cost of all repairs to public property
made necessary by any operations of the grantee under this franchise;
   (c)   Indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers from any and all
liability from damage proximately resulting from operations under this
franchise, and be liable to the city for all damage proximately resulting from
the failure of the grantee well and faithfully to observe and perform each and
every provision of this franchise and each and every applicable provision of
Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the state;
   (d)   Remove or relocate, without expense to the city, and facilities
installed, used and maintained under this franchise if and when made necessary
by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any street, or the
construction therein or thereunder of any subway, viaduct, sewer, storm drain,
pipeline or other improvement, made by the city. This franchise shall not
constitute an agreement or undertaking by the city, nor impose upon the city
any obligation, to pay any part of the costs of removal or relocation of any of
the pipes and appurtenances when required in order to accommodate construction
of any state freeway;
   (e)   File with the city council within thirty days after any sale,
transfer, assignment or lease of this franchise to another water purveyor, or
any part thereof, or of any of the rights or privileges granted thereby,
written evidence of the same, certified thereto by the grantee or its duly
authorized officers.
   Any sale, transfer, assignment or lease of this franchise, to any other
party, or any part thereof, or of any of the rights and privileges granted
thereby, written evidence of the same, certified thereto by the grantee or its
duly authorized officers shall be submitted to the city council for their
approval before such transfer can be made;
   (f)   Promptly repair at the sole cost and expense of the grantee and to the
complete satisfaction of the city, any damage to any street or public
improvement caused directly or indirectly by the grantee in exercising,
directly or indirectly, any right, power or privilege under this franchise or
in performing any duty under or pursuant to any of the provisions of this
franchise;
   (g)   Pay to the city on demand the cost of resurfacing public streets,
alleys or highways, that have not been returned to a satisfactory condition
within seventy-two hours after notification of intent by the city to the
company to correct the condition caused by the company;
   (h)   Any pipelines abandoned or removed from service shall be in
conformance with accepted waterworks practices.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.340 Forfeiture of franchise upon noncompliance.
   (a)   If the grantee fails, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the
provisions or conditions of Sections
4.50.240 through
4.50.350 and does not within ten days after written demand for compliance begin
the work of compliance or, after such beginning, does not prosecute the same
with due diligence to completion, then the city council may declare this
franchise forfeited.
   (b)   The city may sue in its own name for the forfeiture of this franchise
in the event of noncompliance by the grantee its successors or assigns with any
of the conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.50.350 Payment of publication and posting expenses by grantee.
The grantee shall pay to the city a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for
all publication and posting expenses incurred by it in connection with the
granting of this franchise, such payment to be made within thirty days after
the city furnishes the grantee with a written statement of such expenses.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.55
GRANT OF CATV FRANCHISE--CALIFORNIA CABLESYSTEMS, INC.
Sections:
   
4.55.010   Definitions.
   
4.55.020   Franchise.
   
4.55.030   Purpose and intent.
   
4.55.040   Physical area involved.
   
4.55.050   Duration of grant.
   
4.55.060   Time for completion of construction--Liquidated damages.
   
4.55.070   Continued adherence to technical criteria and performance standards.
   
4.55.080   Senior citizens' discount.
   
4.55.100   Mobile van.
   
4.55.110   Community programming.
   
4.55.120   Acquisition of CATV system by the city.
   
4.55.130   Inconsistency with Chapter 4.50 of this title.
4.55.010 Definitions.
The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivation used in this
chapter shall have the definitions and meanings specified in Chapter 4.50 of
this title.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.020 Franchise.
Subject to the provisions of
Chapter 4.50 of this title and the franchise limitations set forth therein, a
nonexclusive franchise is granted to California Cablesystems, Inc. ("grantee"
hereinafter) for the transmitting, receiving, distributing and supplying of
radio, television and other cable communication services along, across and upon
the public streets, ways, alleys and places within the city.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.030 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to grant a franchise to engage in
the business of operating a cable communication system in the city particularly
described in this chapter. It is the further purpose and intent of this chapter
that the grantee of the franchise granted by the ordinance codified in this
chapter provide the citizens of the city the best possible community cable
communication services consistent with the state of the art and rates
reasonable to both grantee and its subscribers.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.040 Physical area involved.
This franchise relates to the present territorial limits of the city and to any
area hereafter annexed thereto during the initial term of this franchise and
any renewal or renewals thereof.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.050 Duration of grant.
   (a)   This franchise shall become effective on the thirtieth day subsequent
to the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter provided, that as of
that date grantee has timely filed with the designated city officials any and
all documents and bonds, has timely made any and all payments and has timely
performed any and all acts specified in
Chapter 4.50 of this title as prerequisites to the effectiveness of this
franchise.
   (b)   The term of this franchise shall continue until December 31, 2002.
(Ord. 404 § 2, 1987; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.060 Time for completion of construction--Liquidated damages.
Grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, cause to be constructed, installed
and rendered fully operational, a CATV system serving the entirety of the city
and complying with the technical criteria and performance standards set forth
in
Chapter 4.50 of this title and contained in Exhibit "A" attached hereto and
incorporated in this chapter by reference, including standards for local
origination facilities, within one year from the effective date of the
ordinance codified in this chapter; provided, that grantee shall be entitled to
such extensions of time to cause the same to be accomplished as are equal to
delays in said construction and installation which are due to acts of God, acts
of the public enemy, fires, floods, epidemics, quarantine restrictions,
strikes, lockouts, freight embargoes, unusually severe weather, or from any
other cause beyond the reasonable control of grantee and/or its employees,
agents or contractors. Due to the fact that it would be extremely difficult to
ascertain and qualify the amount of damages which would be incurred by the city
and its residents should grantee not timely complete the construction and
installation referred to in this section, the city shall be entitled to collect
and receive from grantee the sum of one thousand dollars per day as liquidated
damages for each day of grantee's delay beyond the time prescribed in this
section for completing the construction and installation specified in this
section.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.070 Continued adherence to technical criteria and performance standards.
Grantee's operation and maintenance of a CATV system within the city pursuant
to this franchise shall at all times adhere to the technical criteria and
performance standards set forth in
Chapter 4.50 of this title and contained in Exhibit "A" attached to the
ordinance codified in this chapter and available for inspection in the office
of the city clerk.
(Ord. 404 § 7, 1987; Ord. 383 § 2 Exh. A (part), 1986).
4.55.080 Senior citizens' discount.
The grantee shall, upon determination by the city by resolution, provide a
senior citizen discount of up to thirty-three percent of its basic monthly
service rate to subscribers. Senior citizens shall include persons who act as
head of the household and shall be sixty-two years of age and above.
(Ord. 404 § 3 (part) , 1987).
4.55.100 Mobile van.
In addition to its other portable equipment, grantee shall provide for use in
the city, at reasonable times and for reasonable periods of time requested by
the city, a self-contained mobile van, equipped so as to have necessary remote
production capability for origination of programming.
(Ord. 446 § 1, 1990; Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
4.55.110 Community programming.
The grantee shall provide the following or equivalent support for local
programming:
   (1)   The grantee shall provide free of charge consulting and training
services on production and program format and the use of public access,
governmental and educational channels.
   (2)   The grantee shall offer and conduct a free workshop, not less than
four times a year, to provide training in the technical and conceptual skills
required for community television production. Announcements of the date, time
and place of such workshops shall be made over the public access and community
affairs channels no less than six times daily for a two-week period prior to
the workshop. Notice of the workshop shall also be published in the
subscriber's program guide or a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Attendance at and completion of such a workshop or evidence
satisfactory to the grantee of equivalent training or experience may be a
prerequisite for using production facilities and equipment.
   (3)   A full-time, professional staff shall be employed by the grantee to
conduct training programs to promote the public use of the public channels,
community affairs, and other cablecasting channels, to advise such users on the
programming and production matters and to otherwise fulfill the grantee's
community programming obligations hereunder.
   (4)   The grantee, in conjunction with access users, community organizations
and volunteers, shall produce and cablecast on the system, no later than twelve
months following the date of transfer of the franchise to American, an average
minimum of ten original hours of community programming per week including
programming originated by or for other communities served by the system. If the
average number of community programming hours produced and cablecast falls
below the number stipulated, the grantor shall have the right to require the
grantee to increase its community programming production staff within ninety
days of written notice of noncompliance. For the purposes hereof, the
measurement of average number of hours produced and cablecast shall be
calculated twice yearly in February and July, and shall include the periods
between the previous July 1st and December 31st and January 1st and June 30th
respectively.
   (5)   The grantee shall make expenditures in support of the community
programming efforts described in paragraphs (1) through (4) herein each year to
the two percent of its gross revenues related to the operation of the system
for the previous year.
   (6)   The grantee agrees to work cooperatively with the La Mirada Civic
Theater to explore co-production opportunities. If the theater and the grantee
agree that an event (or events) has commercial potential for both parties,
grantee agrees to enter into good-faith negotiations with the goal of
structuring a joint venture agreement.
   (7)   The grantee shall provide a minimum of ten free promotional
advertising spots of ten to thirty seconds in length for the La Mirada Civic
Theater on an annual basis. The length, quality and timing for cablecasting of
each advertising spot shall be mutually agreed upon by the grantee and the
theater staff. The grantee shall not cablecast said advertising without the
consent of the Civic Theater management.
   (8)   The grantee shall insert into customer billing statements promotional
material(s) provided by the La Mirada Civic Theater, on a semiannual basis. The
grantee shall pay for the costs of insertion of the promotional material and
the theater shall pay for the total cost of producing the promotional material.
The theater shall notify the grantee ninety days in advance to reserve a space
in the billing statement and shall provide the grantee and CableData with the
artwork for the promotional material according to a mutually agreed-upon
schedule.
   (9)   The grantee shall pay the city the amount of fifty thousand dollars.
The grantee shall make the payment either in form of cash or the value of
production equipment up to said amount. The form and method of payment shall be
mutually agreed upon by the grantee and the city. If the grantee and the city
determine that the payment is to be made in cash, the grantee shall make
payment upon the effective date of the franchise ordinance. If the grantee and
the city determine that the payment is to be made with production equipment up
to said amount, then the production equipment will be provided by the grantee
within a time period to be mutually agreed upon by grantee and city.
(Ord. 404 § 5, 1987).
4.55.120 Acquisition of CATV system to the city.
In the event that the city desires to acquire the CATV system which is the
subject of this franchise at the conclusion of the term hereof or any renewal
period of that term, the city shall apply written notice of that desire to
grantee at least six months prior to the conclusion of that term or renewal
period. City and grantee then shall each promptly appoint one appraiser to
establish the fair market value of the system as a whole to be acquired by the
city. The two appraisers shall select a third appraiser who will chair the
appraisal board. The board then will, by majority vote, determine the value of
the system to be acquired by the city as a whole. Such value determined by the
appraisal board shall be binding on both grantee and city and shall be used as
the purchase price of said system should city acquire the same by negotiation
and written agreement entered into prior to the conclusion of the subject term
of this franchise of the subject renewal thereof. Further, such value
determined by the appraisal board shall be used as the fair market value of the
CATV system which is the subject of this franchise in any eminent domain
proceeding instituted by city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of
any acquisition by the city subsequent to the expiration or termination of this
franchise or any renewal period of that term, the value of the system to be
acquired by the city shall not include any sum for the franchise itself.
(Ord. 404 § 6, 1987).
4.55.130 Inconsistency with Chapter 4.50 of this title.
Should any provision or provisions of this chapter be held, found or determined
by a court of law to be inconsistent with any provision or provisions contained
in
Chapter 4.50 of this title, the provision or provisions of this chapter shall
control and prevail.
(Ord. 383 § 2 Ex. A (part), 1986).
Chapter 4.60
SALES OF GOODS OR MERCHANDISE FROM VEHICLES
Sections:
   
4.60.010   Definitions.
   
4.60.020   Conditions and prohibitions.
   
4.60.030   Operator permits.
   
4.60.040   Suspension and revocation of permit.
   
4.60.050   Sound from vehicles.
   
4.60.060   Prohibited sales.
   
4.60.070   Health permit.
   
4.60.080   Restricted locations.
   
4.60.090   Trash.
   
4.60.100   Conditions and duration of stops.
   
4.60.110   Hours of operation.
   
4.60.120   Exemptions.
   
4.60.130   Penalties.
4.60.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
meanings set forth below:
   (a)   'Goods' or 'merchandise' means and includes items and tangible things
and products of every kind and description, including any food, produce, and/or
beverage items.
   (b)   'Human powered device' shall mean any device moved by human power
including, but not necessarily limited to, any pushcart, wagon, bicycle,
tricycle, or other wheeled device or conveyance.
   (c)   'Operator' shall mean any person or entity owning a ten percent or
greater interest in, or operating or otherwise controlling, any business
involving the vending of goods or merchandise from a vehicle. For purposes of
enforcement of this chapter, any violation of law committed in connection with
vending by a vendor shall be deemed to be a violation by each operator of the
entity for which the vendor was vending when the violation occurred.
   (d)   'Person' shall mean any natural person, firm, partnership,
association, corporation, or other entity of any kind or nature.
   (e)   'Public property' shall mean any real property, or interest therein,
owned, leased, operated, or otherwise controlled by the city other than a
street, alley, parkway, or sidewalk.
   (f)   'Residential zone' or 'zoned for residential purposes' shall mean any
zone of the city in which residential dwellings are an expressly permitted use.
   (g)   'Vehicle' shall mean a motor vehicle as defined in the Vehicle Code of
the State of California, from which vending occurs, and shall not include any
human powered device.
   (h)   'Vend' or 'vending' shall mean the sale or offering for sale of any
goods or merchandise to the public from a vehicle.
   (i)   'Vendor' shall mean any person who engages in the act of vending from
a vehicle or who drives or otherwise operates any such vehicle for the purpose
of vending therefrom.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.020 Conditions and prohibitions.
It is unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, or operate any vehicle
or conduct any business for the purpose of causing the sale of, or offering for
sale, any goods or merchandise from any vehicle parked, stopped, or standing
upon any public street or private street open to the public, except in
accordance with all applicable provisions of this code and in compliance with
each of the following requirements:
   (a)   Such vending shall be only by means of a vehicle duly registered and
licensed by the State of California with an unladen weight of less than six
thousand pounds.
   (b)   Each vendor shall possess and at all times display in conspicuous view
upon each vehicle a city business license issued pursuant to Title 4 of this
code.
   (c)   Each vendor shall possess an operator's permit issued pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. 605 § 1 (part), 2006).
4.60.030 Operator permits.
   (a)   Any person desiring to obtain an operator's permit to conduct or
otherwise operate the business of vending goods or merchandise from a vehicle
pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the city finance
director. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council. Any such
permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. The permit may be
renewed annually, subject to filing of a new application and payment of a new
application fee. Each permit applicant shall furnish the following information
and documentation in the application:
      (1)   The street address where the office of the business is or will be
located;
      (2)   The full, true name under which the business will be conducted;
      (3)   The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant;
      (4)   The present residence and business addresses and telephone numbers
of the applicant, each ten percent or greater owner of the business, and all
persons who will act as a vendor;
      (5)   A detailed description of the goods or merchandise which the
business will vend;
      (6)   The make, body style, year, VIN number, state license plate number,
and names and addresses of each registered and/or legal owner of each vehicle;
      (7)   A description of the logo, color scheme, insignia, and any other
distinguishing characteristics identifying applicant's business that will
appear on each vehicle;
      (8)   The name, residential address, and telephone number of the
individual(s) primarily responsible for managing the day- to-day operation of
the vending business; and
      (9)   Evidence of compliance with the insurance requirements of the
California Vehicle Code as to each vehicle.
   (b)   The finance director shall be authorized to investigate the truth of
the facts set forth in the application. Each application shall be approved or
denied within thirty days of receipt of a complete application provided,
however, that a decision may be delayed by an additional thirty days when the
finance director's investigation cannot be completed within the initial thirty
day period.
   The permit will be granted unless any substantive fact or representation in
the application is found to be absent or false, or there is substantial
evidence present indicating that granting of the permit would likely present a
realistic threat to the public health or safety. Any applicant denied a permit
will be given written notice of the denial. Such notice shall be given in the
manner specified in Section
4.60.040. Any applicant denied a permit may appeal the denial by filing a
written appeal with the city manager within ten business days of the date of
the notice of denial. If a timely appeal is filed, the applicant shall be given
notice of a hearing to be held before the city manager, or designee, within
thirty days of the date of said notice. Following such hearing, the city
manager, or designee, may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the finance
director to deny the application. The decision of the city manager or designee
shall be final.
   (c)   Each permittee shall notify the finance director, in writing, within
ten business days of any change in the required application information.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.040 Suspension and revocation of permit.
   (a)   Any operator's permit may be suspended or revoked by the finance
director for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Provision of false information on the permit application;
      (2)   Failure of the permittee to notify the finance director within ten
business days of any change in the information supplied by the permittee upon
which issuance of the permit was based, occurring subsequent to the issuance of
the permit;
      (3)   There is substantial evidence of a violation by the permittee, any
employee, subcontractor of the permittee, or any other person acting on the
permittee's behalf, of this chapter or any other local, state, or federal law
constituting a misdemeanor or felony while in the course of conducting vending
operations pursuant to the permit;
      (4)   While in the course of vending, driving of a vehicle by a vendor
not possessing a valid driver’s license, or operation of a vehicle found by
police inspection to be unsafe and in violation of the California Vehicle Code;
      (5)   Vending in any way or manner, or of any goods or product, so as to
cause an identifiable risk of harm to the public.
   (b)   Written notice of suspension or revocation, setting forth the grounds
for suspension or revocation, shall be served on the offending permittee. The
notice shall advise the operator of the right to file a written appeal and be
heard at a hearing, provided such appeal is filed with the city manager within
ten business days of the date of the notice. Upon receipt of a timely appeal,
the permittee shall be given notice of a hearing to be held before the city
manager, or designee, within thirty days of the date of said notice. The city
manager, or designee, may reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the finance
director. Unless immediate suspension is necessary to prevent a significant and
immediate risk to the public health and safety, a suspension or revocation
shall be stayed until expiration of the appeal period or the decision on the
appeal. The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final.
   (c)   No person whose permit is revoked shall be eligible to apply for an
new permit for a period of one year following such revocation.
   (d)   Notices required or permitted to be served pursuant to Sections
4.60.030 or
4.60.040 may be served personally, or by mailing by certified or registered
mail with proof of delivery at the residential address of record, or by
licensed courier or delivery service with proof of personal delivery, or in any
other manner provided by law.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.050 Sound from vehicles.
Any use of amplified sound-making devices to advertise, draw attention to, or
announce the presence of a vendor shall also comply with the regulations set
forth in
Chapter 4.25 of this code, except that registration pursuant to Sections
4.25.030 and
4.25.060 will not be required separately if the information contained in that
registration is found in the permit application under this section.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.060 Prohibited sales.
It is unlawful for any vendor or operator to sell fireworks, or any goods or
products not identified in the application for an operator's permit.
(Ord. 605 § 1 (part), 2006).
4.60.070 Health permit.
Each vendor and operator causing the sale of or offering for sale any produce
or other food item for which a food handling permit or other health permit is
required by law shall possess and at all times display such required permit(s)
in conspicuous view upon such vehicle.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.080 Restricted locations.
   (a)   Vending is permitted on public streets or private streets open to the
public, and is not permitted in or upon any alley, parkway, sidewalk, or other
kind of public property.
   (b)   No vending from such vehicle shall be permitted within sixty feet of
any intersection of two or more streets or within five hundred feet of any
public or private elementary, junior high, or high school.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.090 Trash.
   (a)   Each vehicle shall be equipped with a trash receptacle of a size
adequate to accommodate all trash and refuse generated by vending therefrom.
   (b)   Each vendor shall pick up and deposit in the trash receptacle on the
vehicle all paper, cups, wrapper, litter, or other refuse of any kind that was
a part of the goods or merchandise supplied from the vehicle and which has been
left or abandoned within twenty-five feet of such vehicle on any public
property, other than in a trash receptacle provided for such purposes. No
vendor or operator shall dispose of any trash or refuse from vending operations
in any such public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle
owned, operated, or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor
or operator.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.100 Conditions and duration of stops.
   (a)   No vending shall be permitted for a period of time in excess of ten
minutes in any one location. Such vehicle must be moved a distance of not less
than one hundred feet between consecutive stops where vending occurs.
   (b)   No vehicle shall be parked, stopped, or left standing in any manner
which blocks or impedes vehicular access to any driveway or restricts the free
movement of other vehicles upon the public street.
   (c)   No vending shall be permitted until the vehicle has been brought to a
complete stop and lawfully parked adjacent to the curb.
(Ord. 605 § 1 (part), 2006).
4.60.110 Hours of operation.
Vending is permitted only between the hours of eight a.m. and six p.m. of any
day.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.120 Exemptions.
The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to:
   (a)   Any person delivering any goods or merchandise by vehicle where such
goods or merchandise have been ordered in advance for such delivery from any
business located at a permanent location.
   (b)   Any person vending where such person has been authorized to engage in
such activity by a permit, lease, real property license, agreement, or other
entitlement issued by the city, state or federal government for such purpose.
   (c)   Any person exempted from the provisions of this chapter by any local,
state or federal law, regulation or statute.
(Ord. 605 §1 (part), 2006).
4.60.130 Penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to
violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
chapter or any provision of the chapter hereby adopted. Any person, firm,
partnership or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or any
provision of the chapter hereby adopted, or failing to comply with any of their
requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each and every person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or said chapters
is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or
corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 605 §2, 2006)
Chapter 4.65
FILM PERMITS
Sections:
   
4.65.010    Definitions
   
4.65.020    Filming - Permitted Zones
   
4.65.030    Commercial or Limited Filming - Permit Required
   
4.65.040    Exemptions to Permit Requirement
   
4.65.050    Film Permit Application
   
4.65.060    Film Permit Conditions
   
4.65.070    Film Permit - Decision to Grant, Conditionally Grant or Deny
   
4.65.080    Film Permit Denial - Appeal
   
4.65.090    Permit Revocation
4.65.010 Definitions.
   (a)   “City” means the City of La Mirada.
   (b)   "City Council" means the City Council of the City of La Mirada.
   (c)   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City of La Mirada, or
designee.
   (d)    "Commercial filming" means motion picture, television, still
photography at the same location more than six days out of a period of 90
consecutive days for any purpose other than news purposes.
   (e)   "County" means the County of Los Angeles, California.
   (f)   "Director" means the Finance Director or designee.
   (g)   "Limited filming" means motion picture, television, still photography
at the same location for six or fewer days out of a period of 90 consecutive
days.
   (h)   "Motion picture, television, still photography" means and includes all
activity of staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or
programs, and commercials in any medium including film, tape or digital format.
   (i)   "News purposes" means the photographing, filming or videotaping for
the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting
for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen, and which are
intended for broadcast within 24 hours after the event.
   (j)   "Noise disturbance" means any sound which:
      (1)   Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or
      (2)   Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
      (3)   Endangers or injures personal or real property.
   (k)   “Permit Review Board” means City of La Mirada staff appointed by the
City Manager to review and process business permits.
   (l)   “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, association, group
or combination acting as a unit, nonprofit entity, or government agency.
   (m)   “Student” means a person studying motion picture, television, and/or
still photography at a school or college and who can provide proof of
enrollment.
   (n)   “Studio” means a fixed place of business where filming activities are
regularly conducted upon the premises.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.020 Filming - Permitted Zones.
   (a)   Limited filming shall be permitted in all zones, subject to a film
permit.
   (b)   Commercial filming shall be permitted in Commercial and Industrial
Zones, subject to a film permit.
   (c)   Commercial filming shall be permitted in Residential Zones, subject to
written permission by 75% of the property owners or residents within a 300 foot
radius of the proposed film location property lines, and subject to a film
permit.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.030 Commercial or Limited Filming - Film Permit Required.
   (a)   A film permit shall be required for commercial or limited filming on
private property within the City.
   (b)   A film permit shall be required for commercial or limited filming on
any City street, alley, sidewalk, park, off-street parking facility, public
right-of-way or other public property.
   (c)   All filming on any publicly owned property within City boundaries that
is not owned or controlled by the City shall require written permission and any
applicable permits from the public entity that has jurisdiction over that
property. A public entity can include, but is not limited to, a school
district, community college district, county or state agency, and the
California Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.040 Exemptions to Film Permit Requirement.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to filming for the following
purposes:
   (a)   News purposes, provided that filming is for less than six days out of
a period of 90 consecutive days at substantially the same location;
   (b)   Private family use;
   (c)   Criminal investigations, civil proceedings or emergencies such as
fires, flood or police actions;
   (d)   Education, government and public access and local original programs
for cable television systems franchised within the City;
   (e)   Filming by the City itself;
   (f)   Filming that is being conducted on private property, completely inside
an enclosed building or structure, and that is not viewable from adjoining
public or private property, with a cast and crew of four or fewer people,
involving two or fewer motor vehicles in connection with the filming, and not
involving pyrotechnics, use of hazardous materials, open flames, special
effects smoke or use of vehicles inside buildings associated with the filming;
however, an complete film permit application shall be submitted as provided
for, with no fee required, and such filming shall nonetheless comply with this
chapter;
   (g)   Filming conducted entirely inside a studio;
   (h)   Filming by a student as part of a class in which the student is
currently enrolled, shall be subject to the film permit requirements but are
exempt from any and all fees pursuant to this chapter; and
   (i)   Filming conducted inside a city facility where a rental agreement has
been obtained.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.050 Film Permit Application.
   Any person desiring to use any public property or facility or any private
property for commercial or limited filming shall file an application for a film
permit with the Director, on a form furnished by the City, not less than 30
days before the date on which such person desires to conduct filming. The
permit application shall include the permit fee established by a resolution of
the City Council, which fee shall not exceed the reasonable estimated costs of
administering the film permit application process and the requirements of this
chapter. The Director may use discretion and waive the requirement that
applications be filed no less than 30 days prior to the date on which the
filming is to be conducted. The following information shall be included in the
application, and the application shall be signed under penalty of perjury:
   (a)   The name and address of business.
   (b)   Name, address, phone number and email address of the business owner
and any representative(s).
   (c)   Proposed film location address(s).
   (d)   Proposed hours and dates such filming will occur.
   (e)   General statement of the character or nature of the filming.
   (f)   The exact number of personnel to be involved.
   (g)   The exact number, description and license numbers of vehicles to be
used at the filming location.
   (h)   General description of the equipment and any sets to be used.
   (i)   Property owner's written permission, consent, and/or lease for use of
property not owned or controlled by the City.
   (j)   Copy of insurance endorsement, naming the City as an additional
insured, in such form and with such limits as required by the City's risk
manager.
   (k)   Signed indemnification form.
   (l)   Any additional special circumstances.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.060 Film Permit Conditions.
   The Director may impose conditions and/or require guarantees for the film
permit to ensure compliance with this section and other applicable provisions
of this Code, and to prevent adverse or detrimental impacts to the City. This
shall include reimbursement to the City for any personnel provided to the
applicant (e.g., police, fire, or other staff) for the purpose of assisting the
production. Notwithstanding the foregoing, anyone conducting filming in the
City shall be in violation of this chapter if the Director determines that, at
any time during the term of the film permit, the permittee, or anyone acting on
behalf of, or with the consent of, or under the supervision of, the permittee,
engaged in any of the following:
   (a)   Any activity or failure to act constituting a violation of any
applicable local, state, or Federal law, statute, or regulation, including the
provision of workers compensation for all employees;
   (b)   Any activity creating any noise disturbance, as defined;
   (c)   Any activity generating any public complaint and resulting in a second
police response;
   (d)   Any activity without possessing a permit or license required by any
other provision of this Code.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.070 Film Permit - Decision to Grant, Conditionally Grant or Deny.
   (a)   The Director shall investigate and grant, conditionally grant, or deny
an application for a permit within the time limits set forth in this section.
   (b)   The Director shall determine the completeness of an application within
five working days of its submittal to the City. If the Director determines that
the application is not complete, he or she shall notify the applicant in
writing that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor,
including any additional information necessary to render the application
complete. Such notification by the Director may be sent by electronic mail,
hand delivery, facsimile, or deposited in the U.S. mail or postage prepaid.
   (c)   Within five working days following receipt of an amended application
or supplemental information, the Director shall determine whether the
application is complete in accordance with the procedures set forth above. If
an amended application is not filed with the City within 15 days of the date of
the notice to the applicant, the application shall be deemed to have been
withdrawn and the applicant will be required to submit a new application to the
City.
   (d)   Upon receiving a complete application, the Director shall direct City
staff to conduct an investigation to determine whether the facts set forth in
the application are true and correct, and whether the film permit shall be
approved. The investigation shall include consultation with the Permit Review
Board.
   (e)   The Director shall render a written decision within 15 calendar days
of the submission of a deemed-complete application. Once a decision is made the
applicant shall be notified in writing forthwith.
   (f)   Additional time, beyond what is provided for in this section, may be
requested by the film permit applicant to amend an incomplete application.
Reasonable or justifiable extensions of time shall be granted, up to 30 days.
Extensions of time sought by applicants shall not be considered a delay on the
part of the City or constitute failure by the City to provide for prompt
decisions on applications.
   (g)   A film permit may be denied for the following reasons:
      (1)   A complete application is not submitted;
      (2)   The applicant, or his or her predecessor, employer, or agent, has
been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter during the
preceding twelve months;
      (3)   The applicant has failed to submit the required fees;
      (4)   The applicant has failed to obtain any necessary permits or written
permissions;
      (5)   The City has already issued a filming permit for a location, date,
and/or time that conflicts with the applicant's request;
      (6)   If the City deems the proposed filming to be a potential threat to
the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of La Mirada;
or
      (7)   The applicant has misrepresented a material fact in the
application.
   (h)   If the permit is denied, the written decision shall state the reasons
for the denial.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.080 Film Permit Denial - Appeal.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by the Director's decision shall have the right
to appeal the decision to the City Manager. An appeal must be in writing and
submitted within ten calendar days from the date of the denial of the filming
permit, along with the appeal fee, in the amount set forth by resolution of the
City Council.
   (b)   The City Manager shall set a hearing within ten days from the date the
written request is received by the City.
   (c)   The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing. All
relevant evidence may be considered, and the hearing officer has the discretion
to exclude evidence if he or she finds such evidence to be irrelevant or
needlessly repetitive. The hearing officer has the authority to cut off
presentation of evidence if he or she reasonably believes that the evidence
being presented is irrelevant or needlessly repetitive.
   (d)   After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the
hearing, the City Manager shall issue a written decision to grant,
conditionally grant, or deny the permit and shall list in the decision the
reasons for that decision. The decision of the City Manager shall be final.
   (e)   The City Manager's written decision shall be served on the appellant
within five calendar days from the date of the hearing by mailing to the
appellant by certified mail, return receipt requested, via the U.S. mail.
Service of the City Manager's decision shall be deemed to have been completed
on the date of mailing.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
4.65.090 Film Permit Revocation.
   (a)   Any film permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may
be revoked summarily by the Director, pending a hearing if requested, upon the
occurrence of any of the following:
      (1)   Filming or related activity has been conducted in a manner which
violates one or more of the conditions imposed upon the film permit, including
failure to conform to the plans and procedures described in the application, or
violation of the occupant load limits or other restrictions established by the
Los Angeles County Fire Department;
      (2)   The permittee has failed to obtain or maintain all required City,
County and state licenses and permits;
      (3)   The permit is being used to conduct an activity other than that for
which it was issued, or the permittee or anyone acting on behalf of the
permittee, has engaged in any illegal conduct;
      (4)   The permittee has misrepresented a material fact in the
application;
      (5)   Private property owner(s) and/or tenant(s) on whose property the
filming was permitted have withdrawn consent to the filming.
   (b)   The Director shall advise the permittee of the basis or bases for the
revocation.
   (c)   The permittee may appeal the revocation decision, in writing, to the
City Manager, who shall hold an appeal hearing within 48 hours, or as soon
thereafter as is reasonably convenient.
   (d)   The City Manager shall issue his or her decision to uphold the permit
revocation or reinstate the permit, with or without conditions, on the next
business day following the hearing. The City Manager's decision shall be in
writing and shall be final. Such written decision shall include findings upon
which the decision is based.
(Ord. 688 § 2, 2017)
Chapter 4.70
SIDEWALK VENDING
Sections:
   
4.70.010   Definitions.
   
4.70.020   Permit required.
   
4.70.030   Permit application.
   
4.70.040   Criteria for approval or denial of permit.
   
4.70.050   Permit expiration and renewal.
   
4.70.060   Permit rescission.
   
4.70.070   Appeals.
   
4.70.080   Permits nontransferable.
   
4.70.090   Operating requirements.
   
4.70.100   Administrative citations.
4.70.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall mean as
follows:
   (a)   "Certified farmers' market" means a location operated in accordance
with Chapter 10.5 of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any
regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.
   (b)   "Director" means the Assistant City Manager of the City of La Mirada.
   (c)   "Person" shall mean one or more natural persons, groups, businesses,
business trusts, companies, corporations, joint ventures, joint stock
companies, partnership, entities, associations, clubs, or organizations
composed of two or more individuals (or the manager, lessee, agent, servant,
officer, or employee of any of them), whether engaged in business, nonprofit,
or any other activity.
   (d)   "Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place
to place and stops only to complete a transaction.
   (e)   "Sidewalk vendor" means a person who vends from a vending cart or from
one's person, upon a public sidewalk, parkway, pedestrian path, or other public
right-of-way available to pedestrians.
   (f)   "Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a
fixed location.
   (g)   "Swap meet" means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 of
Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any
regulations adopted pursuant to that article.
   (h)   "Temporary special permit" means a permit issued by the City for the
temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or any other public area,
including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or
temporary event permit, for purposes including, but not limited to, filming,
parades, or outdoor concerns.
   (i)   "Vend" or "vending" means to sell, offer for sale, display for sale,
or solicit offers to purchase, food, food products, beverages, goods, or
merchandise.
   (j)   "Vending cart" means a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart,
wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for vending, that
is not a vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.020 Permit Required.
No person, either for themselves or any other person, shall conduct or engage
in sidewalk vending within the City without first obtaining a sidewalk vending
permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.030 Permit Application.
To apply for a sidewalk vending permit, a person must file an application with
the Director, accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee in an amount
established by resolution of the City Council. The application shall be in a
form prescribed by the Director and shall contain, at a minimum, the following:
   (a)   The legal name and current address and telephone number of the
applicant.
   (b)   If the applicant is an agent of an individual, company, partnership,
corporation, or other entity, the name and business address of the principal.
   (c)   A description of the food or merchandise offered for sale.
   (d)   A description of the area(s) the sidewalk vendor intends to operate.
   (e)   Whether the applicant intends to operate as a stationary sidewalk
vendor or a roaming sidewalk vendor.
   (f)   A copy of a valid business license issued pursuant to La Mirada
Municipal Code
Chapter 4.02.
   (g)   A California seller's permit number pursuant to Revenue and Taxation
Code Section 6067.
   (h)   Certification by the applicant that the information contained in the
application is true to his or her knowledge and belief.
   (i)   If a vendor of food or food products, certification to completion of a
food handler course and proof of all required approvals from the Los Angeles
County Department of Public Health.
   (j)   Proof of liability insurance with liability coverage levels
established by the Director.
   (k)   Any other reasonable information regarding the time, place, and manner
of the proposed vending.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.040 Criteria for Approval or Denial of Permit.
The Director, or his or her designee, shall approve the issuance of a permit
unless he or she determines that:
   (a)   Information contained in the application, or supplemental information
requested from the applicant, is false in any material detail;
   (b)   The applicant has failed to provide a complete application, after
having been notified of the requirement to produce additional information or
documents;
   (c)   The applicant has failed to demonstrate an ability to conform to the
operating standards set forth in section
4.70.090; or
   (d)   The applicant has failed to pay any previous administrative fines,
complete any community service, and/or complete any other alternative
disposition associated with a previous violation of this chapter.
If the permit is denied, written notice of such denial and the reasons therefor
shall be provided to the applicant.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.050 Permit Expiration and Renewal.
A sidewalk vending permit shall be valid for 12 months from the date of
issuance, and shall expire and become null and void on the anniversary of its
issuance. A person may apply for a permit renewal on a form provided by the
City prior to the expiration of his or her active sidewalk vending permit.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.060 Permit Rescission.
The Director may rescind a permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for a fourth
violation or subsequent violation of this Chapter. A sidewalk vendor whose
permit is rescinded may apply for a new sidewalk vending permit upon the
expiration of the term of the rescinded permit.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.070 Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Director to issue, deny issuance,
or rescind a sidewalk vending permit may appeal the decision to the City
Council. The appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within 15 days following
the date of the Director's decision.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.080 Permits Nontransferable.
No permit granted pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.090 Operating Requirements.
Sidewalk vendors shall comply with the following:
   (a)   No sidewalk vendor shall vend in the following locations:
      (1)   Within fifteen feet of any street intersection.
      (2)   Within ten feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, or other
emergency facility.
      (3)   Within ten feet of any driveway or driveway apron.
      (4)   Upon or within any roadway, median strip, or dividing section.
      (5)   Within five hundred feet of a permitted certified farmers' market,
a swap meet, or an area designated for a temporary special permit. This
prohibition shall be limited to the operating hours of the farmers' market or
swap meet, or the limited duration of the temporary special permit.
      (6)   In any City parking lot.
      (7)   Within or upon landscape areas.
   (b)   No sidewalk vendor shall vend to customers in moving operating
vehicles, or in a manner that blocks or obstructs the free movement of
pedestrians or vehicles. Sidewalk vendors must at all times provide a clearance
of not less than four feet on all sidewalks or pedestrian areas so as to enable
persons to freely pass while walking, running, or using mobility assistance
devices. No sidewalk vendor shall encroach within or upon landscape areas/
planters.
   (c)   Sidewalk vending is permitted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., daily, except as follows:
      (1)   In residential areas, sidewalk vending shall be permitted between
the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
      (2)   In nonresidential areas, the limit on hours of operation shall not
be more restrictive than the hours of operation of other businesses or uses on
the same street.
      (3)   In City parks, sidewalk vending shall be permitted only during
hours open to the public.
   (d)   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not vend in areas that are zoned
exclusively residential.
   (e)   Stationary sidewalk vendors shall not vend at any park where the City
has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of
food or merchandise by a concessionaire.
   (f)   Sidewalk vendors shall provide a trash receptacle for customers and
ensure proper disposal of customer trash. Prior to leaving any vending
location, the sidewalk vendor shall pick up, remove, and dispose of all trash
generated by the vending operations or the vendor's customers within a fifteen
foot radius of the vending location.
   (g)   Vendors of food or food products shall possess and display in plain
view on the vending cart all applicable permits from Los Angeles County
Department of Public Health, including a valid and current Mobile Food Facility
permit.
   (h)   Sidewalk vendors shall possess at all times while vending a valid
permit issued pursuant to this chapter, as well as any other permit or license
required by the City and any other appropriate governmental agency.
   (i)   Sidewalk vendors shall possess at all times while vending, current
liability insurance with liability coverage levels as established by the
Director.
   (j)   Sidewalk vendors shall comply with all applicable state and local
laws, including, without limitation, state food preparation, handling, and
labeling requirements; fire codes and regulations; noise standards; and the
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 and other disability access standards
(both state and federal).
   (k)   No vending cart shall become a permanent fixture on the vending site
or be considered an improvement to real property. All stationary sidewalk
vending equipment shall be removed during non-permitted hours of operation.
   (l)   No freestanding/unattached signs shall be used in conjunction with any
sidewalk vendor.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
4.70.100 Administrative Citations.
   (a)   A violation of this chapter by a sidewalk vendor who has a valid
sidewalk vending permit from the City is punishable only by an administrative
citation pursuant to
Chapter 1.08 , in amounts not to exceed the following:
      (1)   One hundred dollars for a first violation.
      (2)   Two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the
first violation.
      (3)   Three hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year
of the first violation.
   (b)   A person engaged in sidewalk vending without a valid City sidewalk
vending permit is punishable by an administrative citation pursuant to
Chapter 1.08 in amounts not to exceed the following, in lieu of the amounts set
forth in paragraph (a):
      (1)   Two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation.
      (2)   Five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the
first violation.
      (3)   One thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year
of the first violation.
      (4)   Upon proof of a valid sidewalk vending permit issued by the City,
the administrative citations set forth in this paragraph shall be reduced to
amounts set forth in paragraph (a).
   (c)   A violation of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction
or misdemeanor. No person alleged to have violated the provisions herein shall
be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted by law.
   (d)   Failure to pay an administrative citation issued pursuant to this
section shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. Additional
fines, fees, assessments, or any other financial conditions beyond those
authorized herein shall not be assessed.
   (e)   When assessing administrative citations pursuant to this section, the
hearing officer shall take into consideration the person's ability to pay the
fine. The City shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to
request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions
or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The person
may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the
judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been
referred to a comprehensive collection program.
   (f)   If the person meets the criteria described in subdivision (a) or (b)
of Government Code section 68632, the City shall accept, in full satisfaction,
20% of an administrative citation imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (g)   The hearing officer may allow a person to complete community service
in lieu of paying the total administrative citation, may waive the
administrative citation, or may offer an alternative disposition.
(Ord. 707 § 1 (part), 2019)
Title 5
   BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapters:
   
5.02   General Provisions
   
5.04   Rules and Regulations
   
5.06   Business Licenses--Fees
Chapter 5.02
   GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
5.02.010   Short title.
   
5.02.020   License required.
   
5.02.030   Definitions.
5.02.010 Short title.
This title may be cited as the "Business License Law" of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.02.020 License required.
No person shall commence, transact or carry on any business, trade, profession,
calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from
the city to do so or without complying with any and all applicable provisions
of this title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.02.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   (1)   "Businesses, professions and trades" as used in this title means and
includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
establishments and all other kind of activities and matters, together with all
devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are
conducted for the purpose of earning a profit or livelihood whether or not a
profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby. "Business, professions and
trades" shall include, but is not limited thereto, trades and occupations of
all and every kind of calling carried on within the city, salesmen, brokers,
retailers, wholesalers, vendors, suppliers, peddlers, professions, the renting
or supplying of living quarters, or rooms, or board, or both for six or more
guests, tenants or occupiers in any other type of endeavor entered into within
the city for the purpose of earning a livelihood or profit whether paid for in
money, goods, labor or otherwise and whether or not the business, profession or
trade has a fixed place of business in the city.
   The business license law shall apply to all persons conducting a business,
profession or trade within the city whether or not such person maintains a
fixed place of business in the city and whether or not the person may primarily
conduct his business, profession or trade elsewhere. Unless exempted by the
provisions of the business license law, a person shall be deemed to be
conducting a business, profession or trade within the city if he, or his
agents, or employees offer, solicit, sell, contract, construct, make and
deliver or repair, or perform acts or services in respect to the business,
trade or professions within the city.
   "Business, professions or trades" shall not apply to any person engaged in a
business, profession or trade solely as an employee of any other person
conducting, managing or carrying on any such business in the city and where
such other person is subject to the terms and provisions of this title.
   (2)   "Person" as used in this title includes the individual natural person,
partnerships, joint adventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees,
trusts or corporations, or any officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind
of personal representative of any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for
himself, or for any person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to
law.
   (3)   "City" means the city of La Mirada.
   (4)   "Finance director" means the finance manager of the city or his or her
designee.
   (5)   "Gross receipts" means and includes the total amount of the sale price
of all sales, the total amount charged or received for the performance of any
act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, whether such service,
act or employment is done as a part of or in connection with the sale of goods
for which a charge is made or credit allowed, including all receipts, cash,
credits and property of any kind or nature, any amount for which credit is
allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on
account of the cost of the property sold, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses
whatsoever; provided, that cash discounts allowed or taken on sales shall not
be included and shall not be construed to impose any tax upon any business or
transaction which the city is not authorized to license or tax under the laws
of the state or of the United States.
   Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and
collected from the consumer or purchaser, or any part of the sale price of any
property previously sold and returned to the seller which is refunded by the
seller by way of cash, credit or allowance given or taken as part payment on
any property so accepted for resale shall be deducted for the purpose of
determining the gross receipts under this title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
Chapter 5.04
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
5.04.010   License required.
   
5.04.020   Application.
   
5.04.030   Application confidential.
   
5.04.040   Compliance with governmental regulations.
   
5.04.050   Term of license.
   
5.04.060   Renewal and delinquency.
   
5.04.070   Fees payable in advance.
   
5.04.080   Unlawful businesses.
   
5.04.090   License not transferable.
   
5.04.100   Duplicate license.
   
5.04.110   Branch establishments.
   
5.04.120   Concessions.
   
5.04.130   Partnerships.
   
5.04.140   Combination businesses.
   
5.04.150   Posting of license.
   
5.04.160   Enforcement.
   
5.04.170   Determining class of business.
   
5.04.180   Gross receipts--New business.
   
5.04.190   Gross receipts--Review.
   
5.04.200   Examination of place of business.
   
5.04.210   Examination of books and records.
   
5.04.220   Assessment--Administrative remedy.
   
5.04.230   Revocation or suspension.
   
5.04.240   License fee a debt.
   
5.04.250   Compromise of claims.
   
5.04.260   Administrative hearing.
   
5.04.270   Appeal to city council.
   
5.04.280   Exemptions.
   
5.04.290   Penalty for violation.
5.04.010 License required.
   (a)   There are imposed upon the business, trades, professions, callings and
occupations specified in this title, license fees in the amounts hereinafter
prescribed.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person or business to transact and carry
on any business in the city without first having procured the proper license as
prescribed in this title and without complying with any and all of the
provisions of this title.
   (c)   This section shall not be construed to require any person or company
to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement
conflicts with applicable statutes or constitutional provisions of the United
States or of the state.
   (d)   Any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation which requires
a separate permit under this code shall obtain and provide proof of such permit
prior to the issuance of any business license.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.020 Application.
All applications for licenses shall be in writing upon a form issued by the
finance director. The applicant, in addition, shall submit any further
information or evidence in writing as required by the finance director. The
application shall be verified or sworn under penalty of perjury by the
applicant and shall be filed with the finance director.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.030 Application confidential.
All applications filed pursuant to the provisions of this section for the
purpose of ascertaining business license fees shall be deemed confidential in
character and shall not be subject to public inspection. It shall be the duty
of the finance director to preserve and keep the statements so that the
contents thereof may not become known except as required by law.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.040 Compliance with governmental regulations.
Every business, trade, profession or service which additionally requires any
Federal, state or local regulatory license or permit, shall present evidence to
the finance director of satisfactory compliance with such regulations prior to
the issuance of any business license under this title. Additionally, no license
shall be issued by the finance director to any business, trade, profession or
service which fails to present any land use permit required by the zoning
ordinance or which has failed to comply with the provisions of any other
regulation of this code having to do with trades, businesses or occupations.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.050 Term of license.
Except in cases specifically provided for otherwise in this title, the license
term for licenses issued under this title shall be for a term of twelve months
commencing from the first day of the calendar year quarter in which the license
is issued. Unless specified otherwise in this title all licenses shall be
subject to renewal upon the anniversary date of the license and the fee for the
same shall then be immediately due and owing.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.060 Renewal and delinquency.
   (a)   Every person or business making application for the renewal of a
license shall furnish to the finance director for guidance in ascertaining the
amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a signed written statement,
under oath, upon a form provided by the finance director, setting forth such
information pertaining to the preceding year as may be required in this chapter
to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid.
   (b)   The finance director shall not issue to any such person or business a
license for the same business, until such person or company shall have
furnished to him the written statement and paid the license tax required in
this chapter.
   (c)   Every person failing to pay the license fee on the date due shall
become subject to a penalty of ten percent of the amount of such license for
each thirty days thereafter up to a maximum of one hundred percent of the
license fee due and owing.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.070 Fees payable in advance.
All license fees shall be paid in advance to the finance director in lawful
money of the United States. The amount to be paid shall be determined in the
discretion of the finance director and in compliance with the terms of this
title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.080 Unlawful businesses.
No license issued under the provisions of this title shall be construed as
authorizing the conduct of or continuance of any illegal or unlawful business.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.090 License not transferable.
No license issued pursuant to this title shall be transferable; provided that
where a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct business at a
particular location, such licensee may upon application therefor and paying a
fee of five dollars, have the license previously issued amended so as to
authorize the conduct of such business from such other location in the city.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.100 Duplicate license.
Duplicate license may be issued by the finance director to replace any license
previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the applicant therefor
filing an affidavit attesting to such fact and at the time of filing such
affidavit paying to the finance director a fee of five dollars.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.110 Branch establishments.
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location
of the business engaged in and each license shall authorize the licensee to
engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner
designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants
used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the
provisions of this title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business
or branch establishments.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.120 Concessions.
Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost rental or
commission basis as a concession or upon rented floor space in or upon the
premises of any person licensed under any provision of this title, shall be
required to obtain a separate and independent license pursuant to the
appropriate provisions of this title and shall be subject to all of the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.130 Partnerships.
In the event that any business conducted, managed or carried on in the city is
organized as a partnership or joint venture, the scheduled license fee need be
paid only by the partnership or joint venture and not by such individual
partner or joint venture.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.140 Combination businesses.
Except as otherwise expressly provided in this title, any person conducting,
managing or carrying on two or more businesses, licensed by this title, at the
same location, shall be required to apply for and obtain only one license for
such businesses; provided, however, that such person shall pay all fees
provided by this title for all businesses conducted at the location.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.150 Posting of license.
All licenses must be kept and posted in the following manner:
   (a)   Any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business in the
city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises
where such business is carried on.
   (b)   Any licensee engaged in business but not operating at a fixed place of
business in the city, shall keep the license upon his person at all times while
engaged in business in the city, or if a vehicle or piece of equipment is used
as an integral part of the business the licensee shall keep the license or a
photocopy thereof, posted in a conspicuous place on the vehicle or equipment so
used.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.160 Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the finance director or his or her designee to enforce
each and every provision of this title requiring the payment of any license
fee. In addition, the finance director shall be responsible for the issuance of
licenses and the proper processing of all applications.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.170 Determining class of business.
The determination of which business or type or class of business a licensee or
applicant is engaged in, and the determination of the applicable variables for
computation of the fee to be paid under this title, shall be an administrative
function of the finance director.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.180 Gross receipts--New business.
The finance director is authorized to determine the probable gross receipts and
make assessments therefrom on any new business which does not possess an
existing record of gross receipts. Any error in such assessment as to
overpayments or underpayments shall be added to or deleted from the business
license fee on the subsequent annual assessment of such new business.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.190 Gross receipts--Review.
The accuracy of all statements of gross receipts shall be subject to audit and
verification by the finance director or his or her properly authorized deputies
or assistants. The finance director is authorized and empowered to inspect and
audit the books and records of any and all persons licensed to carry on any
business pursuant to this title. No statement filed by a person pursuant to
this title shall be conclusive on any matters contained therein.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.200 Examination of place of business.
The finance director, or his or her designated deputy, may examine all places
of business in the city to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this
title have been complied with. The finance director, the city attorney and any
duly authorized employee shall have the power to examine all necessary books
and records of all persons doing business in the city required to be licensed
by the terms of this title for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of
license fee required to be paid by the provisions of this title. Such officers
and each and all of their deputies and duly authorized employees shall have the
power and authority to enter free of charge and at any reasonable time at any
place of business required to be licensed by the provisions of this title and
to demand an exhibition of such license, books or other matters of record. Any
person having any such license heretofore or hereafter issued in his possession
or under his control who fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of
a violation of this code.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.210 Examination of books and records.
For the purpose of the enforcement of this title, the finance director may
deputize a qualified accountant to examine the necessary books and records of
any person doing business in the city. Any failure on the part of any person
licensed under this title to exhibit and allow examination by the accountant so
deputized shall constitute a violation of this code.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.220 Assessment--Administrative remedy.
   Whenever the finance director determines that any fee is due or may be due
to the city under the provisions of this title, the finance director may make
and give notice of an assessment of such fee.
   The finance director may determine the amount of the license fee due from
such person from such information as he or she may be able to obtain and may,
if necessary, estimate the fee required to be paid thereunder upon the basis of
external indices on hand including, but not limited to, capital invested,
dividends paid, sales or other taxes paid or by considering other relevant
facts. In any such case, the finance director shall give notice of the amount
so assessed by serving the same personally or by depositing the same in the
United States Post Office, with postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the
person so assessed at his last known address. Such notice shall additionally
advise the person assessed of the right to an administrative hearing pursuant
to the terms of this title. The license fee shall be assessed as of that date
and shall be due and owing as of the first time the amount would have been due
and owing pursuant to this title in the amount set forth under this title,
together with all penalties as may be due pursuant to Section
5.04.060(c).
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.230 Revocation or suspension.
Any license granted or issued under the provisions of this title may be revoked
or suspended at any time for a material false statement contained in the
application for the license granted or issued. Any person transacting or
carrying on any business during any period of license revocation or suspension
shall be subject to assessment for any insufficient license fee and penalties
under Section
5.04.060(c) for any such insufficient license fee. The finance director shall
give at least five days' written notice to the licensee, postage prepaid, which
notice shall specify the grounds for revocation or suspension and shall advise
the licensee of a right to administrative hearing pursuant to the terms of this
title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.240 License fee a debt.
The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this
title shall be deemed a debt to city. An action on the debt may be commenced in
the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. All remedies
prescribed under this title shall be cumulative and the use of any one or more
remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose
of enforcing the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.250 Compromise of claims.
The finance director shall have, in addition to all other powers conferred by
this chapter, for good cause shown, the power to extend the time for failing
any application for a period of not to exceed thirty days, and in such case
waive any penalty that would have otherwise accrued; and with the approval of
the council and/or the written approval of the city attorney, to compromise any
claim for license fee subject to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.260 Administrative hearing.
   (a)   Right to Hearing. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the finance
director or of any other officer of this city made pursuant to the provisions
of this title may request an administrative hearing before the city manager or
his or her designee within thirty days after notice of any such decision. An
administrative hearing must be applied for and concluded prior to an appeal
before the city council pursuant to Section
5.04.270, unless the city manager receives a written request from the city
council to allow an appeal on any such matter to be taken directly to the city
council.
   (b)   Failure to Request Administrative Hearing. In the event no request for
administrative hearing is filed within the time prescribed in this section, the
decision of the finance director shall become final and conclusive.
   (c)   Hearing Procedures. A written request for administrative hearing shall
be filed with the city clerk, with such notice stating: (1) The name and
address of the applicant; (2) the date of the decision in question; (3) the
reasons for the hearing; and (4) the grounds relied upon for relief. The
application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars
to cover the administrative costs of the hearing.
   The city clerk shall set the matter for hearing not later than sixty days
following the date of application. Notice of the time and place of the hearing
shall be mailed to the applicant, postage prepaid, no later than ten days prior
to the date set for hearing. The notice may also designate certain records of
the applicant required to be produced at the time of the hearing.
   (d)   Administrative Hearing; Decision. At the administrative hearing
prescribed by this section, the applicant and the city may submit any and all
evidence as they believe to be relevant to their respective positions. The
hearing officer may require the presentation of additional evidence from either
the applicant or the city, or from both, and may continue the hearing from time
to time for the purpose of allowing the presentation of additional evidence.
Upon completion of the hearing, the hearing officer may take any action with
respect to the decision of the finance director as evidence may require;
however, the amount of the license fee shall not be increased unless a claim
for an increase is asserted on behalf of the city either before or during the
hearing by the finance director. Written notice of the decision of the hearing
officer shall be given to the applicant within ten days of the conclusion of
the hearing. The decision of the administrative hearing shall be final and
conclusive upon all matters in controversy, unless an appeal is timely filed to
the city council pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.270 Appeal to city council.
Within twenty days of the date of mailing the notice of decision on any
administrative hearing pursuant to this chapter, a licensee who contests such
decision may appeal to the city council for the independent review of the
matter at a public hearing of the council. The procedures, timeliness and
requirements for an administrative hearing pursuant to Section
5.04.260 shall apply to an appeal to the city council, with the additional
requirements that: (a) the appeal application shall also state the date that
the notice of decision was mailed; and (b) the appeal application shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of two hundred dollars.
   The city council may consider any and all evidence of record presented at
the administrative hearing, together with any supplementary report of the staff
necessary to clearly present the facts and circumstances of the case, and any
new information brought forth at the public hearing. The city council may
approve, reverse or modify the decision of the administrative hearing and the
decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.280 Exemptions.
   (a)   Religious, Charitable, Fraternal, Educational, Military, State, County
or Municipal Organizations. No license shall be required for the conducting of
any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical,
literary, religious or moral subject whenever the receipts of such
entertainment, concert, exhibition or lectures are to be appropriated to any
church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose in the city, nor
shall any license or permit be required for the conducting of any recreation,
entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture by any religious,
charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal
organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment,
dance, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose
and objectives for which such association or organization was formed and from
which profit is not derived either directly or indirectly by any person. The
provisions of this title shall not be deemed or construed to require the
payment of a license by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational or
military organization or association conducting casual sales, concerts, dances,
entertainments, exhibitions or lectures for fund raising purposes and where the
funds so derived are retained strictly for charitable, religious, educational,
fraternal or military purposes and do not go to the benefit or use or profit of
any person.
   "Casual sales" as used in this section means the sale or offer for sale of
goods, wares, merchandise or food products for a period not exceeding seven
days, except that "casual sales" shall not include the sale or offer for sale
of Christmas trees from November 15th to December 26th of any year.
   (b)   Interstate Commerce. Every person claiming to be entitled to exemption
from the payment of any license provided for in this section upon the ground
that such license casts a burden upon his rights to engage in commerce with
foreign nations or among the several states, or conflicts with the regulations
of the United States Congress respecting interstate commerce, shall file a
verified statement with the finance director disclosing the interstate or other
character of his business entitling such exemption. Such statement shall state
the name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be
solicited or secured, the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any,
and his address, the kind of goods to be delivered, the name from which the
same are to be shipped or forwarded, the method of solicitation or taking
orders, the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state, the
method of delivery, the name and location of the residence of the applicant and
any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption. A copy of the
order blank, contract form or other papers used by such person in taking orders
shall be attached to the affidavit for the information of the finance director.
It if appears that the applicant is entitled to such exemption, the finance
director shall forthwith issue a free license. In case of dispute, the decision
of the city attorney shall be final.
   (c)   Exemption Under Other Provisions of State Law. Every person claiming
to be entitled to an exemption from payment of any license fee provided for in
this section upon the ground that such license fee is exempt under state law
shall file a verified statement with the finance director disclosing the
character of the business entitling such exemption. The statement shall state
the name and location of the company or firm claiming the exemption, the type
of business conducted and facts establishing that the person, organization or
firm comes within the exemption of the state law. Additional information shall
be supplied to the finance director, or city attorney upon request, in order to
ascertain whether or not the claimant meets the exemption of the state law. In
case of dispute, the decision of the city attorney shall be final.
   (d)   Public Utility and Franchise Holders Exemption. All public utilities
or privately owned public utilities which are holders of a franchise from the
city shall be exempt from the provisions of this business license law.
   (e)   Exempt Licenses to be Endorsed. Whenever the finance director shall
issue any license granting any exemption provided for in this chapter, the
person to whom such license is issued shall endorse thereon his signature in
ink in the presence of the finance director or his or her designee, and no such
license shall be transferable. Any such exempt license shall be issued by the
finance director only for the minimum license period of any such business, and
may be renewed for the same period under the same conditions and in the same
manner as originally obtained.
   (f)   Revocation of License Examinations. At any time that it shall appear
to the satisfaction of the finance director that none of the conditions
specified in this chapter as meriting exemption from license requirements
exists as to any person to whom any such exemption has been allowed, the
finance director may revoke such exemption and the exempt license issued
thereunder. The revocation shall be in accordance with the procedure set forth
in Section
5.04.230 of this chapter.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.04.290 Penalty for violation.
No person shall violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this title. Any person violating any of the provisions or
failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this title, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of this title is committed, continued or permitted by such person and
shall be punished accordingly.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
Chapter 5.06
BUSINESS LICENSES--FEES
Sections:
   
5.06.010   Applicability.
   
5.06.020   General business.
   
5.06.030   Professionals.
   
5.06.040   Services.
   
5.06.050   Contracting and building.
   
5.06.060   Rental of property and accommodations.
   
5.06.070   Coin-operated machines.
   
5.06.080   Performances, exhibitions and amusements.
5.06.010 Applicability.
Unless otherwise exempted in this title, each business, service, profession or
trade shall obtain and pay for a business license pursuant to the terms of this
chapter. The provisions contained in this chapter for the payment of a license
fee in the specified amount are solely revenue raising measures.
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.020 General business.
Every business of retailing, merchandising, wholesaling, manufacturing,
processing, distributing, warehousing or any other business activity involving
a product not otherwise specifically provided for in this title, and which
business is conducted from any premises within the city, shall pay a business
license fee pursuant to the following schedules:
   (a)   Retail--each place of business.
Gross Receipts               Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00          $50.00 (Minimum) +
$50,000.00 to $500,000.00    .0002
$500,000.00 and above        .0001 (Maximum $1,000.00)
   (b)   Wholesale--each place of business.
Gross Receipts               Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00          $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$50,000.00 to $500,000.00    .0002
$500,000.00 and above        .0001 (Maximum $1,000.00)
   (c)   Manufacture.
Gross Receipts               Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $500,000.00         $ 75.00 (Minimum) +
$500,000.00 to $5,000,000.00 .00005
$5,000,000.00 and above      .00002 (Maximum $1,000.00)
   (d)   Warehouse and Distribution. Gross Building Square Footage
$.01 per square foot         $ 75.00 (Minimum)
                             1,000.00 (Maximum)
 
(Ord. 453 § 1, 1991; Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.030 Professionals.
   (a)   Every person or company, where located, engaging in or carrying on
within the city any profession requiring satisfactory compliance with written
and/or oral examination standards adopted by a branch of the state or federal
government and/or requiring a certain amount of tenure with any such branch of
government, shall pay a business license fee based on the following schedule.
Such professions include, but are not limited to:
   Architect, attorney, certified public accountant, chiropodist or podiatrist,
chiropractor, clinical laboratory technologist, dental hygienist, dentist,
embalmer, engineer (all types), land surveyor, mortician, nurse-registered,
optometrist, osteopathic physician and surgeon, pharmacist-registered,
physician and surgeon, psychiatrist, psychologist, veterinarian, x-ray
technician.
   (b)   Fees. Every professional shall pay a fee based on gross receipts based
on services performed by such professional at locations within the city as
follows:
 
Gross Receipts            Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00       $ 50.00 (Minimum)
$50,000.00 to $500,000.00 .0002
$500,000.00 and above     .0001 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.040 Services.
Every business of providing, transporting, maintaining or performing labor for
the benefit of another within the city of supplying some general demand for the
benefit of another within the city which does not produce a tangible commodity;
as well as every business of transporting, maintaining, storing or repairing
tangible commodities within the city whether or not such business is conducted
from a premises, vehicle or mobile location within or outside the city.
Services do not include performances, exhibitions and amusements nor do they
include professional within the terms of this chapter.
   (a)   Recreational.
      (1)   Recreational services include, but are not limited to:
   Bowling alleys; dance halls; driving ranges; golf courses (including
miniature); motion picture theaters (including drive-in); pool halls (including
billiards and snooker); riding stables; skating rinks; social clubs; swimming
pools.
      (2)   Fees.
 
Gross Receipts            Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00       $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$50,000.00 to $500,000.00 .0002
$500,000.00 and above     .0001 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
   (b)   Pick-up and Delivery.
      (1)   Pick-up and delivery services include, but are not limited to:
   Junk and refuse collectors; retail and wholesale delivery; taxicabs, buses
and U-drive cars.
      (2)   Fees. Vehicles operated as an incidental part of a business,
licensed and taxed under any other provision of this chapter or other ordinance
of the city, shall not be separately licensed and taxed.
   Every person or company, except as provided for above, conducting a pick-up
and/or delivery service by means of a motor vehicle, wagon or any other
conveyance, shall pay a license tax as follows:
 
Gross Receipts       Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00  $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$50,000.00 and above .0002 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
   (c)   Business and Personal Services.
      (1)   Business services include, but are not limited to:
   Answering service; appraising; assayer; auctioneering; banking; bookkeeping;
broker-business opportunities; broker-stocks and bonds; consulting and
advising; credit and collection; designing and drafting; employment bureau;
escrow; insurance adjusting; interior decoration; landscaping and gardening;
loan company; messenger; parking lot; property management; tabulating and
machine accounting; typing and shorthand.
      (2)   Personal services include, but are not limited to:
   Ambulance; barber; baths; cosmetologist; interpreter; masseur or masseuse;
physical culture; shoe shining; tutoring and instruction.
      (3)   Fees.
      Less than six single-family dwellings:   No fee
      One business property or six or more single-family dwellings, or two or
more residential rental units all of which are located on one parcel:
 
Gross Receipts       Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00  $ 50.00 (Minimum)+
$50,000.00 and above .0002 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
   (d)   Repair and Maintenance (not building trade).
      (1)   Repair and maintenance services include, but are not limited to:
   Auto wash; drycleaning; janitorial; laundry; product repair and service;
spraying and fumigating; tree surgery, trimming and removal; watch repairing.
      (2)   Fees.
 
Gross Receipts            Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00       $ 50.00   (Minimum)
$50,000.00 to $500,000.00 .0002
$500,000.00 and above     .0001 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
(Ord. 453 § 2, 1991; Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.050 Contracting and building.
Any person or company, wherever located, which is licensed as a contractor by
the state; and who undertakes to or offers to or purports to have the capacity
to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others,
construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or
demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure,
project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the
erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith
within the city, is defined as a contractor and comes under this
classification. The term contractor includes general engineering contractor,
general building contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor and other
building tradesmen.
   A "builder-owner" is a person or company employing subcontractors, specialty
contractors, general engineering contractor or workman under his supervision
and direction by the hour or day for the purpose of constructing improvements
on real property owned by it within the city. It shall be taxed in this title
the same as a general building contractor unless its only building activity is
constructing on its property a single-family or two family dwelling unit or
addition thereto which will be used in whole or in part for the purpose of its
own occupancy for a period of not less than one year.
   A "building tradesman", wherever located, is any person engaged within the
city, in any trade, art, calling, vocation or occupation of the building trades
not licensed as a contractor by the state.
   (a)   Fees.
 
Gross Receipts         Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00    $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$50,000 to $500,000.00 .0002
$500,000.00 and above  .0001 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.060 Rental of property and accommodations.
This section includes every person or company engaged in the business of
renting, leasing or providing, without loss of ownership, any land, dwelling,
building, structure or portion thereof for the purpose of occupancy, sleeping,
lodging, boarding or other use and accommodation. The license tax for the
rental of properties is determined by the ownership of the property. Agents
acting for property owners are responsible for the payment of the license fee
on rentals, and in addition, are subject to the license fee under business
services. Such rental and accommodations include:
   (1)   Business Property (rental): Buildings or portions thereof used for any
business, commercial or industrial purposes; raw land (used for any purpose).
   (2)   Residential Property (rental): Apartments; auto courts; condominiums
(more than one unit); single-family dwellings (more than one unit).
   (3)   Accommodations: Boardinghouse; hospital; hotel; inn; dwelling or
portion thereof; trailer parks; lodging house; motel; resthomes; roominghouse;
sanitariums.
   (4)   Fees.
      One rental unit:      No fee
      Two rental units and above
 
Gross Receipts       Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $50,000.00  $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$50,000.00 and above .0002 (Maximum $1,000.00)
 
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.070 Coin-operated machines.
   (a)   Application of Section. Any machines that dispense a product or
provides amusement resulting from the insertion or use of a coin, slug, token,
plate, disc, plug, key, check or device, money, or thing of value.
      (1)   Exemption. No fee shall be required as to any vending machine used
exclusively for the sale or offer for sale of any newspapers or periodicals.
      (2)   Exemption. No fee shall be required with regard to coin-operated
washing machines or clothes dryers which are owned by a landlord for the
exclusive use of his tenants.
      (3)   Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to coin-
operated washing machines and clothes dryers which are utilized in a commercial
laundromat or laundry service (see services--repair and maintenance).
   (b)   Fees.
   (1)   Vending (Dispensing a Product).
Gross Receipts       Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $20,000.00  $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$20,000.00 and above .01
   (2)   Amusement.
Gross Receipts       Tax Per $1.00 of Gross Receipts
$1.00 to $10,000.00  $ 50.00 (Minimum) +
$10,000.00 and above .01
 
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
5.06.080 Performances, exhibitions and amusements.
   Every business or person which produces, conducts or exhibits any
performance, exhibition or amusement as a transient business, and not from a
permanent location within the city, shall pay a business license fee pursuant
to the schedule set forth below. Such business license fee shall be paid prior
to the licensed activity.
   Such performances, exhibitions and amusements include, but are not limited
to, theatrical performances, musical performances, meetings, athletic contests,
races, recreational activities, exhibitions of art or handicrafts or products,
lectures, speeches, menageries or any other such live activity conducted for
the public to view or participate in the display or performance of such
activity.
   Such business license shall not apply to any performance, exhibition or
amusement produced, conducted or exhibited by a recognized tax exempt
organization is sponsored by a nonprofit educational institution or a nonprofit
association or corporation organized primarily for educational, veteran,
patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes, or political
events held by recognized individuals or organizations with an identification
number issued by the appropriate election jurisdiction.
   (a)   Fees.
 
                                       Daily   Monthly
Amusement parks, animal shows and zoos $ 25.00 $ 750.00
Athletic contests                      25.00   750.00
Carnival, circus or menagerie          25.00   750.00
Motion pictures (taking of)            25.00   750.00
Art, handicraft or products            25.00   750.00
Other                                  25.00   750.00
 
(Ord. 383 § 3 Ex. B (part), 1986).
Title 6
   HEALTH AND SANITATION  *
Chapters:
   
6.04   Health Code
   
6.08   Solid Waste and Recyclables Collection Services
   
6.12   Dairies and Cow Herds
   
6.14   Keeping of Bees Prohibited
 
Notes
  For constitutional provisions authorizing any city to make and enforce within
  its limits all local, police, sanitary and other regulations which are not in
* conflict with the general laws, see Article 11, Section 7 of the California
  Constitution. For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate
  sanitary matters, see California Health and Safety Code §§ 101450 et seq.
Chapter 6.04
HEALTH CODE
Sections:
   
6.04.010   Code and regulations adopted.
   
6.04.020   Copies filed.
   
6.04.030   Amendments to Division 1, Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code.
   
6.04.040   Title 11 amendments.
   
6.04.045   Title 11 amendments - water conservation requirements.
   
6.04.050   Deletions.
   
6.04.060   Conflicts.
6.04.010 Code and regulations adopted.
Division 1 of Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code (Public Health Licensing
Regulations) and Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code (the Health Code), as
the same have been amended and are in effect on August 1, 1998, are adopted by
reference, subject to any amendments as set forth herein, and shall henceforth
collectively be known as the "health code of the city of La Mirada."
(Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1998).
6.04.020 Copies filed.
A certified copy of Division 1 of Title 8 and Title 11, as adopted in Section
6.04.010, has been deposited with the city clerk, and shall be at all times
maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1998).
6.04.030 Amendments to Division 1, Title 8 of the Los Angeles County Code.
   A.   Section 8.04.142 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.142 Food facility.
   'Food facility' means any food establishment, food warehouse, milk
warehouse, mobile food facility, mobile support unit, vehicle, vending machine,
swap meet prepackaged food stand, mobile preparation unit, or any place used in
conjunction with the operation of the above, including, but not limited to,
storage facilities for food utensils, equipment, and materials.
   B.   Section 8.04.200 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.200 Food vehicle, retail.
   1.   'Retail food vehicle' means any motorized or nonmotorized conveyance or
portable food service unit upon which prepackaged or approved unpackaged food
is sold or offered for sale at retail. Categories of retail food vehicles
include:
      (a)   Animal food vehicle;
      (b)   Bakery distributor vehicle (independent, retail);
      (c)   Fish peddler vehicle;
      (d)   Food vehicle - Department of Motor Vehicles exempt;
      (e)   Food salvage distributor vehicle;
      (f)   Fruit and vegetable vehicle;
      (g)   Grocery distributor vehicle;
      (h)   Independent ice distributor vehicle;
      (i)   Independent retail meat vehicle;
      (j)   Independent milk distributor vehicle, not a processor-owned milk
delivery vehicle;
      (k)   Industrial catering vehicle;
      (l)   Limited food vehicle;
      (m)   Unpackaged food vehicle;
      (n)   Prepackaged food cart, a nonmotorized vehicle, from which the
operator dispenses prepackaged and labeled food;
      (o)   Any combination of the above;
      (p)   Or any vehicle, including, but not limited to a mobile food
facility, from which animal food, bakery products, fish, shellfish, seafood,
fruits, vegetables, meats, poultry, preserves, jelly, relish, milk or other
dairy products, food or food products, ice or beverages, whether in bulk,
canned, wrapped, bottled, packaged, or any other form, are sold or kept for
sale at retail or are distributed to the consumer.
   C.   Section 8.04.225 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.225 Grading, scoring method and letter grade card.
   1.   'Grading' means the letter grade issued by the county health officer at
the conclusion of the routine inspection of a food facility. The grade shall be
based upon the scoring method set forth in this section resulting from the food
official inspection report and shall reflect the food facility's degree of
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders,
ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the
public health.
   2.   'Scoring method' means a procedure used by the county health officer
where a score is calculated by adding values predefined on the food official
inspection report for violations that are observed during an inspection, and
subtracting that total from 100. The resulting numerical sum, stated as a
percentage, constitutes the score for the inspection.
   3.   'Letter grade card' means a card that may be posted by the county
health officer at a food facility upon completion of a routine inspection that
indicates the letter grade of the facility as determined by the county health
officer using the scoring method set forth in this section. For the purposes of
this provision, a food facility shall include a food facility operating in
conjunction with a food processing establishment.
   4.   The county health officer, in his discretion, may immediately close and
food facility which, upon completion of the routine inspection, does not
achieve at least a 'C' grade as defined herein. Nothing in this provision shall
prohibit the county health officer from immediately closing any food facility,
if, in his discretion, immediate closure is necessary to protect the public
health.
   5.   The letter grade for a food facility shall be based upon the final
numerical percentage score set forth in the food official inspection report, as
follows:
      (a)   A grade of 'A' shall indicate a final score of 90 percent or higher
as determined by the county health officer;
      (b)   A grade of 'B' shall indicate a final score less that 90 percent
but not less that 80 percent as determined by the county health officer;
      (c)   A grade of 'C' shall indicate a final score less than 80 percent
but not less that 70 percent as determined by the county health officer.
   D.   Section 8.04.275 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.275 Inspection score card.
   1.   'Inspection score card' means a card that may be posted by the county
health officer at a food facility, upon completion of a routine inspection,
that indicates the total numerical percentage score for the facility as
determined by the county health officer and as set forth in the food official
inspection report. For the purposes of this provision, a food facility shall
include a food facility operating in conjunction with a food processing
establishment.
   2.   The county officer, in his or her discretion, may immediately close any
food facility which, upon completion of the routine inspection, achieves a
total numerical percentage score less than 70 percent as set forth in Section
8.04.225. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the county health officer
from immediately closing any food facility if, in his discretion, immediate
closure is necessary to protect the public health.
   E.   Section 8.04.306 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.306 Mobile food facility.
   'Mobile food facility' means any vehicle used in conjunction with a
commissary or other permanent food facility upon which food is sold or
distributed at retail. 'Mobile food facility' does not include a 'transporter'
used to transport packaged food from a food facility, or other approved source
to the consumer.
   F.   Section 8.04.311 is hereby added to read as follows:
   8.04.311 Mobile support unit.
   1.   'Mobile support unit' means a vehicle used in conjunction with a
commissary or other permanent food facility that travels to and services mobile
food facilities as needed to replenish supplies, including food and potable
water, clean the interior of the unit, or dispose of liquid or solid wastes.
The county health officer shall have the discretion to score a mobile support
unit pursuant to the method set forth in Section 8.04.225.
   G.   Section 8.04.337 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.337 Notice of closure.
   1.   'Notice of closure' means a public notice that may be posted by the
county health officer at a food facility upon suspension or revocation of the
facility's public health permit and that results in the immediate closure of
the facility and the discontinuance of all operations of the food facility, by
order of the county health officer, because of violations of applicable
federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules,
regulations, or directives relating to the public health.
   H.   Section 8.04.403 is hereby added to read as follows:
   8.04.403 Route location.
   1.   The owner/operator of a mobile food facility or mobile support unit
shall complete a Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet, obtained from the county
health officer, listing the complete address, telephone number and arrival/
departure times of each location where the retail food business is being
conducted. The Mobile Facility Route Sheet shall be maintained on file at the
Vehicle Inspection Program. The owner/operator of a mobile food facility or
mobile support unit shall notify the county health officer of any significant
changes to the Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet. Failure to provide an accurate
and current Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet may result in suspension or
revocation of the public health license or permit.
   I.   Section 8.04.595 is hereby added to read as follows:
   8.04.595 Public health license and permit - Annual certification inspection.
   1.   The owner/operator of a mobile food facility or mobile support unit
shall obtain an annual certification inspection from the county health officer.
The enforcement agency shall initially approve all mobile food facilities and
mobile support units as complying with California Health and Safety Code
Chapters 1-8, inclusive, 10 and 13. The county health officer shall then issue
a certification sticker which shall be affixed to the mobile food facility or
mobile support unit. The sticker will be valid during the fiscal year
corresponding to the mobile facility's or mobile support unit's current public
health operating permit. Failure to secure an annual certification sticker
shall result in a suspension or revocation of the public health license or
permit.
   J.   Section 8.04.752 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.752 Posting requirements - Penalty for noncompliance - Documents
available for public review.
   1.   Upon issuance by the county health officer, the health officer shall
post at every food facility the letter grade card or the inspection score card
as determined by the county health officer, so as to be clearly visible to the
general public and to patrons entering the facility. 'Clearly visible to the
general public and to patrons' means:
      (a)   Posted in the front window of the food facility within five (5)
feet of the front door or posted in a display case mounted on the outside front
wall of the food facility within five (5) feet of the front door;
      (b)   Posted adjacent to the pass out window on a mobile food facility,
or on the customer service side of an unenclosed mobile food facility; or
      (c)   Posted in a location as directed and determined in the discretion
of the county health officer to ensure proper notice to the general public and
to patrons.
   2.   In the event that a food facility is operated in the same building or
space as a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event that a
food facility shares a common patron entrance with such a separately licensed
or permitted business, or in the event of both, the county health officer shall
post the letter grade card or the inspection score card in the initial patron
contact area, or in a location as determined in the discretion of the county
health officer.
   3.   The letter grade card and the inspection score card shall not be
defaced, marred, reproduced, copied, camouflaged, hidden or removed. It is
unlawful to operate a food facility unless the letter grade card or the
inspection score card as determined by the county health officer is in place as
set forth hereunder. Removal of the letter grade card or the inspection score
card is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or
revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in
Section 8.04.930.
   4.   Every food facility shall post a legibly lettered sign which displays
the following information so as to be clearly visible to the general public and
to patrons entering the facility:
      Any public health concerns regarding this facility should be directed to
the County of Los Angeles, Environmental Health office located at: 12440 East
Imperial Highway Room 519, Norwalk, CA 90651.
   5.   The food official inspection report upon which the letter grade card or
the inspection score card is based and all subsequent reports issued by the
county health officer shall be maintained at the food facility and shall be
available to the general public and to patrons for review upon request. The
food facility shall keep the food official inspection report and all subsequent
reports until such time as the county health officer completes the next routine
inspection of the facility and issues a new food official inspection report.
   K.   Section 8.04.755 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.755 Letter grade card and inspection score card - Period of validity. A
letter grade card or inspection score card shall remain valid until the county
health officer completes the next routine inspection of the food facility.
   L.   Section 8.04.943 is hereby amended to read as follows:
   8.04.943 Public health permit suspension or revocation - Notice of closure.
   1.   Upon issuance of a written notice of suspension or revocation of the
public health permit by the county health officer, the health officer shall
post a notice of closure at the food facility so as to be clearly visible to
the general public and to patrons.
   2.   Upon issuance of the written notice of suspension or revocation of the
public health permit by the county health officer, the food facility shall
immediately close to the general public and to patrons and shall discontinue
all operations until the public health permit has been reissued or reinstated
by order of the county health officer or until the facility no longer operates
as a food facility.
   3.   The notice of closure shall remain posted until removed by the county
health officer. Removal of the notice of closure by any person other than the
county health officer or the refusal of a food facility to close upon issuance
of the written notice of suspension of the public health permit is a violation
of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the food
facility's public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section
8.04.930."
(Ord. 641 § 2, 2011; Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1998).
6.04.040 Title 11 amendments.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
6.04.010 of this chapter, Sections 11.02.340, 11.10.010, 11.38.150 and
11.38.260 of Division 1 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code are amended
to read as follows:
   11.02.340 TEMPORARY REFRESHMENT STAND. "Temporary Refreshment Stand" means
any food preparation or dispensing operation conducted in connection with a
fair, circus, or public exhibition or gathering, or offering food for sale or
gift to the general public for a temporary period of time in one location.
   A temporary refreshment stand shall not operate for more than thirty (30)
days. A temporary refreshment stand shall only operate in locations approved by
the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall make an investigation of the
premises, equipment and facilities to be used in the operation of the
refreshment stand, and shall, when deemed necessary for the protection of
public health, restrict the operation to the preparation and service of those
foods which in his or her opinion would not be injurious to public health, when
prepared and served with such facilities as the operator intends to use.
   11.10.010 FOOD DEMONSTRATOR DEFINED. "Food Demonstrator" means any person
who offers or serves, with or without charge, unpackaged bulk food, or packaged
food, to the public for the purpose of publicizing, advertising, or promoting
the sale of food, food products, or food equipment. "Food Demonstrator" does
not mean a person operating as a hawker, or as or on behalf of a food
establishment, restaurant, or itinerant restaurant.
   11.38.150 WELLS-DRILLING AND DESTROYING. No person shall drill, dig, bore,
deepen or excavate any well, or destroy an existing well, without first making
application and securing a permit from the Health Officer.
   The application shall be made on a form prepared by the Health Officer which
shall include the location of the proposed or existing well, the type of
casing, the manner of sealing and any other data required by the Health
Officer.
   11.38.260 RECONSTRUCTION OR CONVERSION OF EXISTING WELL FOR DOMESTIC USE.
Any person intending to convert any industrial, oil or irrigation well for use
as a domestic water well, shall first apply and secure a permit from the Health
Officer.
   The application shall be made on a form prepared by the Health Officer which
shall include the location of the well, the type of casing, the manner of
sealing and any other data required by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1998).
6.04.045 Title 11 amendments - water conservation requirements.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 6.04.010 of this Chapter, Part 4 of
Chapter 11.38 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended to read as
follows:
   Part 4 WATER CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CITY OF LA MIRADA
   11.38.620   HOSE WATERING PROHIBITION. "No person shall hose, water or wash
down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, or other paved
surfaces, except as is required for the benefit of public health and safety.
Willful violation hereof shall be subject to a written warning for the first
violation, and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for each
subsequent violation.
   11.38.630   WATERING OF LAWNS AND LANDSCAPING.
   A.   No person shall water or cause to be watered any lawn or landscaping
between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
   B.   No person shall water or cause to be watered any lawn or landscaping
more than once a day.
   C.   No person shall water or cause to be watered any lawn or landscaping to
such an extent that runoff into adjoining streets, parking lots or alleys
occurs due to incorrectly directed or maintained sprinklers or excessive
watering.
   D.   It shall be the duty of all persons to inspect all hoses, faucets and
sprinkling systems for leaks, and to cause all leaks to be repaired as soon as
is reasonably practicable.
   E.   Willful violation hereof shall be subject to a written warning for the
first violation, and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for
each subsequent violation.
   11.38.640   INDOOR PLUMBING AND FIXTURES.
   A.   It shall be the duty of all persons to inspect all accessible indoor
plumbing and faucets for leaks, and to cause all leaks to be repaired as soon
as is reasonably practicable.
   B.   Willful violation hereof shall be subject to a written warning for the
first violation, and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for
each subsequent violation.
   11.38.650   WASHING VEHICLES. No motor vehicle, boat, trailers, or other
type of mobile equipment may be washed, except at a commercial carwash or with
reclaimed water, unless such vehicle is washed by using a hand-held bucket or a
water-hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle. No person shall leave a
water hose running while washing a vehicle or at any other time. Willful
violation hereof shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation,
and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for each subsequent
violation.
   11.38.660   PUBLIC EATING PLACES. No restaurant, hotel, cafeteria, café, or
other public place where food is sold or served shall serve drinking water to
any customer unless specifically requested to do so by such customer. Willful
violation hereof shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation,
and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for each subsequent
violation.
   11.38.670   DECORATIVE FOUNTAINS. No person shall use water to clean, fill,
or maintain levels in decorative fountains, ponds, lakes, or other similar
aesthetic structures unless such water flows through a recycling system.
Willful violation hereof shall be subject to a written warning for the first
violation, and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine of $100.00 for each
subsequent violation.
   11.38.680   PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS. The Director of Public Works, with
input and concurrence from the Director of Public Health, shall periodically
review the provisions of this Part and recommend necessary updates to the Board
of Supervisors. The review of these provisions and preparation of resulting
recommendations, if any, shall be performed, at a minimum, every two years
following the first review, which shall be completed by December 31, 2010.
(Ord. 631 § 1, 2009).
6.04.050 Deletions.
Chapter 11.06 of Division 1 of Title 11 of the Los Angeles County Code, as
adopted by Section
6.04.010, is deleted.
(Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1998).
6.04.060 Conflicts.
In the event of any inconsistency or where any conflict occurs, between any
provision of the La Mirada Municipal Code and any of the codes or provisions
thereof adopted in this chapter, the provisions of the La Mirada Municipal Code
shall govern.
(Ord. 523 § 2 (part), 1998).
Chapter 6.08
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLABLES COLLECTION SERVICES
Sections:
Article I. General Provisions
   
6.08.010   Title.
   
6.08.020   Purpose and intent.
   
6.08.030   Defined terms and phrases.
Article II. Collection Agreements
   
6.08.040   Authorization by city council--Contract requirement.
   
6.08.050   Contents.
   
6.08.060   Collector fee.
   
6.08.070   AB 939 administrative fee.
   
6.08.080   Resolution of conflicts.
   
6.08.090   Permits and licenses.
   
6.08.100   Transfer of collection agreement.
   
6.08.110   Revocation of permit or collection agreement.
   
6.08.120   Interim suspension.
   
6.08.130   Notice of hearing--Revocation.
   
6.08.140   Appeals.
   
6.08.150   Council action.
Article III. Rates
   
6.08.160   Rates, fees and charges.
   
6.08.170   Billing and collection of fees.
Article IV. Vehicles
   
6.08.180   Vehicles--Generally.
   
6.08.190   Vehicle standards.
   
6.08.200   Operation of equipment.
   
6.08.210   Compliance with vehicle standards.
Article V. Exclusions
   
6.08.220   Residential householder exclusion.
   
6.08.230   Gardener's exclusion.
   
6.08.240   Commercial/Industrial exclusions.
   
6.08.250   Contractors' exclusions.
   
6.08.260   Document destruction service.
   
6.08.270   Self-haul exclusion.
   
6.08.280   General requirement.
Article VI. General Requirements
   
6.08.290   Mandatory service.
   
6.08.300   Litter.
   
6.08.310   Transfer of loads on public streets.
   
6.08.320   Unauthorized removal from containers.
   
6.08.330   Hours of collection.
   
6.08.340   Resource recovery.
   
6.08.350   Ownership.
   
6.08.360   No burning, burial or dumping of solid waste or recyclables.
   
6.08.370   Trespass.
   
6.08.380   Required monthly reports.
   
6.08.390   Annual report.
   
6.08.400   Worker's compensation insurance.
   
6.08.410   Collector's liability insurance.
   
6.08.420   City to be free from liability.
   
6.08.430   Office for inquiries and complaints.
   
6.08.440   Building contractors to leave area clean.
   
6.08.450   Accumulation of solid waste declared nuisance.
   
6.08.460   Unauthorized containers.
Article VII. Residential Solid Waste, Recycling and Green Waste Collection
   
6.08.470   Residential collection--Disposal.
   
6.08.480   Residential collection--Frequency.
   
6.08.490   Residential collection--Solid waste containers.
   
6.08.500   Residential collection--Recyclables containers.
   
6.08.510   Residential collection--Green waste containers.
   
6.08.520   Residential collection--Placement and removal of containers.
   
6.08.530   Residential collection--Care of containers.
   
6.08.540   Residential collection--Special collection services.
Article VIII. Commercial/Industrial Collection
   
6.08.550   Commercial/Industrial--Disposal and status of solid waste.
   
6.08.560   Commercial/Industrial--Frequency of collection.
   
6.08.570   Commercial/Industrial--Containers.
   
6.08.580   Commercial/Industrial--Maintenance and placement of containers.
   
6.08.590   Commercial/Industrial--Care of containers.
   
6.08.600   Commercial/Industrial--Special circumstances.
Article IX. Mandatory Organic Waste Disposal Reduction
   
6.08.650   Definitions.
   
6.08.660   Requirements for single-family organic waste generators.
   
6.08.670   Requirements for commercial organic waste generators and commercial
businesses.
   
6.08.680   Waivers for generators.
   
6.08.690   Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   
6.08.700   Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   
6.08.710   Requirements for haulers, facility operators and community
composting operations.
   
6.08.720   Self-hauler requirements.
   
6.08.730   Procurement requirements for direct service providers and vendors.
   
6.08.740   Compliance with CALGreen recycling requirements.
   
6.08.750   Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance requirements.
   
6.08.760   Inspections and investigations by the city.
   
6.08.770   Enforcement.
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.08.010 Title.
This chapter is known and may be cited as the solid waste and recyclables
collection services ordinance of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.020 Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of the city council in adopting this chapter to set forth
terms and conditions pursuant to which authorization may be granted by the city
council to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services, and to
promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing
reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and
disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris and other discarded matter, goods
and material.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.030 Defined terms and phrases.
   (a)   For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as
defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it
is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:
      (1)   AB 939 Administrative Fee. "AB 939 administrative fee" means any
fee adopted by the city council pursuant to California Public Resources Code
Section 41901.
      (2)   Authorized Collector. "Authorized collector" means a solid waste
enterprise operating under the provisions of a collection agreement approved by
the city council.
      (3)   Bin. "Bin" means a detachable container used in connection with
commercial/ industrial premises with a two to four cubic yard capacity,
equipped with a lid, and designed for mechanical pick-up by collection
vehicles.
      (4)   Box. "Box," sometimes known as a "roll-off" or "drop" box, means a
wheeled or sledded container or compactor, generally seven to forty cubic yards
in size, suitable for the storage and collection of commercial or industrial
solid waste or recyclables.
      (5)   Bulky Goods. "Bulky goods" means oversized or overweight household
articles placed curbside by a residential householder, which oversized or
overweight household articles have weights, volumes or dimensions which cannot
be accommodated by solid waste, recyclables, or green waste containers for
residential premises, such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing
machines, furniture, sofas, mattresses, box springs, large rugs and landscaping
debris.
      (6)   City Manager. "City manager" means the city manager of the city of
La Mirada or the city manager's designee.
      (7)   Collection. "Collection" means the operation of gathering together
within the city, and transporting to the point of disposal or processing, any
solid waste (including green waste) and recyclables.
      (8)   Collection Agreement. "Collection agreement" means an agreement
between the city and a solid waste enterprise, entered into pursuant to Article
II of this chapter, for the provision of solid waste and recyclables collection
services in the city.
      (9)    Collector. "Collector" means any solid waste enterprise:
         (A)   Who has been awarded a collection agreement to provide
residential or commercial/industrial solid waste or recyclables collection
services in the city, or
         (B)   Who has been issued a permit or nonexclusive contract to provide
solid waste and recyclables collection services to state facilities.
      (10)   Collector Fee. "Collector fee" means the fee paid to the city by
an authorized collector pursuant to the collection agreement, pursuant to
Section
6.08.060.
      (11)   Commercial/Industrial Business Owner. "Commercial/Industrial
business owner" means any person, firm, corporation or other enterprise or
organization holding or occupying, alone or with others, commercial/industrial
premises, whether or not it is the holder of the title or the owner of record
of the commercial/industrial premises.
      (12)   Commercial/Industrial Premises. "Commercial/Industrial premises"
means all occupied real property in the city, except property occupied by state
or local governmental agencies which do not consent to their inclusion, and
except residential premises as defined in subsection (31) hereof, and shall
include, without limitation, wholesale and retail establishments, restaurants
and other food establishments, bars, stores, shops, offices, industrial
establishments, manufacturing establishments, service stations, repair,
research and development establishments, professional, services, sports or
recreational facilities, construction and demolition sites, a multiple unit
residential complex that is not a residential premises, and any other
commercial or industrial business facilities, structures, sites, or
establishments in the city.
      (13)   Construction Site or Demolition Site. "Construction site or
demolition site" means any real property in the city in, on or from which a
building or structure is being fabricated, assembled, erected or demolished,
and which produces construction or demolition solid waste which must be removed
from the property, and requires the use of commercial solid waste containers.
      (14)   Construction Waste or Demolition Waste. "Construction waste or
demolition waste" means any solid waste or debris generated as the result of
construction or demolition, including without limitation, discarded packaging
or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for
fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding
liquid waste and hazardous waste.
      (15)   Container. "Container" means any vessel, tank, receptacle, box or
bin used for the purpose of holding solid waste or recyclables for collection.
      (16)   Disposal. "Disposal" means the complete operation of treating and
disposing of solid waste after the collection thereof.
      (17)   Green Waste. "Green waste" means that solid waste consisting of
leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials
generated from landscapes or gardens, separated from other solid waste. "Green
waste" does not include stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or
four feet in length.
      (18)   Hazardous Waste. "Hazardous waste" means a waste or combination of
wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or
infectious characteristics, may do either of the following: (i) cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious
irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; (ii) pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise manager. "Hazardous
waste" includes, without limitation, extremely hazardous waste, acutely
hazardous waste, radioactive waste, and medical waste, and any other waste as
may hereafter from time to time be designated as hazardous by the Environmental
Protection Agency ("EPA") or other agency of the United States Government, or
by the California Legislature or any agency of the state of California
empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous, extremely
hazardous or acutely hazardous.
      (19)   Holiday. "Holiday" means:
         New Year's Day
         Memorial Day
         Independence Day
         Labor Day
         Thanksgiving Day
         Christmas Day
   "Holiday" also means any other day recognized by resolution of the city
council.
      (20)   In the City or within the City. "In the city" or "Within the city"
means all of the territory within the corporate boundaries of city as such
boundaries exist on the effective date of this chapter or may thereafter exist
by virtue of the annexation of territory to or detachment of territory from the
boundaries of city.
      (21)   Landscaping Debris. "Landscaping debris" means green waste that
does not fit into a green waste container, and includes stumps or branches
exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length.
      (22)   Manure. "Manure" means the waste droppings from any animal.
      (23)   Person. "Person" means any individual, association, firm,
partnership, corporation, or any other group or combination thereof acting as a
unit.
      (24)   Processing. "Processing" means the reduction, separation, recovery
and conversion of solid waste.
      (25)   Public Agency. "Public agency" means any governmental agency or
department thereof, whether federal, state, or local.
      (26)   Recyclables. "Recyclables" means those materials that are suitable
for recycling, as determined by resolution of the city council, or as set forth
in a collection agreement.
      (27)   Recyclables Container. "Recyclables container" means a container
which is provided to residential premises for use in collecting and moving
recyclables to curbside for collection by the collector, or a container which
is provided to commercial/industrial premises for use by the collector in
collecting and moving recyclables.
      (28)   Recycling. "Recycling" means the process of collecting, sorting,
cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become
solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality
standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. "Recycling" does not include
transformation as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201.
      (29)   Residential Householder. "Residential householder" means any
person or persons holding or occupying residential premises in the city,
whether or not the owner of the residential premises.
      (30)   Residential Owner. "Residential owner" means the owner of any
residential premises within the city.
      (31)   Residential Premises. "Residential premises" means any residential
dwelling unit within the city, except:
         (A)   multiple unit residential complexes of four units or more; or
         (B)   any multiple unit residential complex which, with the prior
written approval of the city manager or designee, receives commercial bin
service.
      (32)   Resource Recovery. "Resource recovery" means any use of solid
waste collected pursuant to this chapter, except for landfill disposal or
transfer for landfill disposal. "Resource recovery" shall include, but is not
limited to, transformation, composting, and multi-material recycling.
      (33)   Solid Waste. "Solid waste" means all putrescible and
nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash,
refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction
wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial
appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not
a hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and
other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. "Solid waste" shall not include
hazardous waste.
      (34)   Solid Waste and Recyclables Collection Services. "Solid waste and
recyclables collection services" means the collection, storage, or transfer of
solid waste (including green waste) and recyclables.
      (35)   Solid Waste Container. "Solid waste container" means any container
permitted to be used for the purpose of holding solid waste for collection.
      (36)   Solid Waste Enterprise. "Solid waste enterprise" means any
individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or
private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste
and recyclables collection services.
      (37)   Special Items. "Special items" means any bulky or heavy objects
that require bin service and are not bulky goods, including, but not limited
to, dirt, sod, brick, manure, waste from any poultry yard or stable, and
construction and demolition waste.
      (38)   Standard Commercial/Industrial Solid Waste Container. "Standard
commercial/industrial solid waste container" means a state-of-the-art bin or
solid waste container used in connection with commercial/industrial premises
with a two, three, or four cubic yard capacity, designed for mechanical pick-up
by collection vehicles and equipped with a lid, or where appropriate for the
commercial/industrial premises being served, a twelve to forty cubic yard roll-
off box or compactor, and shall include other types of containers suitable for
the storage and collection of commercial/industrial solid waste if approved in
writing by the city manager.
      (39)   Standard Residential Green Waste Container. "Standard residential
green waste container" means a standardized roll-away container with a locking
lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity
of ninety-five gallons, and of a design, color and durability as approved by
the city manager.
      (40)   Standard Residential Recycling Container. "Standard residential
recycling container" means a standardized roll-away container with a locking
lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity
of ninety-five gallons, and of a design, color and durability as approved by
the city manager.
      (41)   Standard Residential Solid Waste Container. "Standard residential
solid waste container" means a standardized roll-away container with a locking
lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity
of either sixty-five or ninety-five gallons, and of a design, color and
durability as approved by the city manager.
   (b)   Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the city
and any enterprise from incorporating into any agreement for exclusive services
definitions relating to their respective contractual rights and obligations
which may differ from or augment those set forth herein.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AGREEMENTS
6.08.040 Authorization by city council--Contract requirement.
   The city council may authorize, by contract, one or more solid waste
enterprises to provide solid waste and recyclables collection services for
residential and commercial/industrial users or customers. In the sole
discretion of the city council, the solid waste and recyclables collection
services may be authorized on an exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or
without competitive bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste
within all or any part of the territory of the city.
   No person shall collect or dispose of solid waste or recyclables in the city
unless that person has entered into a collection agreement with the city,
except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, and irrespective of
any permit issued by any other governmental agency authorizing collection of
solid waste or recyclables. Any such collection agreement shall be in addition
to any business license or permit otherwise required by this code. Collectors
operating in the city on the effective date of this chapter under a permit or a
nonexclusive collection agreement may continue to operate only until the rights
thereunder are terminated or revoked, or until such rights expire pursuant to
the provisions of Section 49520 of the Public Resources Code.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.050 Contents.
The terms and provisions of any collection agreement for solid waste and
recyclables collection services may relate to or include, without limitation,
the following subject matters:
   (a)   The nature, scope and duration of the agreement;
   (b)   The collection schedule, including the frequency, days and hours of
collection;
   (c)   The applicable collector fee, including the amount, method of
computation, and time for payment;
   (d)   The applicable rates, fees and charges for regular, special and
emergency collection services, including the method of setting and adjusting
same, and the responsibility for billing and collecting same;
   (e)   Collection vehicles, including the permissible size and color, and any
required identification, safety equipment, maintenance, inspection, and
operational requirements;
   (f)   The receipt, processing and reporting of customer inquiries and
complaints;
   (g)   The collection of solid waste from publicly owned property and
facilities;
   (h)   Performance standards for the collector's personnel and equipment;
   (i)   Solid waste, recyclables, and green waste containers, including size,
repair or replacement, handling, placement, obligations of the collector to
provide, and permissible charges therefor;
   (j)   Standards and procedures for periodic performance reviews by the city;
   (k)   Noise attenuation policies and procedures;
   (l)   The maintenance by the collector of an office for the conduct of
business;
   (m)   Policies and procedures relating to the noncollection of solid waste,
the collection of recyclables, the composting of green waste and resource
recovery;
   (n)   Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance and
workers' compensation insurance;
   (o)   Requirements relating to the dissemination of information to the
public concerning regular and special solid waste and recyclables collection
services, including green waste services;
   (p)   Actions or omissions constituting breaches or defaults, and the
imposition of applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies,
including suspension, revocation or termination;
   (q)   Requirements relating to performance bonds and to indemnification;
   (r)   Requirements relating to affirmative action programs;
   (s)   Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures,
reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records;
   (t)   Requirements relating to the assignment, transfer and renewal of the
agreement;
   (u)   Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state
and federal laws, rules or regulations pertaining to solid waste and
recyclables collection services, and to the implementation of state-mandated
programs, including, without limitation, the city's "source reduction and
recycling element" and the city's "household hazardous waste element."
   (v)   Such additional requirements, conditions, policies and procedures as
may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the collection agreement and
which will, in the judgment and discretion of the city council, best serve the
public interest and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.060 Collector fee.
Each collector shall pay a collector fee in an amount determined by resolution
of the city council or established in the applicable collection agreement.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.070 AB 939 administrative fee.
Each collector shall be responsible for collecting any AB 939 administrative
fee adopted by the city council, and paying the collected fees to the city
concurrently with payment of the collector fee.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.080 Resolution of conflicts.
In the event of any conflict between the provisions of a collection agreement
which is authorized and approved by the city council and the provisions of this
chapter, the provisions of the collection agreement shall control.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.090 Permits and licenses.
Every collector shall obtain and maintain at all times during the collector's
operations a business license issued by the city, and all applicable permits
and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.100 Transfer of collection agreement.
No permit or collection agreement which is authorized by, subject to, or issued
under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred, delegated, sublet,
subcontracted to or assigned to another person without the prior approval of
the city council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the
majority of the ownership or control in the collector, and the transfer of a
majority of stock in collector to another person.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.110 Revocation of permit or collection agreement.
After a hearing as provided in this chapter, the city manager may revoke or
suspend any collection permit or collection agreement for violation of a
provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation
of any public agency.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.120 Interim suspension.
The city manager, without a hearing, may suspend a collection agreement or a
permit for not more than sixty days, if the city manager finds that continued
operation by the collector will constitute a threat to the public health,
safety, or general welfare.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.130 Notice of hearing--Revocation.
The city manager shall mail notice of a hearing to revoke a collection permit
or collection agreement to the collector not less than fifteen days prior to
such hearing. In the event of the revocation of a collection agreement or a
permit, the city manager shall notify the collector in writing of the reasons
therefor. Notification may be made in person or by mail.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.140 Appeals.
Within fifteen calendar days after notice by the city manager of revocation of
a collection permit or collection agreement has been sent to the collector, the
collector may file with the city clerk an appeal of such decision to the city
council.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.150 Council action.
The city council may either affirm the action of the city manager, send the
matter back to the city manager for further consideration, or set the matter
for hearing by the city council. If the city council sets the matter for
hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in Section
6.08.110. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the collector not less than
fifteen days prior to the hearing.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE III. RATES
6.08.160 Rates, fees and charges.
The city council may, by resolution or an approved collection agreement, place
a limit on the rates, fees, and charges (collectively, "fees") collectors may
charge to residential owners and to commercial/industrial business owners for
the collection of solid waste and recyclables. No collector shall charge any
fee which is greater than the maximum permitted by the city council, unless
otherwise authorized in this chapter.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.170 Billing and collection of fees.
   The billing and collection of the fees imposed by the collectors for solid
waste and recyclables collection services shall be the responsibility of the
collector, and the city shall have no liability or responsibility therefor.
   Every commercial/industrial business owner and residential owner shall pay
the collector the applicable fees for collection services rendered pursuant to
this chapter.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE IV. VEHICLES
6.08.180 Vehicles--Generally.
No person may operate any vehicle for the collection of solid waste or
recyclables other than a collector who has a valid business license and a
collection agreement or permit and who has paid all required license,
collection agreement, permit or other city charges.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.190 Vehicle standards.
Any vehicle utilized for the collection, transportation or disposal of solid
waste or recyclables shall comply with the following standards:
   (a)   Each vehicle shall be constructed and used so that no solid waste,
recyclables, oil, grease, or other substance will blow, fall or leak out of the
vehicle;
   (b)   A broom and shovel shall be carried on each vehicle at all times;
   (c)   Each vehicle shall comply with all applicable statutes, laws, or
ordinances of any public agency;
   (d)   Each vehicle must be under seven years of age unless specifically
authorized in writing by the city manager;
   (e)   Routine inspections by the California Highway Patrol shall be
conducted annually and certificates for the inspection shall be filed annually
with the city manager;
   (f)   All vehicles shall at all times be kept clean and sanitary, in good
repair and well and uniformly painted to the satisfaction of the city manager;
   (g)   Each vehicle shall be equipped with watertight bodies fitted with
close-fitting metal covers;
   (h)   The collector's name or firm name and telephone number shall be
printed or painted in legible letters not less than five inches in height in
plain sight on both sides of all of collector's vehicles used in the city;
   (i)   High intensity fog lamps shall be maintained on any vehicle eighty
inches or wider, which shall consist of two red tail lamps in addition to the
standard tail lamps. The fog lamps shall be used when visibility is less than
fifty feet;
   (j)   All equipment shall be maintained at all times in a manner to prevent
unnecessary noise during its operation;
   (k)   As the collector replaces existing equipment, the type and make of the
new equipment shall be subject to prior approval by the city manager.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.200 Operation of equipment.
All persons operating equipment for the collection or transportation of solid
waste or recyclables shall do so in compliance with all applicable federal,
state and local laws and ordinances. Such vehicles shall not be operated in a
manner which results in undue interference with normal traffic flows. No such
vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on the public streets. No such
vehicle shall be parked overnight on a public street or thoroughfare in the
city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.210 Compliance with vehicle standards.
Any vehicle used in the collection or transportation of solid waste or
recyclables in the city shall, at all times, be maintained in accordance with
all the standards set forth in Section
6.08.190 of this chapter. The use of a vehicle which fails to comply with each
of the standards set forth in Section
6.08.190 is prohibited. A collector shall immediately remove any vehicle from
collection service which fails, at any time, to conform to any of the standards
recited in Section
6.08.190 and shall not use that vehicle until it is repaired. Should the city
manager give notification at any time to a collector that any of the
collector's vehicles are not in compliance with the standards of this chapter,
the vehicle shall be immediately removed from service by the collector. The
vehicle shall not again be utilized in the city until it has been inspected and
approved by the city manager. The collector shall maintain its regular
collection schedule regardless of the repair of any vehicle.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE V. EXCLUSIONS
6.08.220 Residential householder exclusion.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent residential householders from
collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on
their residential premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling or
disposing of recyclables generated in or on their residential premises.
However, no residential householder shall employ or engage any solid waste
enterprise, other than the authorized collector, to haul or transport such
materials to a transfer station or landfill.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.230 Gardener's exclusion.
No provisions of this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person
engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of grass cuttings,
prunings, and similar material not containing other solid waste when incidental
to providing such gardening, tree trimming, or similar services.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.240 Commercial/Industrial exclusions.
   (a)   Source Separated Recyclables. No provision of this chapter shall
prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from selling to a buyer, for a
monetary or other valuable consideration, any source separated recyclables,
including without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, by-product,
ferrous or nonferrous metal, worn-out or defective part, junk, pallet,
packaging material, paper or other similar item generated in, on or by a
commercial/industrial premises or business, and no longer useful to such
commercial/industrial business but having market value, whether such buyer is a
recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying
and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce; so long as such buyer
is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste for a fee or other
charge or consideration, and that no such materials are transported for
disposition to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources
Code Section 40200). Source separated recyclables within the meaning of this
section shall mean recyclables separated on the commercial/industrial premises
from solid waste for the purpose of sale, not mixed with or containing more
than incidental or minimal solid waste, and having a market value.
   No provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other
enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in
the stream of commerce and which is not engaged in the business of collecting
solid waste or providing solid waste collection services for a fee or other
charge, or consideration, from buying any materials referenced in this
subsection A for a monetary or other valuable consideration, and which buys
such materials for marketing and not for disposition in a landfill or transfer
station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200); nor shall any
provision of this chapter prevent such recycler, junk dealer or enterprise
which buys such materials from removing and transporting such materials to a
destination for marketing in the stream of commerce. No such buyer shall buy or
transport such materials without prior authorization from the city, as required
by this code, whether in the form of a business license, a business permit, or
a nonexclusive collection agreement.
   (b)   In-House Recycling Programs. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a
commercial/industrial business which has its own recycling or resource recovery
program for recyclables generated by such business and not utilizing a solid
waste enterprise which provides collection services for a fee, service charge,
or other consideration, from continuing such recycling or resource recovery
program, and the recyclables included in such program are excepted from any
collection agreement entered into by the city.
   (c)   Renovation, Rebuilding, Repairs. No provision of this chapter shall
prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from arranging for any worn,
spent, or defective equipment, or part thereof, used in such commercial/
industrial business and requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging,
regeneration or repair, to be picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged,
regenerated or otherwise restored and repaired and returned to such commercial/
industrial business owner; nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent any
person engaged in the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging,
regenerating, or otherwise restoring or repairing such equipment or part
thereof, from transporting the same from or returning it to the commercial/
industrial business, or from removing, transporting or disposing of any such
equipment, or part thereof, replaced in connection with an equipment repair or
service contract.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.250 Contractors' exclusions.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor having a
contract for the demolition or reconstruction of a building, structure,
pavement or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged
from such demolition or reconstruction, or from causing such salvageable items
or demolition waste to be removed and transported from the premises on which
such waste is generated, pursuant to the provisions of the demolition or
construction contract. if a subcontractor is to be engaged to remove such
demolition waste, the authorized collector shall have the right of first
refusal to provide such services. If the authorized collector cannot guarantee
that such services will be provided within a period of twenty-four hours, for a
per bin charge that does not exceed the maximum permitted by the collection
agreement, the city manager may authorize the licensed contractor or the owner
of the premises to utilize the services of another duly authorized solid waste
enterprise.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.260 Document destruction service.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent any person engaged in the business
of destroying or disposing of secret, confidential, or sensitive documents from
transporting or disposing of such documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating
or other means, as a part of such document destruction or disposal service.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.270 Self-haul exclusion.
Notwithstanding subsection (c) of Section
6.08.290, and in addition to the authority granted by Section
6.08.220, nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial
business owner or residential householder from, on a regular basis, collecting
and disposing of solid waste generated in or on their premises, in lieu of
availing themselves of the services of the authorized collector. No residential
householder or commercial/industrial business owner shall employ or engage any
solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector, to haul or
transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill. Any residential
householder or commercial/industrial business owner who, pursuant to this
Section
6.08.270 seeks to on a regular basis collect and dispose of solid waste
generated in or on their premises, must first obtain a self-haul permit from
the city, and must comply with procedures for self-hauling to be adopted by the
city council by resolution.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.280 General requirement.
In all cases where the right to an exclusion pursuant to Sections
6.08.220 through
6.08.270 of this chapter is exercised, disposal shall be made at a disposal or
processing facility which meets all applicable regulatory requirements. Any
such disposal by a person exempted under this section shall not relieve such
person from any obligation or liability imposed by this chapter or any other
city ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation for the payment of the minimum
solid waste and recyclables collection rates imposed by the authorized
collector pursuant to this chapter, or of any other applicable rates or fees.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following shall be exempt from the payment
of the solid waste and recyclables collection rates imposed for use of the
services provided by the authorized collector:
   (a)   Any person with a valid self-haul permit obtained pursuant to Section
6.08.270 who does not use the solid waste collection services offered by the
authorized collector; and
   (b)   Any owner of vacant property who does not use the solid waste and
recyclables collection services offered by the authorized collector, for the
period of time the property is vacant.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE VI. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
6.08.290 Mandatory service.
   (a)   All solid waste and recyclables collected from residential or
commercial/industrial premises for a fee, service charge or other
consideration, shall be collected by an authorized collector, subject to the
exclusions set forth in Article V of this chapter.
   (b)   No person, firm, corporation or solid waste enterprise, other than an
authorized collector, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive,
collect or transport solid waste or recyclables from within the city for a fee,
service charge or other consideration therefor, except as specifically provided
herein.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each residential
householder and commercial/industrial business owner shall utilize the services
of the authorized collector for the collection of solid waste and recyclables
from the residential or commercial/industrial premises held or occupied by such
householder or owner and shall pay for such services the fees set by the
collector and authorized by the city council. No residential householder or
commercial/industrial business owner shall enter into an agreement for solid
waste and recyclables collection services with any person, firm or corporation
other than the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.300 Litter.
Any person who deposits or causes to be deposited any solid waste or
recyclables on any public property, including the public right-of-way, or on
private property within public view, except in a container provided therefor as
herein specified, shall immediately clean up, contain, collect and remove same.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.310 Transfer of loads on public streets.
No person shall transfer solid waste or recyclables from one collection vehicle
to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to
the method of operation and is approved by the city manager, or is necessary
owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.320 Unauthorized removal from containers.
No person other than the authorized collector shall remove or tamper with, or
remove any solid waste or recyclables from a container, other than the owner or
occupant of the property served by such container, or an authorized employee of
the city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.330 Hours of collection.
   In residential areas and commercial/industrial areas that are contiguous to
residential premises, no collection or delivery/removal of containers shall be
made between the hours of seven p.m. and six a.m. Monday through Saturday or at
any time on Sunday.
   In commercial/industrial areas that are not contiguous to residential
premises, no collection or delivery/removal of containers shall be made between
the hours of six p.m. and five a.m. Monday through Saturday or at any time on
Sunday.
   The city manager may waive the requirements of this section when
necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the collector. The city
manager may require a collector to change hours of operation in residential or
commercial/industrial areas if disruption occurs.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.340 Resource recovery.
Every collector shall, at all times, comply with city policies and programs
with regard to solid waste recovery, reduction of solid waste, and recycling.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.350 Ownership.
At such time as the solid waste or recyclables are placed for collection at the
usual place of collection, the solid waste and recyclables become the property
of the city's authorized collector.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.360 No burning, burial, or dumping of solid waste or recyclables.
   It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including collectors, to
burn any solid waste or recyclables within the city.
   It shall be unlawful at any time for any person, including collectors, to
bury or dump any solid waste or recyclables within the city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.370 Trespass.
No person authorized to collect or transport solid waste or recyclables shall
enter on private property beyond the extent necessary to collect the solid
waste or recyclables properly placed for collection, or beyond the extent
necessary to provide any agreed upon special collection service.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.380 Required monthly reports.
Each collector shall provide the city with monthly tonnage reports which
include the following:
   (a)   Total amount of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste removed from
the city for the respective reporting month.
   (b)   The name, address and telephone number of each solid waste disposal
and/or recycling facility used by the collector during the reporting month.
   (c)   The complaint log described in Section
6.08.430.
   (d)   Each report shall be signed by an officer of the collector. If the
collector has more than one collection route, it shall submit a separate report
for each collection route. Each report shall be received by the city by five
p.m. on the 20th day of each month following each reporting month.
   (e)   Each collector shall maintain, but is not required to submit monthly:
copies of waste disposal facility weight tickets/invoices which indicate the
net amount of all waste disposed, transferred and/or recycled during each month
that collection services are provided; an updated revised collection service
identification list; report for the reporting month.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.390 Annual report.
Every collector shall furnish an annual report to the city detailing the
quantity and nature of all solid waste or recyclables removed from the city.
Reports shall be delivered to the city on or before January 31st of each year,
for the immediately preceding calendar year. This report shall also include
permitted waste disposal facilities where the collector has disposed and/or
transferred all solid waste removed from the city. This report is to also
include a compilation of monthly tonnage reports and/or copies of tipping
receipts. The report shall include a customer service identification list which
identifies the name and address of each customer receiving collection service
from the collector. The timely filing of a complete annual report is a
condition of any permit or collection agreement awarded by the city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.400 Worker's compensation insurance.
Each collector shall at all times provide, at its own expense, workers'
compensation insurance coverage for all employees. Each collector shall file
and maintain certificates with the manager showing the insurance to be in full
force and effect at all times the collector shall have a permit issued by the
city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.410 Collector's liability insurance.
Each collector shall furnish the city a policy or certificate of comprehensive
general and automobile liability insurance insuring the collector against
bodily injury, property damage and automobile liability in amounts approved by
the city council. The insurance shall provide that the coverage is primary and
that any insurance maintained by the city shall be excess insurance, shall be
procured from an insurer authorized to do business in the state of California,
shall name the city of La Mirada and its officers, employees and agents as
additional insured and shall not be canceled or modified without first giving
to city thirty days' prior written notice.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.420 City to be free from liability.
Any collector or person who collects, transports, or disposes of solid waste,
recyclables, or green waste within the city shall indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless the city and its officers, employees, and agents against any and all
claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, obligations, liabilities, damages,
recoveries, and deficiencies, including interest, penalties and reasonable
attorneys fees, that the city shall incur or suffer, which arise, result from
or relate to the collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste,
recyclables or green waste by that person.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.430 Office for inquiries and complaints.
   Any collector with a collection agreement shall maintain an office at some
fixed location and shall maintain a telephone at the office, listed in the
current telephone directory in the firm name by which it conducts business in
the city, and shall at all times during the hours between eight a.m. and five
p.m. of each weekday and between eight a.m. and twelve noon on Saturday, have
an employee or agent at that office to answer inquiries and receive complaints.
The telephone number shall be a toll-free number from all portions of the city.
   The collector shall maintain at the office a written log of all complaints/
inquiries received. Such log shall contain the date of inquiry/complaint, the
callers name, address and telephone number, the nature of the complaint/
inquiry, the action taken or the reason for nonaction, and the date such action
was taken. All inquiries and complaints shall be promptly answered or responded
to and/or dealt with to the satisfaction of the city. Such log of complaints
and other records pertaining to solid waste and recyclables collection and
disposal shall be open to the inspection of the city at all reasonable times
and shall be maintained for a period of one year. Compliance with the
requirements of this section are conditions to any permit or collection
agreement which is awarded by the city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.440 Building contractors to leave area clean.
All owners, contractors and builders of structures shall, upon the completion
of any such structure, gather up and haul away, at their sole cost and expense,
all solid waste of every nature, description or kind, which has resulted from
the building of such structure, including all lumber scraps, shingles, plaster,
brick, stone, concrete and other building material, and shall place the lot and
all nearby premises utilized in such construction in a sightly condition, and
it shall be unlawful not to do so.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.450 Accumulation of solid waste declared nuisance.
The accumulation of solid waste by any person beyond the period of one week or
in any manner other than as specified in this chapter is hereby declared to be
a nuisance pursuant to Section 38771 of the California Government Code. The
city council, pursuant to Section 38773 of the Government Code, shall by
separate ordinance provide for the summary abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.460 Unauthorized containers.
No cardboard box or paper bag may be used as a container for solid waste
(including green waste), or recyclables. Except as expressly authorized by this
Chapter 6.08 of the Municipal Code, no person other than an authorized
collector may place a container for the collection of solid waste (including
green waste) or recyclables within the city. Any container placed in violation
of this Section
6.08.460 is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and is subject to abatement
pursuant to other provisions of the city code.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE VII. RESIDENTIAL SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING, AND GREEN WASTE COLLECTION
6.08.470 Residential collection--Disposal.
All solid waste collected by a collector shall be disposed of by the collector
in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations
and the controlling permit or collection agreement.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.480 Residential collection--Frequency.
Unless otherwise approved by the city council, collection of solid waste and
recyclables shall take place no less than once each calendar week, on the same
day of the week. The authorized collector shall collect all solid waste and
recyclables placed for collection in compliance with this chapter from each
residential premises in accordance with a schedule which has been approved by
the city manager. The schedule shall identify the routes and days of pick up
for each collection district established within the city.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.490 Residential collection--Solid waste containers.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the collector shall provide
one standard residential solid waste container to each residential householder,
and may include the costs thereof in the monthly collection rate.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, collector shall provide additional standard
residential solid waste containers sufficient to accommodate the amount of
solid waste generated by the residential premises. No cardboard box, paper bag,
or other similarly fragile container, may be used as a container for solid
waste. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, upon the commencement of
automated collection in the city only containers provided by the collector may
be used for residential solid waste.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part) , 1999).
6.08.500 Residential collection--Recyclables containers.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the collector shall provide
one standard residential recycling container to each residential householder
and may include the costs thereof in the monthly collection rate.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, collector shall provide additional recycling
containers sufficient to accommodate the amount of recyclables generated by the
residential premises. Except as expressly provided otherwise herein, upon the
commencement of automated collection in the city only containers provided by
the collector may be used for residential recyclables.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.510 Residential collection--Green waste containers.
Subject to the prior approval of the city manager, the collector shall provide
one standard residential green waste container to each residential householder
and may include the costs thereof in the monthly collection rate.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, collector shall provide additional standard
residential green waste containers sufficient to accommodate the amount of
green waste generated by the residential premises. Except as expressly provided
otherwise herein, upon the commencement of automated collection in the city
only containers provided by the collector may be used for residential green
waste.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.520 Residential collection--Placement and removal of containers.
Every residential householder shall place each solid waste, recyclables, and
green waste container for collection at the curb in front of the premises, or
at the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more
than one street. No person shall place any such container for collection
earlier than sunset of the day preceding the day designated for collection, and
all containers and receptacles shall be removed from the place of collection
prior to ten p.m. of the day the containers have been emptied. Such containers
shall be removed to a storage location which is not visible from any public
right-of-way, excluding alleys.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.530 Residential collection--Care of containers.
Upon collection, all solid waste containers shall be replaced, by the
collector, upright, where found, with the lids replaced, and all solid waste,
recyclables and green waste containers shall be replaced in an upright
position, at the location where found by the collector.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.540 Residential collection--Special collection services.
The authorized collector shall provide, upon request from a residential
householder, special collection of solid waste, collection of bulky goods
(including but not limited to white goods and bundled landscaping debris), and
collection of special items at such rates as may be established by the
collector and authorized by the city and at such times as may be agreed upon by
the collector and the person requesting the service. If no agreement is
reached, such special collections shall be provided as determined by the city
manager. Such special collection may include carry-out service, or any other
service beyond that required by this chapter or the applicable collection
agreement.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE VIII. COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL COLLECTION
6.08.550 Commercial/Industrial--Disposal and status of solid waste.
The authorized collector shall collect and dispose of all solid waste generated
and presented for collection at each commercial/industrial premises in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. Any such collection and disposal shall be in accordance with all
applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations and any controlling
permit or collection agreement between the collector and the city. All solid
waste collected by a collector shall be the exclusive property of the
collector.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.560 Commercial/Industrial--Frequency of collection.
The authorized collector shall collect solid waste from commercial/industrial
premises not less than once per week. In no event shall such collection
schedule permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities detrimental to
public health or safety.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.570 Commercial/Industrial--Containers.
   (a)   Every commercial/industrial business served by an authorized collector
shall use the standard commercial/industrial solid waste, recyclables, or green
waste container or containers provided by the authorized collector. Where a
commercial/industrial business owner is served by an excepted collector, such
excepted collector and business owner shall determine by private agreement who
is to provide the container.
   (b)   Every collector which provides any container or other equipment used
for the storage of commercial/industrial solid waste shall:
      (1)   Place and maintain on the outside of such container, bin or other
equipment, in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height,
the collector's business name and telephone number, in a color contrasting with
the background color of the container; and
      (2)   Provide containers on casters or with hasps and locks upon request
by the commercial/industrial business owner.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.580 Commercial/Industrial--Maintenance and placement of containers.
Solid waste, recyclables and green waste containers provided by the collector
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the collector.
Containers which are not provided by the collector shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition by the commercial/industrial business owner. Every
commercial/industrial business owner shall provide a solid waste container
location on the commercial/industrial premises and shall keep the area in good
repair, clean and free of solid waste outside of the container. Every collector
shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the
ground as a result of the collector's emptying of the container or other
activities of the collector.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.590 Commercial/Industrial--Care of containers.
Upon collection of solid waste, recyclables, and green waste by the collector,
all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed.
No person, other than the owner thereof, shall in any manner, break, damage,
roughly handle or destroy containers placed on the premises of a commercial/
industrial business owner.
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
6.08.600 Commercial/Industrial--Special circumstances.
If particular commercial/ industrial business premises require collections at
times, frequencies or in a manner such that the collector is unable to perform
the collection in the normal course of business, or where unusual quantities of
solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of,
or where special methods of handling are required, or where the quantity of
solid waste requires the use of multiple (more than three) containers, the
collector and the commercial/ industrial business owner may make arrangements
for such collection on mutually agreeable terms. If the business owner and the
collector do not agree as to the methods for the service provided for in this
section, the city manager shall determine the method of service. If the
collector is unable or unwilling to provide such service, the city manager may
authorize the business owner to use another solid waste enterprise for such
special service until the collector can provide such service in its normal
course of business.  
(Ord. 531 § 3 (part), 1999).
ARTICLE IX - MANDATORY ORGANIC WASTE DISPOSAL REDUCTION
6.08.650 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following words, terms, phrases, and
their derivations have the meanings given herein. Terms not defined in this
section and defined elsewhere in this Code shall have the same meanings herein
unless the context otherwise requires. In the event of a conflict between a
definition in this Code and a definition in 14 CCR Section 18982, the
definitions in Section 18982 shall control for the purposes of this Article.
Additionally, for the purposes of this Article, the definitions in 14 CCR
Section 18982 shall control for terms used in this Article and not defined in
this Code. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural
number. Unless otherwise specified herein, references to a statute or
regulation means the statute or regulation, as amended, supplemented,
superseded and replaced from time to time.
   "Blue container" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(5) and
shall be used only for the purpose of storage and collection of source
separated recyclable materials.
   "California Code of Regulations" or "CCR" means the State of California Code
of Regulations. CCR references in this Article are preceded with a number that
refers to the relevant title of the CCR (e.g., "14 CCR" refers to Title 14 of
the CCR).
   "CalRecycle" means the California Department of Resources Recycling and
Recovery, which is the Department designated with responsibility for
developing, implementing, and enforcing SB 1383 Regulations on the City (and
others).
   "City" means the City of La Mirada.
   "City Manager" means the City Manager of the City or his or her designee.
   "Commercial business" or "commercial" means a firm, partnership,
proprietorship, joint-stock company, corporation, or association, whether for-
profit or nonprofit, strip mall, industrial facility, or a multi-family
residential dwelling; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(6). A
multi-family residential dwelling that consists of fewer than five units is not
a commercial business for purposes of implementing this Article.
   "Commercial edible food generator" includes a Tier One or a Tier Two
commercial edible food generator as defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(73) and
(a)(74). For the purposes of this definition, food recovery organizations and
food recovery services are not commercial edible food generators pursuant to 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
   "Community composting" means any activity that composts green material,
agricultural material, food material, and vegetative food material, alone or in
combination, and the total amount of feedstock and compost on-site at any one
time does not exceed 100 cubic yards and 750 square feet, as specified in 14
CCR Section 17855(a)(4); or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)
(8).
   "Compliance review" means a review of records by the City to determine
compliance with this Article.
   "Compost" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 17896.2(a)(4).
   "Compostable plastic(s)" means plastic materials that meet the ASTM D6400
standard for compostability; or, as otherwise described in 14 CCR Section
18984.1(a)(1)(A) or 18984.2(a)(1)(C).
   "Container contamination" or "contaminated container" means a container,
regardless of color, that contains prohibited container contaminants; or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(55).
   "County" means the County of Los Angeles.
   "C&D" means construction and demolition debris.
   "Designee" means an entity that the City contracts with or otherwise
arranges to carry out any of the City's responsibilities of this Article as
authorized in 14 CCR Section 18981.2; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(15). A designee may be a government entity, a hauler, a
private entity, or a combination of those entities.
   "Edible food" means food intended for human consumption; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18). For the purposes of this Article or as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(18), "edible food" is not solid
waste if it is recovered and not discarded. Nothing in this Article or in 14
CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 requires or authorizes the recovery of edible food
that does not meet the food safety requirements of the California Retail Food
Code.
   "Enforcement action" means an action of the City to address non-compliance
with this Article including, but not limited to, issuing administrative
citations, fines, penalties, or using other remedies; or, as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(19).
   "Enforcement Official" means the City Manager or the City's authorized
designee(s) who is/are partially or wholly responsible for enforcing this
Article.
   "Excluded waste" means hazardous substance, hazardous waste, infectious
waste, designated waste, volatile, corrosive, medical waste, infectious,
regulated radioactive waste, and toxic substances or material that facility
operator(s), which receive materials from the City and its generators,
reasonably believe(s) would, as a result of or upon acceptance, transfer,
processing, or disposal, be a violation of local, State, or Federal law,
regulation, or ordinance, including: land use restrictions or conditions, waste
that cannot be disposed of in Class III landfills or accepted at the facility
by permit conditions, waste that in the City's Enforcement Official's or its
designee's, reasonable opinion would present a significant risk to human health
or the environment, cause a nuisance or otherwise create or expose the City, or
its designee, to potential liability; but not including de minimis volumes or
concentrations of waste of a type and amount normally found in single-family or
multi-family solid waste after implementation of programs for the safe
collection, processing, recycling, treatment, and disposal of batteries and
paint in compliance with Sections 41500 and 41802 of the State Public Resources
Code.
   "Food distributor" means a company that distributes food to entities
including, but not limited to, Supermarkets and grocery stores; or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(22).
   "Food facility" has the same meaning as in Section 113789 of the State
Health and Safety Code.
   "Food recovery" means actions to collect and distribute food for human
consumption that otherwise would be disposed; or, as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(24).
   "Food recovery organization," unless otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(25), means an entity that engages in the collection or receipt of
edible food from commercial edible food generators and distributes that edible
food to the public for food recovery either directly or through other entities,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   A food bank as defined in Section 113783 of the State Health and
Safety Code;
      (2)   A nonprofit charitable organization as defined in Section 113841 of
the State Health and Safety Code; and
      (3)   A nonprofit charitable temporary food facility as defined in
Section 113842 of the State Health and Safety Code.
   A "food recovery organization" is not a commercial edible food generator for
the purposes of this Article and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter
12 pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(7).
   "Food recovery service" means a person or entity that collects and
transports edible food from a commercial edible food generator to a food
recovery organization or other entities for food recovery; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(26). A food recovery service is not a
commercial edible food generator for the purposes of this Article and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 pursuant to 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(7).
   "Food scraps" means all food such as, but not limited to, fruits,
vegetables, meat, poultry, seafood, shellfish, bones, rice, beans, pasta,
bread, cheese, and eggshells. Food scraps excludes fats, oils, and grease when
such materials are source separated from other food scraps.
   "Food service provider" means an entity primarily engaged in providing food
services to institutional, governmental, commercial, or industrial locations of
others based on contractual arrangements with these types of organizations; or,
as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(27).
   "Food-soiled paper" means compostable paper material that has come in
contact with food or liquid, such as, but not limited to, compostable paper
plates, paper coffee cups, napkins, pizza boxes, and milk cartons.
   "Food waste" means food scraps, food-soiled paper, and compostable plastics.
   "Generator" means a person or entity that is responsible for the initial
creation of solid waste, and with respect to organic waste, means a person or
entity that is responsible for the initial creation of organic waste; or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(48).
   "Gray container" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(28) and
shall be used only for the purpose of storage and collection of gray container
waste.
   "Gray container waste" means solid waste that is collected in a gray
container that is part of the city's three-container organic waste collection
service that prohibits the placement of organic waste in the gray container as
specified in 14 CCR Sections 18984.1(a) and (b); or, as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 17402(a)(6.5).
   "Green container" has the same meaning as in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(29) and
shall be used only for the purpose of storage and collection of source
separated green container organic waste.
   "Grocery store" means a store primarily engaged in the retail sale of canned
food; dry goods; fresh fruits and vegetables; fresh meats, fish, and poultry;
and any area that is not separately owned within the store where the food is
prepared and served, including a bakery, deli, and meat and seafood
departments; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(30).
   "Hauler route" means the designated itinerary or sequence of stops for each
segment of the City's collection service area; or, as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(31.5).
   "High diversion organic waste processing facility" means a facility that is
in compliance with the reporting requirements of 14 CCR Section 18815.5(d) and
meets or exceeds an annual average mixed waste organic content recovery rate of
50 percent between January 1, 2022 and December 31, 2024, and 75 percent after
January 1, 2025, as calculated pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18815.5(e) for
organic waste received from the "mixed waste organic collection stream" as
defined in 14 CCR Section 17402(a)(11.5); or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(33).
   "Inspection" means a site visit where the City or its designee reviews
records, containers, and an entity's collection, handling, recycling, or
landfill disposal of organic waste or edible food handling to determine if the
entity is complying with requirements set forth in this Article; or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(35).
   "Large event" means an event, including, but not limited to, a sporting
event or a flea market, that charges an admission price, or is operated by a
local agency, and serves an average of more than 2,000 individuals per day of
operation of the event, at a location that includes, but is not limited to, a
public, nonprofit, or privately owned park, parking lot, golf course, street
system, or other open space when being used for an event; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(38).
   "Large venue," unless otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(39),
means a permanent venue facility that annually seats or serves an average of
more than 2,000 individuals within the grounds of the facility per day of
operation of the venue facility. For purposes of this Article and
implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a venue facility includes,
but is not limited to, a public, nonprofit, or privately owned or operated
stadium, amphitheater, arena, hall, amusement park, conference or civic center,
zoo, aquarium, airport, racetrack, horse track, performing arts center,
fairground, museum, theater, or other public attraction facility. For purposes
of this Article and implementation of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, a site
under common ownership or control that includes more than one large venue that
is contiguous with other large venues in the site, is a single large venue.
   "Local education agency" means a school district, charter school, or county
office of education that is not subject to the control of the City's
regulations related to solid waste; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(40).
   "Mixed waste organic collection stream" or "mixed waste" means organic waste
collected in a container that is required by 14 CCR Section 18984.1 to be taken
to a high diversion organic waste processing facility; or, as otherwise defined
in 14 CCR Section 17402(a)(11.5).
   "Multi-family residential dwelling(s)" or "multi-family" means of, from, or
pertaining to residential premises with five or more dwelling units. Multi-
family premises do not include hotels, motels, or other transient occupancy
facilities, which are considered commercial businesses.
   "MWELO" refers to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, 23 CCR,
Division 2, Chapter 2.7.
   "Non-compostable paper" includes, but is not limited to, paper that is
coated in a plastic material that will not breakdown in the composting process;
or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(41).
   "Non-local entity" means the following entities that are not subject to the
City's enforcement authority; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982
(a)(42):
      (1)   Special district(s) located within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the City;
      (2)   Federal facilities, including military installations, located
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City;
      (3)   Prison(s) located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City;
      (4)   Facilities operated by the State park system located within the
jurisdictional boundaries of the City;
      (5)   Public universities (including community colleges) located within
the jurisdictional boundaries of the City;
      (6)   County fairgrounds located within the jurisdictional boundaries of
the City; and
      (7)   State agencies located within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
City.
   "Non-organic recyclables" means non-putrescible and non-hazardous recyclable
wastes including, but not limited to, bottles, cans, metals, plastics and
glass; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(43).
   "Notice of violation" or "NOV" means a notice that a violation has occurred
that includes a compliance date to avoid an action to seek penalties; or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(45) or further explained in 14 CCR
Section 18995.4.
   "Organic waste" means solid waste containing material originated from living
organisms and their metabolic waste products, including, but not limited to,
food, green material, landscape and pruning waste, organic textiles and
carpets, lumber, wood, paper products, printing and writing paper, manure,
biosolids, digestate, and sludges; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section
18982(a)(46). Biosolids and digestate are as defined by 14 CCR Section 18982
(a).
   "Paper products" include, but are not limited to, paper janitorial supplies,
cartons, wrapping, packaging, file folders, hanging files, corrugated boxes,
tissue, and toweling; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(51).
   "Printing and writing papers" include, but are not limited to, copy,
xerographic, watermark, cotton fiber, offset, forms, computer printout paper,
white wove envelopes, manila envelopes, book paper, note pads, writing tablets,
newsprint, and other uncoated writing papers, posters, index cards, calendars,
brochures, reports, magazines, and publications; or, as otherwise defined in 14
CCR Section 18982(a)(54).
   "Prohibited container contaminants," unless otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(55), means the following:
      (1)   Discarded materials placed in the blue container that are not
identified by the City as acceptable source separated recyclable materials for
the blue container;
      (2)   Discarded materials placed in the green container that are not
identified by the City as acceptable source separated green container organic
waste for the green container, including carpet, hazardous wood waste and non-
compostable paper;
      (3)   Discarded materials placed in the gray container that are
acceptable source separated recyclable materials and/or source separated green
container organic waste to be placed in the city's green container or blue
container; and,
      (4)   Excluded waste placed in any container.
   "Recovery" means any activity or process described in 14 CCR Section 18983.1
(b); or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(49).
   "Recycled-content paper" means paper products and printing and writing paper
that consists of at least 30 percent, by fiber weight, postconsumer fiber; or,
as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(61).
   "Restaurant" means an establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of
food and drinks for on-premises or immediate consumption; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(64).
   "Route review" means a visual inspection of containers along a hauler route
for the purpose of determining container contamination and may include
mechanical inspection methods such as the use of cameras; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(65).
   "SB 1383" means Senate Bill 1383 of 2016 approved by the Governor of the
State on September 19, 2016, which added Sections 39730.5, 39730.6, 39730.7,
and 39730.8 to the State Health and Safety Code, and added Chapter 13.1
(commencing with Section 42652) to Part 3 of Division 30 of the State Public
Resources Code, establishing methane emissions reduction targets in a Statewide
effort to reduce emissions of short-lived climate pollutants.
   "SB 1383 Regulations" means the Short-Lived Climate Pollutants: Organic
Waste Reduction Regulations developed by CalRecycle and adopted in 2020 that
created 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 and amended portions of 14 CCR and 27
CCR.
   "Self-hauler" means a person or entity, who, in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this Code, hauls solid waste, organic waste or
recyclable materials that he or she has generated to another person or entity.
"Self-hauler" also includes a person or entity who back-hauls waste; or, as
otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(66). Back-haul means generating
and transporting organic waste to a destination owned and operated by the
generator using the generator's own employees and equipment; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(66)(A).
   "Single-family" means of, from, or pertaining to any residential premises
with fewer than five units.
   "Solid waste" unless otherwise defined in State Public Resources Code
Section 40191, means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and
liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes,
industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and
parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or
chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable
or animal solid and semi-solid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid
wastes, with the exception that "solid waste" does not include any of the
following wastes:
      (1)   Hazardous waste, as defined in the State Public Resources Code
Section 40141;
      (2)   Radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law
(Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 114960) of Part 9 of Division 104 of the
State Health and Safety Code); and,
      (3)   Medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management
Act (Part 14 (commencing with Section 117600) of Division 104 of the State
Health and Safety Code). Untreated medical waste shall not be disposed of in a
Solid Waste landfill, as defined in State Public Resources Code Section
40195.1. Medical waste That has been treated and deemed to be solid waste shall
be regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the State Public Resources Code.
   "Source separated" means materials, including commingled recyclable
materials, that have been separated or kept separate from the solid waste
stream, at the point of generation, for the purpose of additional sorting or
processing those materials for recycling or reuse in order to return them to
the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or
reconstituted products, which meet the quality standards necessary to be used
in the marketplace; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR Section 17402.5(b)(4).
For the purposes of this Article, "source separated" shall include separation
of materials, at the point of generation, by the generator, property owner,
property owner's employee, property manager, or property manager's employee
into different containers for the purpose of collection such that source
separated materials are separated from gray container waste or other solid
waste for the purposes of collection and processing of those materials.
   "Source separated blue container organic waste" means source separated
organic wastes that can be placed in a blue container that is limited to the
collection of those organic wastes and non-organic recyclables. Source
separated blue container organic waste excludes source separated green organic
waste, but includes paper products, printing and writing paper, wood and dry
lumber and textiles unless otherwise specified by the City.
   "Source separated green container organic waste" means source separated
organic waste that can be placed in a green container that is specifically
intended for the separate collection of organic waste by the generator,
excluding source separated blue container organic waste, carpets, non-
compostable paper, and textiles.
   "Source separated recyclable materials" means source separated non-organic
recyclables and source separated blue container organic waste.
   "State" means the State of California.
   "Supermarket" means a full-line, self-service retail store with gross annual
sales of two million dollars or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery,
canned goods, or non-food items and some perishable items; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 18982(a)(71).
   "Tier One commercial edible food generator" means a commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(73):
      (1)   Supermarket;
      (2)   Grocery store with a total facility size equal to or greater than
ten thousand square feet;
      (3)   Food service provider;
      (4)   Food distributor; or
      (5)   Wholesale food vendor.
   "Tier Two commercial edible food generator" means a commercial edible food
generator that is one of the following; or, as otherwise defined in 14 CCR
Section 18982(a)(73):
      (1)   Restaurant with 250 or more seats, or a total facility size equal
to or greater than 5,000 square feet;
      (2)   Hotel with an on-site food facility and 200 or more rooms;
      (3)   Health facility with an on-site food facility and 100 or more beds;
      (4)   Large venue;
      (5)   Large event;
      (6)   A State agency with a cafeteria with 250 or more seats or total
cafeteria facility size equal to or greater than 5,000 square feet; or
      (7)   A local education agency facility with an on-site food facility.
   "Wholesale food vendor" means a business or establishment engaged in the
merchant wholesale distribution of food, where food (including fruits and
vegetables) is received, shipped, stored, prepared for distribution to a
retailer, warehouse, distributor, or other destination; or, as otherwise
defined in 14 CCR Section 189852(a)(76).
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.660 Requirements for single-family organic waste generators.
Single-family organic waste generators shall comply with the following
requirements, except single-family generators that meet the self-hauler
requirements of this Code:
   (a)   Subscribe to the City's three-container organic waste collection
service(s) for all organic waste generated as described below. The City shall
have the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers to
evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each type of collection service for
proper separation of materials and containment of materials; and single-family
generators shall adjust their service level for their collection services as
requested by the City. Generators may additionally manage their organic waste
by preventing or reducing their organic waste, managing organic waste on site,
and/or using a community composting site pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   (b)   Participate in the City's organic waste collection service(s) by
placing designated materials in designated containers as described in this
paragraph, and shall not place prohibited container contaminants in collection
containers. Generators shall place source separated green container organic
waste, including food waste, in the green container; source separated
recyclable materials (which includes source separated non-organic recyclables
and source separated blue container waste) in the blue container; and gray
container waste in the gray container. Generators shall not place materials
designated for the gray container into the green container or the blue
container.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.670 Requirements for commercial organic waste generators and commercial
businesses.
Commercial organic waste generators and commercial businesses shall comply with
the following:
   (a)   Except for commercial organic waste generators that meet the self-haul
requirements of this Code, commercial organic waste generators, including
multi-family residential dwellings, shall subscribe to the City's three-
container organic waste collection service(s) and comply with requirements of
those service(s) as described below in paragraph (b) of this section. The City
shall have the right to review the number and size of a generator's containers
and frequency of collection to evaluate adequacy of capacity provided for each
type of collection service for proper separation of materials and containment
of materials; and commercial businesses shall adjust their service level for
their collection services as requested by the City. Generators may additionally
manage their organic waste by preventing or reducing their organic waste,
managing organic waste on site, and/or using a community composting site
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(c).
   (b)   Except for commercial organic waste generators that meet the self-haul
requirements of this code, commercial organic waste generators, including
multi-family residential dwellings, shall participate in the City's organic
waste collection service(s) by placing designated materials in designated
containers as described in this paragraph, and not placing prohibited container
contaminants in containers. Generators shall place source separated green
container organic waste in the green container; source separated recyclable
materials (which includes source separated non-organic recyclables and source
separated blue container waste) in the blue container; and gray container waste
in the gray container. Generators shall not place materials designated for the
gray container into the green container or the blue container.
   (c)   Commercial organic waste generators, except for multi-family
residential dwellings, shall provide containers for the collection of source
separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials in all indoor and outdoor areas where disposal containers are
provided for customers. Such containers shall be visible and easily accessible.
Such containers do not need to be provided in restrooms. If a commercial
business does not generate any of the materials that would be collected in one
type of container, then the business does not have to provide that particular
container in all areas where disposal containers are provided for customers.
Pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b), the containers provided by the
commercial business shall have either:
      (1)   A body or lid that conforms with the container colors provided
through the organic waste collection service provided by the City. A commercial
business is not required to replace functional containers, including containers
purchased prior to January 1, 2022, that do not comply with the requirements of
this subsection prior to the end of the useful life of those containers, or
prior to January 1, 2036, whichever comes first.
      (2)   Container labels that include language or graphic images, or both,
indicating the primary material accepted and the primary materials prohibited
in that container, or containers with imprinted text or graphic images that
indicate the primary materials accepted and primary materials prohibited in the
container; or, as otherwise provided in 14 CCR 18984.8.
   (d)   Commercial organic waste generators, including multi-family
residential dwellings, shall supply and allow access to adequate number, size
and location of collection containers with sufficient labels or colors
(conforming to subsections (c)(1) and (c)(2) above) for employees, contractors,
tenants, and customers, consistent with the City's collection service and
Article 3 of Chapter 12 of Division 7 of Title 14 of the CCR.
   (e)   Commercial organic waste generators, except for multi-family
residential dwellings, shall prohibit employees from placing materials in a
container not designated for those materials per the City's blue container,
green container and gray container collection service pursuant to 14 CCR
Section 18984.1(a)(5).
   (f)   Commercial organic waste generators, except for multi-family
residential dwellings, shall periodically inspect blue containers, green
containers and gray containers for contamination and inform employees if
containers are contaminated and the requirements to keep contaminants out of
those containers pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18984.9(b)(3).
   (g)   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
shall annually provide information to employees, contractors, tenants, and
customers about organic waste recovery requirements and about proper sorting of
source separated green container organic waste and source separated recyclable
materials.
   (h)   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
shall provide information as described in (g) in this Section before or within
fourteen days of occupation of the premises to new tenants.
   (i)   Commercial businesses, including multi-family residential dwellings,
shall provide or arrange access for the City or its agent to their properties
during all inspections conducted in accordance with Section 6.08.760 to confirm
compliance with the requirements of this Section.
   (j)   If a commercial business wants to self-haul, meet the self-hauler
requirements of this Code, including Section
6.08.720.
   (k)   Commercial organic waste generators, including multi-family
residential dwellings, if generating two cubic yards or more of total solid
waste per week (or other threshold defined by the State), shall require that
any contract or work agreement between the owner, occupant, or operator of the
commercial business and a gardening or landscaping service specify that the
organic waste generated by those services be managed in compliance with Chapter
12, Part 3, Division 30 of the Public Resources Code.
   (l)   Commercial businesses that are Tier One or Tier Two commercial edible
food generators shall comply with food recovery requirements, pursuant to
Section
6.08.700.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.680 Waivers for generators.
The City, at its discretion and in accordance with 14 CCR Section 18984.11, or
as otherwise authorized by CalRecycle, may grant one or more of the following
types of waivers to a generator of organic waste:
   (a)   De minimis waivers. The City may waive a commercial business'
obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to comply with some
or all of the organic waste requirements of this Article if the commercial
business provides documentation, or the City has evidence demonstrating, that
the business generates below a certain amount of organic waste material as
described below in subsection (a)(2). Commercial businesses requesting a de
minimis waiver shall:
      (1)   Submit an application specifying the services that they are
requesting a waiver from and provide documentation as noted in subsection (a)
(2) below.
      (2)   Provide documentation that either:
         (A)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
two cubic yards or more per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container or green container comprises less than 20 gallons per week per
applicable container of the business' total waste; or
         (B)   The commercial business' total solid waste collection service is
less than two cubic yards per week and organic waste subject to collection in a
blue container or green container comprises less than ten gallons per week per
applicable container of the business' total waste.
      (3)   Notify the City if circumstances change such that the commercial
business' organic waste exceeds the threshold required for waiver, in which
case the waiver will be rescinded. In addition, if the City obtains information
at any time that a commercial business that has received a waiver is exceeding
the organic waste thresholds set forth in subsection (a)(2) above, the City
shall rescind the waiver.
      (4)   Provide written verification of eligibility for a de minimis waiver
every five years, if the City has approved a de minimis waiver.
   (b)   Physical space waivers. The City may waive a commercial business' or
property owner's obligations (including multi-family residential dwellings) to
comply with some or all of the recyclable materials and/or organic waste
collection service requirements of this Article if the City has evidence from
its own staff, a hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer demonstrating
that the premises lacks adequate space for the collection containers required
for the organic waste collection requirements of this Article. Commercial
businesses or property owners requesting a physical space waiver shall:
      (1)   Submit an application form specifying the type(s) of collection
services for which they are requesting a compliance waiver and provide
documentation as noted below.
      (2)   Provide documentation that the premises lacks adequate space for
blue containers and/or green containers including documentation from its
hauler, licensed architect, or licensed engineer.
      (3)   Provide written verification to the City that it is still eligible
for a physical space waiver every five years, if the City has approved an
application for a physical space waiver.
   (c)   The Enforcement Official will be responsible for review and approval
of waivers.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.690 Requirements for commercial edible food generators.
   (a)   Tier One commercial edible food generators must comply with the
requirements of this Section commencing January 1, 2022, and Tier Two
commercial edible food generators must comply with the requirements of this
Section commencing January 1, 2024, pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3.
   (b)   Large venue or large event operators, not providing food services, but
allowing for food to be provided by others, shall require food facilities
operating at the large venue or large event to comply with the requirements of
this Section commencing January 1, 2024.
   (c)   Commercial edible food generators shall comply with the following
requirements:
      (1)   Arrange to recover the maximum amount of edible food that would
otherwise be disposed.
      (2)   Contract with or enter into a written agreement with food recovery
organizations or food recovery services for:
         (A)   The collection of edible food for food recovery; or
         (B)   Acceptance of the edible food that the commercial edible food
generator self-hauls to the food recovery organization for food recovery.
      (3)   Shall not intentionally spoil edible food that is capable of being
recovered by a food recovery organization or a food recovery service.
      (4)   Allow the City's designated enforcement entity or designated third
party enforcement entity to access the premises and review records kept
pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.4.
      (5)   Keep records that include the following information, or as
otherwise specified in 14 CCR Section 18991.4:
         (A)   A list of each food recovery service or food recovery
organization that collects or receives its edible food pursuant to a contract
or written agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         (B)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under
14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
         (C)   A record of the following information for each of those food
recovery services or food recovery organizations:
            (i)   The name, address and contact information of the food
recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (ii)   The types of food that will be collected by or self-hauled
to the food recovery service or food recovery organization.
            (iii)   The established frequency that food will be collected or
self-hauled.
            (iv)   The quantity of food, measured in pounds recovered per
month, collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
   (d)   If the Enforcement Official makes a request, then within 30 days of
the request, Tier One commercial edible foods generators and Tier Two
commercial edible food generators shall provide a food recovery report to the
City that includes the following information:
      (1)   A copy of all contracts or written agreements established under 14
CCR Section 18991.3(b).
      (2)   The quantity of food, measured in annual pounds recovered,
collected or self-hauled to a food recovery service or food recovery
organization for food recovery.
      (3)   The name, address and contact information of the food recovery
service or food recovery organization.
   (e)   Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit or conflict with
the protections provided by the California Good Samaritan Food Donation Act of
2017, the Federal Good Samaritan Act, or share table and school food donation
guidance pursuant to Senate Bill 557 of 2017 (approved by the Governor of the
State on September 25, 2017, which added Article 13 (commencing with Section
49580) to Chapter 9 of Part 27 of Division 4 of Title 2 of the State Education
Code, and amended Section 114079 of the State Health and Safety Code, relating
to food safety, as amended, supplemented, superseded and replaced from time to
time.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.700 Requirements for food recovery organizations and services.
   (a)   Food recovery services collecting or receiving edible food directly
from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the following
records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(1):
      (1)   The name, address and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the service collects edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food collected from each
commercial edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The quantity in pounds of edible food transported to each food
recovery organization per month.
      (4)   The name, address and contact information for each food recovery
organization that the food recovery service transports edible food to for food
recovery.
   (b)   Food recovery organizations collecting or receiving edible food
directly from commercial edible food generators, via a contract or written
agreement established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b), shall maintain the
following records, or as otherwise specified by 14 CCR Section 18991.5(a)(2):
      (1)   The name, address and contact information for each commercial
edible food generator from which the organization receives edible food.
      (2)   The quantity in pounds of edible food received from each commercial
edible food generator per month.
      (3)   The name, address and contact information for each food recovery
service that the organization receives edible food from for food recovery.
   (c)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services shall inform
generators about State Food and Federal Good Samaritan Food Donation Act
protection in written communications, such as in their contract or agreement
established under 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b).
   (d)   Food recovery organizations and food recovery services that have their
primary address physically located in the City and contract with or have
written agreements with one or more commercial edible food generators pursuant
to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) shall report to the City the total pounds of
edible food recovered in the previous calendar year from the Tier One and Tier
Two Commercial Edible Food Generators they have established a contract or
written agreement with pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18991.3(b) no later than
March 31 of each year, commencing March 31, 2023.
   (e)   Food recovery capacity planning. Food recovery services and food
recovery organizations operating in the City shall provide information and
consultation to the City, upon request, regarding existing, or proposed new or
expanded, food recovery capacity that could be accessed by the city and its
commercial edible food generators. A food recovery service or food recovery
organization contacted by the City shall respond to such request for
information within 60 days, unless a shorter time frame is otherwise specified
by the City.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.710 Requirements for haulers, facility operators and community composting
operations.
   (a)   Requirements for haulers.
      (1)   Haulers providing residential, commercial, or industrial organic
waste collection services to generators within the City's boundaries shall meet
the requirements and standards of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12 as a condition
of approval of contract, agreement, or other authorization to collect organic
waste.
      (2)   Through written notice to the City, haulers shall identify the
facilities to which they will transport organic waste.
      (3)   Haulers providing organic waste collection services shall comply
with the applicable requirements of 14 CCR, Division 7, Chapter 12, Article 3.
      (4)   Haulers providing residential, commercial industrial organic waste
collection services shall transport organic waste to a facility, operation,
activity or property that recovers organic waste as defined in 14 CCR, Division
7, Chapter 12, Article 2.
      (5)   Haulers providing residential, commercial industrial organic waste
collection services shall obtain applicable approval of the City pursuant to 14
CCR Section 18988.1 and keep a record of the documentation of its approval by
the City.
   (b)   Paragraph (a) of this section is not applicable to a hauler that,
consistent with Article 1, Chapter 9, Part 2, Division 30, commencing with
Section 41950 of the Public Resources Code, is transporting source separated
organic waste to a community composting site or to a hauler that is lawfully
transporting C&D in a manner that complies with 14 CCR Section 18989.1 and
applicable requirements of this Code.
   (c)   Requirements for facility operators and community composting
operations.
      (1)   Owners of facilities, operations and activities that recover
organic waste, including, but not limited to, compost facilities, in-vessel
digestion facilities and publicly-owned treatment works shall, upon the City's
request, provide information regarding available and potential new or expanded
capacity at their facilities, operations, and activities, including information
about throughput and permitted capacity necessary for planning purposes.
Entities contacted by the City shall respond within 60 days, unless a shorter
timeframe is otherwise specified by the City.
      (2)   Community composting operators, upon the City's request, shall
provide information to the City to support organic waste capacity planning,
including, but not limited to, an estimate of the amount of organic waste
anticipated to be handled at the community composting operation. Entities
contacted by the City shall respond within 60 days, unless a shorter timeframe
is otherwise specified by the City.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.720 Self-hauler requirements.
In addition to any other requirements for self-haulers as contained in this
Code:
   (a)   Self-haulers of organic waste shall comply with the requirements in 14
CCR Section 18988.3.
   (b)   Self-haulers shall source separate all recyclable materials and
organic waste (materials that the City otherwise requires organic waste
generators to separate for collection in the City's organics and recycling
collection program) generated on-site from solid waste in a manner consistent
with 14 CCR Section 18984.1, or shall haul organic waste to a high diversion
organic waste processing facility as specified in 14 CCR Section 18984.3.
   (c)   Self-haulers shall haul their source separated recyclable materials to
a facility that recovers those materials; and haul their source separated green
container organic waste to a solid waste facility, operation, activity or
property that processes or recovers source separated organic waste.
Alternatively, self-haulers may haul organic waste to a high diversion organic
waste processing facility.
   (d)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
residential dwellings) shall keep a record of the amount of organic waste
delivered to each solid waste facility, operation, activity or property that
processes or recovers organic waste; this record shall be subject to inspection
by the City. The records shall include the following information:
      (1)   Delivery receipts and weight tickets from the entity accepting the
waste.
      (2)   The amount of material in cubic yards or tons transported by the
generator to each entity.
      (3)   If the material is transported to an entity that does not have
scales on-site, or employs scales incapable of weighing the self-hauler's
vehicle in a manner that allows it to determine the weight of materials
received, the self-hauler is not required to record the weight of material but
shall keep a record of the entities that received the organic waste.
   (e)   A single-family organic waste generator that self-hauls organic waste
is not required to record or report information in subsection (d) of this
section.
   (f)   Self-haulers that are commercial businesses (including multi-family
self-haulers) shall provide information collected in paragraph (d) of this
section to the City, if requested.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.730 Procurement requirements for direct service providers and vendors.
Direct service providers to the City and all vendors providing paper products
and printing and writing papers shall comply with the City's policy regarding
recovered organic waste product procurement, including recycled-content paper
procurement.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.740 Compliance with CALGreen recycling requirements.
   (a)   In addition to any other requirements of this Code, the following
requirements also apply:
      (1)   For projects covered by the California Green Building Standards
Code, 24 CCR, Part 11, the applicants must, as a condition of the City's permit
approval, comply with the following:
         (A)   Where five or more multi-family dwelling units are constructed
on a building site, provide readily accessible areas that serve occupants of
all buildings on the site and are identified for the storage and collection of
blue container and green container materials, consistent with the collection
program offered by the City, or comply with the provision of adequate space for
recycling for multi-family and commercial premises pursuant to Sections
4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the California Green Building
Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11, as amended July 1, 2019 and effective January
1, 2020.
         (B)   Where new commercial construction or additions will result in
more than 30% of the floor area, provide readily accessible areas identified
for the storage and collection of blue container and green container materials,
consistent with the collection program offered by the City, or shall comply
with provision of adequate space for recycling for multi-family and commercial
premises pursuant to Sections 4.408.1, 4.410.2, 5.408.1, and 5.410.1 of the
California Green Building Standards Code, 24 CCR, Part 11, as amended July 1,
2019 and effective January 1, 2020.
   (b)   For organic waste commingled with C&D, the requirements of 24 CCR
Sections 4.408.1 and 5.408.1, as amended July 1, 2019 and effective January 1,
2020 shall be complied with.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.750 Model Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance requirements.
Property owners or their building or landscape designers, including anyone
requiring a building or planning permit, plan check or landscape design review
from the City, who are constructing a new (single-family, multi-family, public,
institutional, or commercial) project with a landscape area greater than 500
square feet, or rehabilitating an existing landscape with a total landscape
area greater than 2,500 square feet, shall comply with Sections 492.6(a)(3)(B)
(C), (D), and (G) of the MWELO, including sections related to use of compost
and mulch, as amended September 15, 2015.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.760 Inspections and investigations by the City.
   (a)   City representatives and/or its designated entity, including
designees, are authorized to conduct inspections and investigations, at random
or otherwise, of any collection container, collection vehicle loads, or
transfer, processing, or disposal facility for materials collected from
generators, or source separated materials to confirm compliance with this
Article by organic waste generators, commercial businesses (including multi-
family residential dwellings), property owners, commercial edible food
generators, haulers, self-haulers, food recovery services and food recovery
organizations, subject to applicable laws. This Section does not allow the
City, its designees or agents to enter the interior of a private residential
property for inspection. For the purposes of inspecting commercial business
containers for compliance with this Article, the City may conduct container
inspections for prohibited container contaminants.
   (b)   A regulated entity shall provide or arrange for access during all
inspections (with the exception of residential property interiors) and shall
cooperate with the City representative and/or its designated entity, including
designees, during such inspections and investigations. Such inspections and
investigations may include confirmation of proper placement of materials in
containers, edible food recovery activities, records, or any other requirement
of this Article described herein. Failure to provide or arrange for:
      (1)   Access to an entity's premises; or
      (2)   Access to records for any inspection or investigation is a
violation of this Article and may result in penalties described herein.
   (c)   Any records obtained by the City during its inspections and other
reviews shall be subject to the requirements and applicable disclosure
exemptions of the Public Records Act as set forth in State Government Code
Section 6250 et seq.
   (d)   The City representative, its designees and agents are authorized to
conduct any inspections or other investigations as reasonably necessary to
further the goals of this Article, subject to applicable laws.
   (e)   The City shall receive written complaints from persons regarding an
entity that may be potentially non-compliant with SB 1383 regulations,
including receipt of anonymous complaints in accordance with by 14 CCR Section
18995.3.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
6.08.770 Enforcement.
   (a)   Violation of any provision of this Article that occurs on or after
January 1, 2024 shall constitute grounds for issuance of a notice of violation
and assessment of a fine by the Enforcement Official in accordance with 14 CCR
Section 18995.4. Enforcement actions under this Article are issuance of an
administrative citation and assessment of a fine. The City's procedures on
imposition of administrative fines set forth in Chapter 1.08 (Penalties,
Administrative and Civil Remedies, and General Provisions) of Title 1 (General
Provisions) of this Code are hereby incorporated in their entirety, as modified
from time to time, and shall govern the imposition, enforcement, collection and
review of administrative citations issued to enforce this Article and any rule
or regulation adopted pursuant to this Article, except as otherwise indicated
in this Article. Other remedies allowed by law may be used, including civil
action or prosecution as a misdemeanor or infraction. The City may pursue civil
actions in the State courts to seek recovery of unpaid administrative
citations. The City may choose to delay court action until such time as a
sufficiently large number of violations, or cumulative size of violations exist
such that court action is a reasonable use of City staff and resources.
         The provisions of this subsection (a) do not apply to violations
related to a generator placing prohibited container contaminants in containers,
which the Enforcement Official and/or the City's Designee shall enforce through
the notice provisions of 14 CCR Section 18984.5(b) and the contamination
processing fees pursuant to the provisions of the applicable collection
agreement between the City and a franchised hauler.
   (b)    Enforcement pursuant to this Article may be undertaken by the
Enforcement Official.
   (c)   Penalty amounts for types of violations. For the purposes of this
Article, the penalty levels for violations of the provisions of this Article
are as follows:
      (1)   For a first violation (excluding any violation that has been timely
corrected in accordance with the warning set forth in a notice of violation),
the penalty shall be $50 per violation.
      (2)   For a second violation (excluding any violation that has been
timely corrected in accordance with the warning set forth in a notice of
violation), the penalty shall be $100 per violation.
      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation (excluding any violation that
has been timely corrected in accordance with the warning set forth in a notice
of violation), the penalty shall be $250 per violation.
   (d)   Compliance deadline extension considerations. The City may extend the
compliance deadlines set forth in a notice of violation if it finds that there
are extenuating circumstances beyond the control of the respondent that make
compliance within the deadlines impracticable, including the following:
      (1)   Acts of God, such as earthquakes, wildfires, flooding and other
emergencies or natural disasters;
      (2)   Delays in obtaining discretionary permits or other government
agency approvals; or
      (3)   Deficiencies in organic waste recycling infrastructure or edible
food recovery capacity and the City is under a corrective action plan with
CalRecycle pursuant to 14 CCR Section 18996.2 due to those deficiencies.
(Ord. 720, § 1, 2021)
Chapter 6.12
DAIRIES AND COW HERDS
Sections:
   
6.12.010   Definitions.
   
6.12.020   Maintenance of dairies.
   
6.12.030   Barns.
   
6.12.040   Cow yards.
   
6.12.050   Removal of fly breeding materials.
   
6.12.060   Control of flies.
   
6.12.070   Mosquitos and gnats.
   
6.12.080   Rain--Removal of manure and fly breeding material.
6.12.010 Definitions.
   (a)   "Dairy" means any place or premises where one or more cows are kept
and any part or all of the milk or milk products from which cow or cows are
sold or offered for sale.
   (b)   "Dairyman" means any person keeping or maintaining, or causing or
permitting to be kept or maintained, any cows or calves, in connection with a
dairy or otherwise.
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 5200).
6.12.020 Maintenance of dairies.
Every dairyman shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 5201).
6.12.030 Barns.
The interior of any barn or other place in which cows are milked or housed,
including, but not limited to, walls, ceilings, floors, mangers and gutters,
manure traps, shall be kept clean and in good repair.
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 5202).
6.12.040 Cow yards.
All cow yards, hay storage areas and alleys shall be graded and kept drained
and clean.
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 5203).
6.12.050 Removal of fly breeding materials.
   (a)   All animal manure, excrement, and all other fly breeding materials,
shall be removed from all areas of any dairy including, but not limited to,
cattle yards, barns, sheds, feeding platforms, and mangers, as often as is
necessary to prevent the breeding or harboring of flies.
   It is further provided that, in any event, all animal manure, excrement, and
all other fly breeding materials shall be removed at least once every seven
days. Provided, however, that in the event that there is such precipitation
that the removal of animal manure, excrement, and other fly breeding materials
is impracticable, any dairy or dairyman may apply forthwith to the city
administrator for an extension of time beyond the aforesaid seven-day
limitation. The city administrator upon receipt of such application shall grant
such extension of time only where he shall affirmatively find and determine
that by reason of an unusual amount of precipitation that such removal is
impracticable. The city administrator may grant such extensions of time as are
necessary or convenient to effectuate his determination.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon forty-eight
hours written notice from the health officer, a dairyman shall remove all
manure, excrement, and all other fly breeding materials from his dairy as
specified in the notice. The notice may be given by delivery to any responsible
person on the dairy or by posting in a conspicuous place thereon. The health
officer shall have the authority to issue such notice whenever he shall find
that the removal of fly breeding materials and/or abatement of fly breeding
conditions is necessary to preserve the health and/ or welfare of the community
or adjoining neighborhood.
(Ord. 48 § 1, 1962; Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 5204).
6.12.060 Control of flies.
   (a)   All areas of any dairy wherein flies might propagate or be harbored,
including, but not limited to, cow yards, barns and sheds, shall be cleaned and
sprayed with effective insecticides as often as is necessary to prevent the
breeding, propagation, or harboring of flies which constitute a menace to the
health and/or welfare of the community or adjoining neighborhood. The health
officer shall have the authority to designate the frequency required and such
insecticides as are effective as fly insecticides when needed.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon written
notice by the health officer, a dairyman shall spray or cause to be sprayed,
within twenty-four hours of such notice his dairy as specified in such notice.
The notice may be given by delivery to a responsible person on the dairy or by
posting in a conspicuous place thereon. The health officer shall have the
authority to issue such notice whenever he shall find that the cleaning and/or
spraying required thereby is necessary to preserve the health and/or welfare of
the community or adjoining neighborhood.
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 52.05).
6.12.070 Mosquitos and gnats.
   (a)   All areas of any dairy wherein mosquitos and/or gnats might propagate
or be harbored, including, but not limited to, cow yards, barns and sheds,
shall be so cleaned, drained and/or sprayed with effective insecticides as
often as deemed necessary by the health officer or his representative.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon written
notice by the health officer a dairyman shall abate the mosquito and/or gnats
nuisance within twenty-four hours as specified in such notice.
(Ord. 10 § 1 (part), 1960; prior code § 5206).
6.12.080 Rain--Removal of manure and fly breeding material.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, in the event of any rain
or precipitation within the city, the city administrator may give twenty-four
hours written notice to any dairyman to remove all manure, excrement and all
other fly breeding materials from his dairy as specified in the notice. The
notice may be given by delivery to any responsible person on the dairy or by
posting in a conspicuous place thereon. The city administrator shall have the
authority to issue such notice whenever, in his opinion, the removal of fly
breeding materials and/or abatement of fly breeding conditions is necessary to
preserve the health or welfare of the community or adjoining neighborhood.
(Ord. 31 § 1, 1961; prior code § 5206).
Chapter 6.14
KEEPING OF BEES PROHIBITED
Sections:
   
6.14.010   Keeping of bees prohibited.
   
6.14.020   Africanized honey bees declared to be a public nuisance.
6.14.010 Keeping of bees prohibited.
Except as otherwise provided by law, it is unlawful for any person to maintain
bees, including any beehive or colony, within the city.
(Ord. 555 § 1 (part), 2000).
6.14.020 Africanized honey bees declared to be a public nuisance.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any property owner or tenant to knowingly permit to
exist, or to maintain, on any premises under his or her ownership or control,
any nest, hive, colony, swarm or infestation of Africanized honey bees,
including any managed beehive that has become Africanized, and the same is
declared to be a public nuisance which shall be immediately and properly abated
by either the property owner or tenant, or by the greater Los Angeles County
vector control district ("district") or the city, at the expense of the
property owner as provided in this section. Notwithstanding any other provision
of this section, authorized representatives of the district and/or city are
authorized to immediately enter any property and abate Africanized honey bees
constituting a public nuisance when necessary to protect the public from an
imminent threat of harm, as determined by a district or city representative.
   (b)   Upon discovering the presence of Africanized honey bees on any
premises, designated district and/or city representatives shall be authorized
to enter upon such property, with the consent of the owner or tenant, to
determine whether such infestation constitutes a public nuisance and, if so, to
abate the same utilizing appropriate physical, chemical or biological control
measures. Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of the district to
enter property and abate the presence of Africanized honeybees pursuant to
California Health and Safety Code Section 2270(f).
   (c)   In the event the city is required to abate Africanized honey bees
constituting a public nuisance on any property, the property owner or tenant
shall be provided with an invoice reflecting the cost of such abatement,
together with written notice that the decision to abate and/or the cost of
abatement incurred by the city may be appealed, by filing a written request for
a hearing with the city manager no more than five business days following the
date of the notice. Upon receipt of a timely request, the city manager shall
schedule a hearing, giving written notice thereof to the property owner or
tenant, and the hearing shall be conducted substantially in accordance with the
provisions of Section 21.55.150 of Chapter 21.55. All costs of abatement are
hereby deemed to be recoverable as a debt on a written contract or as a civil
penalty in such amount as may be established by resolution of the city council.
   (d)   Abatement and recovery of abatement costs by the district shall be
conducted pursuant to applicable provisions of state law including, but not
limited to, the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 2270 et seq.
   (e)   The abatement procedures contained in this section are alternative to
any other procedures provided by law.
(Ord. 555 § 1 (part), 2000).
Title 8
   ANIMALS  *
Chapters:
   
8.04    Animal Control
   
8.08    Horses
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to impose and collect an annual
  license on dogs, see Gov. Code 38792. For statutory provisions pertaining to
* the regulation and licensing of dogs, see Food and Agric. Code 30501 et seq.
  For statutory provisions pertaining to rabies control, see Health and S. Code
  121575 et seq.
Chapter 8.04
ANIMAL CONTROL
Sections:
   
8.04.010   Title.
   
8.04.020   Code adopted.
   
8.04.025   Fees.
   
8.04.030   Copy filed.
   
8.04.040   Amendments--General.
   
8.04.050   Deletions.
   
8.04.060   Conflicts.
   
8.04.070   No entitlements created hereby.
   
8.04.080   Penalty for violation of chapter.
8.04.010 Title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Animal Control
Ordinance of the City of La Mirada" and may be cited as the "animal control
ordinance." (Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.020 Code adopted.
Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on September
10, 2024, but excluding penalty provisions, is adopted by reference as the
Animal Control Ordinance of the city. (Ord. 734, § 2, 2024; Ord. 648 § 2, 2012;
Ord. 642 § 2, 2011; Ord. 633 § 2 (part), 2010; Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.025 Fees.
Fees for services provided pursuant to Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code,
as adopted in Section
8.04.020 of this Code, shall be established and may be amended from time to
time by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 633 § 3 (part), 2010)
8.04.030 Copy filed.
At least one certified copy of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as
adopted in Section
8.04.020, has been deposited with the city clerk, and shall be at all times
maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.040 Amendments--General.
Title 10, as adopted in Section
8.04.020, is amended as follows:
   Whenever reference is made to the county of Los Angeles or to the
unincorporated area of the county, such area shall be deemed to include within
its corporate limits the area of the city of La Mirada for purposes of
fulfilling the requirements of this chapter. Whenever reference is made to the
regional planning commission, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the
planning commission of the city of La Mirada. Whenever reference is made to a
zoning ordinance, such reference shall be deemed to refer to the zoning
ordinance of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.050 Deletions.
All fee amounts established in Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as
adopted in Section
8.04.020 of this Code, are deleted and superseded by the provisions of the
section. All fees required to be paid pursuant to any provision of Title 10
shall be in such amounts as established and amended from time to time, by
resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 642 § 3, 2011; Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.060 Conflicts.
Whenever an apparent conflict or inconsistency exists between any provision of
Los Angeles County Code Title 10 as adopted in Section
8.04.020 and any provision of the La Mirada Municipal Code, each provision
shall be construed so as to supplement the other. In the event any apparently
conflicting or inconsistent provisions may not reasonably be so construed, the
provisions of the La Mirada Municipal Code shall prevail.
(Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.070 No entitlements created hereby.
The adoption of Los Angeles County Code Title 10, as set forth in Section
8.04.020, shall not be construed for any purpose as creating any entitlement or
authorizing any business or use of land which is prohibited by any provision
contained in the La Mirada Municipal Code, including Title 21, the zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. 522 § 2 (part), 1998).
8.04.080 Penalty for violation of chapter.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to
violate any provision, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements, of
Los Angeles County Code Title 10, as adopted in Section
8.04.020. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision
of Title 10, or failing to comply with any of its requirements, shall be deemed
guilty of an infraction, except as hereinafter provided, and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished as provided for in
Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
   (b)   Violation of Sections 10.12.190, 10.12.200, 10.20.280, 10.20.310,
10.28.060, 10.28.280(c), 10.32.020, 10.32.070, 10.32.080, 10.37.050(c),
10.37.060(f), 10.40.010, 10.40.040, or 10.86.010 of Los Angeles County Code
Title 10, as adopted in Section
8.04.020, is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (c)   Penalties related to potentially dangerous and vicious dogs.
      1.   If the determination that a dog is potentially dangerous under
Section 10.37.020, or that a dog is vicious under Section 10.37.030, is made
pursuant to a court hearing, the judicial officer shall impose a fine on the
owner not to exceed $1,000 for each separate basis upon which the determination
was made. The fine shall be paid to the department for the purposes of
defraying the cost of administering this chapter.
      2.   In the event an owner or custodian of a dog released after a hearing
pursuant to Section 10.37.110 or Section 10.37.120, fails to comply with any of
the conditions imposed under Section 10.37.130 or Section 10.37.140, such owner
or custodian shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in
Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
      3.   Violations of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code may be
punished by imposition of an administrative penalty, as provided in Chapter
1.08 of this Code.
      4.    Subject to the provisions of this subsection (c), all penalties set
forth in this chapter shall apply to violations of Title 10 of the Los Angeles
County Code.
   (d)   A violation of any of the provisions of Los Angeles County Code Title
10, as adopted in Section
8.04.020, shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through
civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent
injunction or any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such
nuisances. (Ord. 648 § 3, 2012; Ord. 642 § 4, 2011; Ord. 522 §§ 3, 4, 1998).
Chapter 8.08
HORSES
Sections:
   
8.08.010   Speed.
   
8.08.020   Parks.
8.08.010 Speed.
No person shall drive or ride any horse or other animal upon any public highway
or thoroughfare, within the city limits, immoderately, or beyond a moderate
gait, or in such a manner as to endanger the safety of persons on the highway
or thoroughfare.
(Prior code § 4304).
8.08.020 Parks.
No persons shall drive, lead, ride or permit any horse upon any public park or
recreation facility within the city limits, except in designated horse trails.
(Ord. 307 § 1, 1980).
Title 9
   PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS
AND SAFETY  *
Chapters:
   
9.04   Noise--Disorderly Conduct
   
9.06   Burglar and Robbery Alarms
   
9.08   Loitering and Soliciting from Streets
   
9.09   Loitering by Criminal Street Gangs
   
9.10   Smoking Prohibited in Public Recreational Areas, City Facilities, and
City Workplaces
   
9.12   Possession and Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages
   
9.15   Topless and Bottomless Waitresses and Performers
   
9.20   Coloring Baby Fowls and Animals
   
9.24   Gaming--Gambling
   
9.28   Lookouts
   
9.36   Discharging of Weapons
   
9.40   Minors
   
9.42   Threats with Replica Firearms
   
9.44   Parades
   
9.48   Protection of Streets
   
9.50   Painting of House Numbers on Curbs
   
9.52   Throwing Missiles
   
9.56   Gates
   
9.60   Unsightliness
   
9.64   Swimming Pools, Excavations, and Abandoned Chests
   
9.76   Gate-Crashing
   
9.84   Abandoned Wells
   
9.85   Use of Newsracks
   
9.90   Graffiti
   
9.96   Skateboards and Other Wheeled Devices Prohibited
   
9.98   Admission Charge and Loud or Unruly Parties
   
9.100   Urinating or Defecating in Public Places
   
9.102   Abatement of Public Nuisance Residential Units
   
9.106   Camping and Storage of Personal Property
   
9.108   Noncharitable Soliciting
   
9.109   Charitable Soliciting
   
9.110   Use of City-Owned Facilities, Recreation and Athletic Facilities, and
Adjoining Open Space Areas Restricted
   
9.112   Shopping Carts
   
9.114   Narcotics and Gang-Related Crime Prevention Program
   
9.116   Garage Sales
   
9.117   Use of the City Seal and Logos
   
9.120   Fourth of July Block Parties
   
9.124   Maintenance of Foreclosed and Abandoned Residential Properties
   
9.128   Rewards for Information on Crimes
   
9.132   Maintaining and Registering Vacant or Abandoned Commercial Properties
and Storefronts
   
9.133   Cannabis Prohibitions and Regulations
   
9.140   Unlawful Possession of a Catalytic Converter Prohibited
 
Notes
  For constitutional provisions authorizing cities to make and enforce within
* their respective limits such local police regulations which are not in
  conflict with the general laws, see Article 11, Section 7 of the California
  Constitution.
Chapter 9.04
NOISE--DISORDERLY CONDUCT
Sections:
   
9.04.010   Unnecessary or loud noises prohibited.
   
9.04.050   Disturbing the peace with noisy or smoky vehicle.
9.04.010 Unnecessary or loud noises prohibited.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to make or continue to cause to be made
or continued, within the city, any loud or unnecessary noise or any noise which
may reasonably be anticipated to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, peace, health or safety of others.
   (b)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing,
and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but such enumeration shall
not be deemed to be inclusive, namely:
      (1)   Radios, Phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting
playing, using or operating of any radio receiving set, television set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort
of residential inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary
for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle,
or chamber in which such machine or device is operating and who are voluntary
listeners thereto. The operating of any such set, instrument, phonograph,
machine or device between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. in such a manner
as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the residential
property line, or vehicle, in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section;
      (2)   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers for Advertising. The using, operating or
permitting playing, using or operating of any radio receiving set, television
set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon
the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure;
      (3)   Yelling, Shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, whistling or singing on
the public streets between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m., or at any time
or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in
any office or in any dwelling, or other type of residence, or of any persons in
the vicinity;
      (4)   Construction or Repair. The performance of any construction or
repair work of any kind upon, or excavating for, any building or structure,
where any such work entails the use of any air compressor, jackhammer, power-
driven drill, riveting machine, excavator, hand hammer on steel or iron, or any
other machine, tool, device, or equipment which makes loud noises to the
disturbance of persons occupying sleeping quarters in a dwelling, hotel, or
apartment or other place of residence. The above use of machinery or equipment
that produces such unnecessary noise shall be prohibited on Sunday between the
hours of eight p.m. and nine a.m. or any other day between the hours of eight
p.m. and seven a.m. The provisions of this section do not apply to any person
who performs any construction, repair, or excavation pursuant to the express
written permission of the city engineer. Upon receipt of an application in
writing therefor, stating the reasons of the request and the facts upon which
such reasons are based, the engineer may grant such permission if he finds
that:
         (A)   The work proposed to be done is in the public interest; or
         (B)   Hardship, or injustice or unreasonable delay would result from
the interruption thereof during the hours and days specified above; or
         (C)   The building or structure involved is devoted or intended to be
devoted to a use immediately incident to the public defense. Any person
dissatisfied with the decision of the city engineer may forthwith appeal to the
city council.
            (i)   The provisions of this section do not apply to the
construction, repair, or excavation during prohibited hours as may be necessary
for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such
hours as the offices of the city are closed or where such necessity requires
immediate action prior to the time at which it would be possible to obtain the
aforementioned permits; provided, that the persons doing such construction,
repair, or excavation obtain a permit therefor within one day after the office
of the city engineer is first opened subsequent to the making of such
construction, repair, or excavation.
            (ii)   The provisions of this section do not apply to construction,
repair, or excavation by a public utility which is subject to the jurisdiction
of the public utilities commission and where such work is necessary for the
immediate preservation of the public health, safety or welfare and where such
necessity makes it necessary to construct, repair or excavate during the
prohibited hours.
            (iii)   The provisions of this section do not apply in any
territory which is not a zone classified by the city's zoning ordinances as a
manufacturing zone (M zone) and is not less than five hundred feet from any
territory in any zone classified by the city's zoning ordinances as a
residential zone (R zone).
      (5)   Rubbish Collection. The performance of any rubbish collection
utilizing any mechanical equipment in any residential zone (R zone) or within
five hundred feet of any residential zone between the hours of eight p.m. and
six a.m.
(Ord. 360 § 1, 1984; Ord. 279 § 1, 1979; Ord. 141 § 1, 1968; prior code § 4301;
Ord. 683, §§ 1, 2 2016).
9.04.050 Disturbing the peace with noisy or smoky vehicle.
A person shall not operate any motor vehicle (including any motorcycle, trail
bike, dune buggy, motor scooter, or jeep) or the motor thereof on any place
other than a highway so as to disturb the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or
person by noise, dust, smoke or fumes caused by such motor vehicle.
(Ord. 162 § 1, 1970; prior code § 4108).
Chapter 9.06
BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARMS
Sections:
   
9.06.010   Title.
   
9.06.020   Purpose.
   
9.06.030   Definitions.
   
9.06.040   Required response; silencing alarm systems.
   
9.06.050   Alarm businesses and agents.
   
9.06.060   Notice of change.
   
9.06.070   Alarm system standards.
   
9.06.080   Maintenance and inspections.
   
9.06.090   Reimbursement for false alarm responses.
   
9.06.100   Maintaining a nuisance alarm.
   
9.06.110   Exempt alarms.
   
9.06.120   Automatic dialing device requirements.
   
9.06.130   Prohibited alarm systems.
   
9.06.140   Penalties and enforcement.
   
9.06.145   Administrative penalties for maintaining a public nuisance alarm.
   
9.06.150   Limitation of liability.
   
9.06.160   Appeals.
   
9.06.170   Civil remedies.
9.06.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Public Safety Alarm Ordinance of the City.
(Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing burglary,
robbery, fire, and medical assistance alarm systems within the City; to reduce
false alarms; and to provide the authority to establish fees. (Ord. 649 § 2,
2012).
9.06.030 Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Alarm Agent.” Any person who is registered as an alarm agent pursuant to
the provisions of the California Alarm Company Act, § 7590, et seq., of the
Business and Professions Code and doing business as such within the corporate
limits of the City of La Mirada.
   “Alarm Company Operator.” Any person licensed as an alarm company operator
pursuant to the provisions of the California Alarm Company Act, § 7590, et
seq., of the Business and Professions Code and doing business as such within
the corporate limits of the City of La Mirada.
   “Alarm Officer.” The officer or employee of the city or its police or fire
department, having responsibility for responding, or for causing the response,
to an activated alarm system.
   “Alarm System Coordinator.” The officer or employee of the city, or designee
thereof, designated by the City Manager as having direct authority and
responsibility for administration of the provisions of this chapter, excepting
only those functions specifically designated to be performed by the Alarm
Officer.
   “Alarm Subscriber.” Any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or
otherwise obtains and operates an alarm system or contracts for the servicing
or maintenance of an alarm system.
   “Alarm System.” Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or
used for the detection of burglary, robbery, fire, within a building,
structure, or facility, or on any premises, or for alerting others to a hazard
or need for medical assistance, or to the commission of an unlawful act within
a building, structure or facility, which emits a sound or transmits a signal or
message when actuated, and which is designed to elicit a response from law
enforcement or fire personnel.
      (i)   Alarm System includes, but is not limited to, every automatic
dialing device, direct-dial telephone device, audible alarm, and proprietor
alarm. Devices which are not designed or used to register or activate alarms
that are audible, visible or perceptible outside the protected building,
structure, facility or premises are not included within this definition.
      (ii)   Alarm System includes all of the necessary equipment designed and
installed for the detection of burglary, robbery, or fire, or to signal any
emergency or need for medical assistance, or other hazard, within a premises,
building, structure, or facility, or for alerting others to the commission of
an unlawful act within a premises, building, structure, or facility.
   “Audible Alarm.” An alarm system that generates an audible sound at its
location when it is actuated.
   “Automatic Dialing Device.” An alarm system that automatically and
electronically transmits by any means a prerecorded voice message or form of
signal to a City-authorized telephone number, indicating the existence of an
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
   Emergency. Any condition which results in, or which could result in, the
response of law enforcement or fire personnel or any condition which
jeopardizes or could jeopardize public safety.
   “False Alarm.” The notification to the City’s police or fire department
concerning the activation of an alarm system when:
      (i)   There is no evidence of a crime or other activity that warrants the
assistance of the City’s police department on the premises, as indicated by the
investigation of a police officer on the scene or by the lack of a police
report filed by the occupant or property owner, and no individual who was on or
near the premises or who viewed a video communication from, or live-monitored
the premises called for the dispatch or confirmed a need for police response;
or
      (ii)   There is no indication or presence of a fire or medical or other
emergency situation on the premises, that warrants a call for assistance from
or investigation by the City’s fire department, and no individual who was on or
near the premises or who viewed a video communication from, or live-monitored
the premises requested the response or confirmed a need for emergency response.
   “False Alarm” shall not include an alarm for which law enforcement or fire
personnel do not actually arrive at the alarm location, or any alarm caused by
earthquakes, severe storms or other extraordinary circumstances determined by
the Alarm Officer to be clearly beyond the control of the alarm subscriber.
   "Proprietor Alarm." An alarm that is not serviced by an alarm agent or alarm
company operator, and that is not designed to cause a response by the City’s
police or fire department. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.040 Required response; silencing alarm systems.
   Upon notification by the Alarm Officer that an alarm system is activated,
the alarm subscriber, or the representative or alarm agent of the alarm
subscriber, shall immediately proceed to the location and silence the alarm.
The alarm shall be silenced within thirty minutes after notification when the
alarm system is protecting a residential structure or within forty-five minutes
when the alarm system is protecting a commercial or industrial structure.
Alternative to providing such response, the alarm system may be equipped with
an automatic shut-off device which shall silence the alarm within fifteen
minutes after activation when the alarm system is protecting a residential
structure or within thirty minutes of activation when the alarm system is
protecting a commercial or industrial structure. The failure of an alarm
subscriber to comply with the response and alarm silencing time limits set
forth herein shall be chargeable as a false alarm. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012)
9.06.050 Alarm businesses and agents.
   All alarm company operators performing services in the City of La Mirada
shall obtain a city business license, and all such operators and alarm agents
shall register their name and file a copy of their state identification card,
license, or permit with the Alarm System Coordinator. Each alarm agent while
engaged in the duties of an alarm agent shall carry on such agent’s person at
all times the state identification card, license, or permit and shall display
same to the Alarm Officer when requested. No alarm system may be installed by
anyone other than the owner of the alarm or alarm company operator, unless
otherwise approved in writing by the Alarm System Coordinator. (Ord. 649 § 2,
2012).
9.06.060 Notice of change.
   Whenever any change occurs relating to any application or other information
required by this chapter, the person required to provide such information shall
give written notice thereof to the Alarm System Coordinator within ten days of
such change. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.070 Alarm system standards.
   No alarm system, not including automatic dialing device alarms, shall be
operated unless the alarm subscriber has entered into a service contract with
an alarm company operator providing for service twenty-four hours per day.
Every alarm system shall be equipped so that it shall not activate in the event
of a power outage unless there exists an emergency situation for which the
alarm was designed to detect. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any alarm
subscriber whose alarm system provides only an audible alarm and does not send
an alarm notification to a monitoring company or to any public safety agency,
may request a waiver of the requirements of this section by submitting a
written request for waiver to the Alarm System Coordinator. The request shall
state the location, make, model, and type of alarm system, and shall include
manufacturer’s information verifying that the alarm is designed to
automatically silence after no more than fifteen total minutes of activation
when used for a residential structure, or thirty minutes when used for a
commercial structure. Only alarm systems that are equipped and operated to
automatically silence after no more than fifteen total minutes (residential) or
thirty total minutes (commercial) of activation, are eligible for a waiver. The
Alarm System Coordinator may inspect the alarm system and/or require provision
of any additional information deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this
section. Any waiver issued pursuant to this section may be revoked, after
written notice, for failure to comply with the requirements of this section.
The issuance of a waiver shall not affect the liability of an alarm subscriber
for false alarm charges. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.080 Maintenance and inspections.
   A.   Maintenance. Each alarm subscriber shall maintain each alarm system in
good working order, and provide the necessary service to prevent malfunctions.
   B.   Inspections. The Alarm Officer may require an alarm subscriber to have
a nuisance alarm system inspected at the subscriber’s expense, by the company
providing the alarm subscriber’s alarm services, or other person qualified to
inspect and service such equipment. Inspections shall be complete enough to
detect any likely malfunctions and shall include testing of the equipment.
Particular attention shall be paid to the conditions that have the potential of
causing false alarms. The person making the inspection shall provide a written
report to the alarm subscriber and the Alarm System Coordinator, detailing
measures taken to eliminate the likelihood of further false alarms caused by
the alarm system. The report shall be kept on the premises for two years, and
shall be subject to inspection by the Alarm System Coordinator upon request.
(Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.090 Reimbursement for false alarm responses.
   Each alarm subscriber shall reimburse the City for the cost of law
enforcement or fire personnel and equipment responses to ‘excessive false
alarms’ as defined in, and in such amount as set by, resolution of the City
Council. Failure to pay any false alarm fee when due is a violation of this
section and shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of ten percent
(10%) of the original false alarm fee amount, for each month the amount remains
unpaid, provided that such penalty shall not exceed the original amount due.
(Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.100 Maintaining a nuisance alarm.
   A.   No alarm subscriber shall operate or maintain an alarm system which
generates more than three false alarms in any twelve-month period.
   B.   Any alarm system operated or maintained in violation of this section is
a nuisance and shall be deemed a public nuisance alarm. (Ord. 659 § 1, 2012;
Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.110 Exempt alarms.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Audible alarms affixed to automobiles.
   B.   Any alarm system installed or maintained by the Alarm Officer, or any
alarm that is otherwise exempted by law from the provisions of this chapter.
   C.   Any auxiliary device installed by a telephone company to protect
telephone company systems that might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an
alarm system.
   D.   Proprietor alarms. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.120 Automatic dialing device requirements.
   A.   No person shall use or operate an automatic dialing device without
complying with this Section
9.06.120.
   B.   The device must be programmed to initiate and deliver the recorded
message or signal only to such City or County telephone number or numbers as
may be assigned or approved by the Alarm System Coordinator.
   C.   Discontinuance of use shall not excuse any liability for false alarm
responses caused by the alarm system.
   D.   Each user of an automatic dialing device is subject to payment of
excessive false alarms fees pursuant to Section
9.06.090.
   E.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, all provisions of this
chapter shall apply to automatic dialing devices. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.130 Prohibited alarm systems.
   A.   It is unlawful to install or maintain on the exterior or interior of
any building, an alarm system which upon actuation emits a sound which is
similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or vehicles used for civil
defense purposes.
   B.   It is unlawful to install, use, maintain or deliberately activate any
alarm system for any purpose other than reporting burglaries, robberies, or
other crimes involving risk of personal harm or property damage, fires, or
medical emergency. Deliberately activating an alarm for any purpose other than
a condition that the alarm is intended to detect is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.140 Penalties and enforcement.
   A.   The first violation of any provision of this chapter occurring within a
one year period shall be punishable as an infraction. Each violation thereafter
within such one year period shall be punishable as a misdemeanor.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, violations of this chapter
may be punished by administrative penalty as provided in this code.
   B.   The conviction of any person for violation of any provision of this
chapter shall not release such person from paying any business taxes, charges,
fees, or reimbursement for false alarm charges due and unpaid at the time of
such conviction, nor shall payment of any fee or reimbursement for false alarms
prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter. All remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies
by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.145 Administrative penalties for maintaining a public nuisance alarm.
    It is unlawful for any alarm subscriber to maintain a "public nuisance
alarm" as defined in Section
9.06.100. In addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter, any
alarm subscriber owning, maintaining or having control over a public nuisance
alarm shall be subject to the following administrative penalties which shall be
administered as set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of this code:
   A.   For a fourth false alarm within any twelve-month period, the
administrative penalty shall be $50.
   B.   For a fifth false alarm within any twelve-month period, the
administrative penalty shall be $100.
   C.   For a sixth or additional false alarm occurring within any twelve-month
period, the administrative penalty shall be $200. (Ord. 659 § 2, 2013).
9.06.150 Limitation of liability.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability on the part
of the City of La Mirada as to any alarm subscriber or to any other person or
entity, as a result of any defect in an alarm system, failure of the city to
receive an alarm, or failure of the city or its police or fire departments to
respond to any alarm regulated by this chapter, whether false or not. The City
Council declares that it shall be entirely within the discretion of each police
officer or fire department receiving a report of an alarm activation, as to
whether or not to respond to such alarm, and that the City of La Mirada assumes
no duty to respond to any alarm as a result of the enactment of this chapter or
prior decisions to respond to alarms. (Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.160 Appeals.
   Any person or business aggrieved by any determination of the Alarm System
Coordinator or Alarm Officer, including determination of a public nuisance
alarm, or false alarm(s), may, within ten days of such determination, appeal
the same by requesting, in writing addressed to the Alarm System Coordinator,
one of the following:
   A.   Administrative review by a Hearing Officer of the facts surrounding the
determination. The Hearing Officer shall consider any written material or other
evidence submitted, including any relevant City, police or fire reports or
other documentation and within ten days thereafter shall render a written
decision either denying the appeal, or reversing the determination with or
without modification; or
   B.   A hearing before a Hearing Officer to contest the determination. Upon
receipt of a timely appeal, notice of a hearing date to be conducted not more
than twenty-one (21) days thereafter, shall be served by first class mail to
the appellant at the address provided in the request for hearing. At the
hearing the Hearing Officer shall consider all relevant written and oral
evidence and, within ten days thereafter shall render a written decision either
denying the appeal, or reversing the determination with or without
modification.
   C.   The Hearing Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall be
an unbiased active or retired City or County of Los Angeles employee having no
connection with the determination being appealed. The Hearing Officer may not
be anyone who works under the supervision of the person making the
determination being appealed. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be final.
   D.   Because the determination that an alarm was a false alarm is based on
the professional judgment of first responders employing all facts known to the
responders at the time of the alarm, the burden of proof in the hearing shall
be on the appellant. Furthermore, the appellant must establish with credible
evidence that facts not considered by the Alarm Officer existed at the time of
the incident, and reasonably lead to the conclusion that the alarm was not
false.
(Ord. 649 § 2, 2012).
9.06.170 Civil remedies.
   In addition to other penalties provided herein, the violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter hereby adopted shall constitute a nuisance and may
be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. 649 § 3, 2012).
Chapter 9.08
LOITERING AND SOLICITING FROM STREETS
Sections:
   
9.08.010   Loitering on streets prohibited.
   
9.08.020   Loitering in front of buildings prohibited.
9.08.010 Loitering on streets prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter or stand or sit in or upon any public
highway, alley, sidewalk or crosswalk so as to in any manner hinder or obstruct
the free passage therein or thereon of persons or vehicles passing along the
same, or so as in any manner to annoy or molest persons passing along the same.
(Ord. 456 § 1 (part), 1992; prior code § 4114).
9.08.020 Loitering in front of buildings prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or at the
entrance of any church, hall, theatre or place of public assemblage so as in
any manner to obstruct the entrance.
(Ord. 456 § 1 (part), 1992; prior code § 4115).
Chapter 9.09
LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS
Sections:
   
9.09.010   Prohibited acts.
   
9.09.020   Powers of law enforcement officers not limited.
   
9.09.030   Parental control.
   
9.09.040   Penalty.
9.09.010 Prohibited acts.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it is unlawful for
any person who is a member of a criminal street gang, as that term is defined
in California Penal Code § 186.22(f), or any successor provision thereto, or
who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a criminal
street gang, to loiter or idle in a public place, as that term is defined in
subsection (b) of this section, under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang's dominance
over certain territory in order to intimidate non-members of that gang from
entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area;
      (2)   With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or any
other unlawful activity.
   (b)   For purposes of this chapter, a "public place" means the public right-
of-way and any other area or location open to the public, whether publicly or
privately owned, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, avenue,
highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground or
public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office
building, transport facility, shop, privately-owned place of business to which
the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or
eating place. "Public place" also includes the front yard area, driveway and
walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house.
(Ord. 579 § 1 (part), 2003)
9.09.020 Powers of Law Enforcement Officers Not Limited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or
right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or
arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in absence of
this chapter.
(Ord. 579 § 1 (part), 2003)
9.09.030 Parental Control.
Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said
parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of
this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 579 § 1 (part), 2003)
9.09.040 Penalty.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to
fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person
violating any provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of its
requirements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and
every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of the provisions
of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall
be deemed punishable therefor as provided herein.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil
process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or
in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of nuisances.
(Ord. 579, §§ 2, 3, 2003).
Chapter 9.10
SMOKING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC RECREATIONAL AREAS,
CITY FACILITIES, AND CITY WORKPLACES
Sections:
   
9.10.010   Purpose.
   
9.10.020   Definitions.
   
9.10.030   Prohibition of smoking in public recreational areas, and city
facilities and city workplaces.
   
9.10.040   Posting of signs.
   
9.10.050   Enforcement and appeal.
   
9.10.060   Violations and penalties.
   
9.10.070   Other applicable laws.
9.10.010 Purpose.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public’s health and welfare by
prohibiting smoking and exposure to second-hand smoke at public recreational
areas, city owned, maintained or operated facilities, and city employee work
areas.
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
9.10.020 Definitions.
   The following words shall apply to this chapter:
   (a)   “City” means the City of La Mirada.
   (b)   “City facility” means any building, structure, facility, or portion
thereof including any balcony, courtyard, deck, parking lot, parking garage,
patio, or walkway, which is owned, maintained, or operated by or leased for
more than occasional use to the City of La Mirada.
   (c)   “City workplace” means any area of a place of employment enclosed by
floor-to-floor ceilings, walls or a vehicle which is owned, maintained,
operated, or leased by the City of La Mirada, in which city employees are
assigned to perform work.
   (d)   “Electronic smoking device” or “vaporizer” means any e-cigarette, or
any other electronic or battery operated device or similar device manufactured,
distributed, marketed, or sold for the purpose of ingesting, inhaling, or
exhaling vapors from any substance, with or without nicotine.
   (e)   “Public recreational area” means any unenclosed space used for
recreational activities or special events, including, but not limited to,
parks, playgrounds, sports fields, bleachers, swimming pools, trails,
campsites, and walking paths owned, maintained, or operated by the city and to
which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted.
   (f)   “Smoking” means to hold, possess, use or control any lighted, burning,
or operating cigarette, cigar, electronic smoking device, hookah, pipe, plant,
or vaporizer containing tobacco or marijuana or other liquids and combustible
substance in any manner or in any form for the purpose of inhaling or exhaling
smoke or vapors.
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
9.10.030 Prohibition of smoking in public recreational areas, and city
facilities and city workplaces.
   Smoking is prohibited in and upon all public recreational areas, city
facilities, and city workplaces. This prohibition shall not apply to smoking
conducted for artistic purposes as part of a theatrical performance at the La
Mirada Theatre for the Performing Arts.
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
9.10.040 Posting of signs.
   Signs deemed appropriate by the City Manager which designate “No Smoking”
areas established by this chapter shall be clearly, sufficiently, and
conspicuously posted in public recreational areas, city facilities, city
workplaces, and any and all other areas covered by this chapter.
Notwithstanding this provision, the absence of such signs shall not be a
defense to a charge of smoking in violation of any other provision of this
chapter.
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
9.10.050 Enforcement and appeal.
Los Angeles County Sheriffs' Deputies, and La Mirada Public Safety and Code
Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce the provision of this chapter,
respond to complaints of violations, act on observations of violations, and to
issue administrative citations to persons found in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
9.10.060 Violations and penalties.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction punishable through an administrative citation and subject to those
fines listed in Municipal Code Section
1.08.090 .
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
9.10.070 Other applicable laws.
   This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where
it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. Should a provision of
state or federal law be more restrictive to the benefit of the nonsmoker, such
state or federal law shall prevail over the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 695 § 3, 2017).
Chapter 9.12
POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  *
Sections:
   
9.12.010   Consumption of alcoholic beverages in specified public places--
Prohibited.
   
9.12.020   Possession of open containers in public parks-- Prohibited.
   
9.12.030   Exceptions--Licensed public premises.
   
9.12.040   Possession of open containers on posted private premises open to the
public--Prohibited.
   
9.12.050   Open container of alcohol--Defined.
   
9.12.060   Activities permitted or prohibited under state law not regulated.
 
Notes
* Prior ordinance history: Ords. 294, 303 and 371. Prior code history: Prior
  code Sections 4100, 4101 and 4106.
9.12.010 Consumption of alcoholic beverages in specified public places--
Prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to consume any
alcoholic beverage, as that term is defined in California Business and
Professions Code Section 23004, or any successor provision thereto, on any
public street, public sidewalk, or public alley, or within or on any public
parking lot, private parking lot open to the public, public park or other city-
owned property, or on the grounds of any public school, or in any stadium or on
any athletic field.
(Ord. 528 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.12.020 Possession of open containers in public parks-- Prohibited.
Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful for any person to possess an
open container of alcohol within any public park or adjacent city or county-
owned, or city and county-owned property, or within any recreation or open
space district. A violation of this section is punishable as an infraction
pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 25620.
(Ord. 528 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.12.030 Exceptions--Licensed public premises.
Sections
9.12.010 and
9.12.020 shall not apply where such consumption or possession occurs within or
on premises for which a license authorizing such consumption and/or possession
has been issued pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Sections
23000 through 25762.
(Ord. 528 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.12.040 Possession of open containers on posted private premises open to the
public--Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person having in his or her possession any open
container of alcohol to enter, be present in or upon, or to remain upon the
posted premises of, including a posted parking lot immediately adjacent to, any
retail business selling packaged alcoholic beverages as an off-sale alcoholic
beverage licensee licensed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code
Sections 23000 through 25752. For purposes of this section, the term "posted
premises" means those premises which are subject to licensure under any retail
package off-sale alcoholic beverage license, the parking lot immediately
adjacent to the licensed premises and any public sidewalk immediately adjacent
to the licensed premises on which one or more clearly visible signs indicate to
patrons of the licensee and to persons in such parking lot and/or on such
public sidewalks, that the provisions of this section are applicable. The
provisions of this section shall not apply unless such posting has occurred. A
violation of this section is punishable as an infraction pursuant to California
Penal Code Section 647e.
(Ord. 528 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.12.050 Open container of alcohol--Defined.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "open container of alcohol" shall mean
any can, bottle, or other receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage which
has been opened, or a seal thereon broken, or the contents of which have been
partially removed.
(Ord. 528 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.12.060 Activities permitted or prohibited under state law not regulated.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to prohibit or permit any
act which is expressly prohibited or permitted by any law of the state of
California including, but not limited to, any law regulating possession of an
open container of alcohol within a motor vehicle.
(Ord. 528 § 2 (part), 1998).
Chapter 9.15
TOPLESS AND BOTTOMLESS WAITRESSES AND PERFORMERS
Sections:
   
9.15.010   Legislative findings and authorization.
   
9.15.020   Theater--Definitions.
   
9.15.030   Prohibition against the display of female breasts.
   
9.15.040   Prohibition against display of private parts.
   
9.15.050   Same--Accessories.
   
9.15.060   Same--Exceptions.
9.15.010 Legislative findings and authorization.
   The city council finds that there exists in this city an increasing trend
toward nude and seminude acts, exhibitions and entertainment, and of undress by
female employees of food, drink and like establishments serving the public, and
that such acts and such competitive commercial exploitation of nudity is
adverse to the public peace, morals, health and good order; and that it is in
the best interest of the public safety and convenience of this city to restrict
such nudity, and the commercial promotion and exploitation thereof, as
hereinafter set forth.
   All words used in this chapter which are also used in Sections 318.5 and
318.6 of the Penal Code are used in the same sense and mean the same as the
same respective words used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code.
(Ord. 205 § 1 (part), 1973).
9.15.020 Theater--Definitions.
As used in this chapter and in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code,
"theater, concert hall or other similar establishment which is primarily
devoted to theatrical performances" means a building, playhouse, room, hall or
other place having permanently affixed seats so arranged that a body of
spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage, upon which theatrical or
vaudeville performances or similar forms of artistic expression are presented,
and where such performances are not incidental to the promoting of the sale of
food, drink or other merchandise, and for which a city license for a theater is
in full force and effect. This definition does not supersede the provisions of
Section
9.15.010.
(Ord. 205 § 1 (part), 1973).
9.15.030 Prohibition against the display of female breasts.
Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live
act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public
or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any
customer:
   (1)   Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn
that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different
pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts are below such
straight line; or
   (2)   Employs any device or covering, which is intended to simulate such
portions of the breast; or
   (3)   Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the
breast may be observed.
(Ord. 205 § 1 (part), 1973).
9.15.040 Prohibition against display of private parts.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who exposes his or her private parts or
buttocks, or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the
private parts or pubic hair of such person, while participating in any live
act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public
or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any
customer.
(Ord. 205 § 1 (part), 1973).
9.15.050 Same--Accessories.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, procures, counsels or
assists any person to violate any provision of Sections
9.15.030 or
9.15.040.
(Ord. 205 § 1 (part), 1973).
9.15.060 Same--Exceptions.
Section
9.15.030 through
9.15.050 do not apply to:
   (1)   A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily
devoted to theatrical performances;
   (2)   Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute.
(Ord. 205 § 1 (part), 1973).
Chapter 9.20
COLORING BABY FOWLS AND ANIMALS
Sections:
   
9.20.010   Prohibited acts.
   
9.20.020   Exceptions.
9.20.010 Prohibited acts.
It is unlawful for any person to do or perform any of the following:
   (1)   Sell, offer for sale, barter or give away in connection with any
business, or the operation thereof, which is required to be licensed in the
city under the provisions of the business license ordinance, as pets, toys,
premiums, or novelties any baby chickens, ducklings, or other fowl under three
weeks of age, or rabbits under two months of age; or
   (2)   Color dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of the above
described fowl or rabbits; or
   (3)   Bring or transport the aforesaid fowl or rabbits into the city.
(Ord. 60 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 4350).
9.20.020 Exceptions.
The provisions of subsections (1) and (3) of Section
9.20.010 shall not apply to the sale or display of any of the fowl or rabbits
described in Section
9.20.010, in proper facilities by breeders, pet stores, or stores engaged in
the business of selling for commercial breeding or raising, or for food, or
their exhibition at any fair, show or exhibit where such fowl or animals are
displayed for commercial purposes or displayed in the interest of improving
agriculture or industry.
(Ord. 60 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 4351).
Chapter 9.24
GAMING--GAMBLING
Sections:
   
9.24.030   Gambling prohibited.
   
9.24.040   Playing prohibited games unlawful.
   
9.24.050   Permitting gambling prohibited.
9.24.030 Gambling prohibited.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, it is unlawful in the city for any
person, firm, corporation or association, either as owner, lessee, manager,
employee, agent or servant to conduct, manage, carry on, maintain, operate,
open, deal or deal in, or to cause or permit to be conducted, managed, carried
on, maintained, operated, opened, dealt or dealt in, any game, operation or
transaction where any prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment
or gratuity, consisting of any money, check, token, credit, goods, wares,
merchandise, property or thing of value, is or is to be given, awarded or
delivered, either directly or indirectly, and wherein chance is a determining
factor or is in any way a determining factor or the result of such game,
operation or transaction, which game, operation or transaction played by the
throwing, tossing, dropping, depositing or placing of any ball, marker, object,
thing or substance into any perforation, hole or indentation in or upon any
surface, receptacle, container, object or thing having marked or designated or
identified thereon by or with any figure, number, character, symbol, letter,
design or mark of any kind, or by the selecting, designating, turning,
indicating, choosing or projecting of any such figure, number, charter,
character, symbol, letter, design or mark of any device, apparatus or
equipment, or by any means or in any manner, or by the drawing, selecting,
choosing or removing from any receptacle or container of any ball, disk,
object, substance or material marked, designated or identified by or with any
figure, number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark, any such figure,
number, character, symbol, letter, design or mark hereinabove referred to,
corresponding to, duplicating, referring to or relating to, in whole or in
part, directly or indirectly, any figure, number, character, symbol, letter,
design or mark upon any card, paper, board, fabric, surface, object, substance
or thing, held, used, operated or maintained by any player or participant
therein or by any person, where, by any predetermination or prearrangement, or
by any rule, method, scheme, design or procedure any person is found, declared
or determined to be, or is, or is to be, the winner, donee, recipient or taker
of such prize, gift, rebate, compensation, reward, award, payment or gratuity,
in the event that any such player or participant pays, deposits, expends, gives
or pledges, either directly or indirectly, or agrees, promises or intends to
pay, deposit, expend, give or pledge, either directly or indirectly, any money,
check, credit, property or thing of value, or makes or agrees to make any
purchase for the privilege of playing or participating therein or of gaining
admission to the place or premises where such game, operation or transaction is
or is to be played, conducted, carried on, maintained or operated, or to any
place or premises.
   Provided, however, that no provision of this section or of Section
9.24.040 or
9.24.050 shall be deemed or construed as prohibiting any act made unlawful by
the provisions of Section 320 or 330 of the California Penal Code, or of any
code section or general law of the state of California, it being the intent of
the city council to prohibit by this chapter all games, operations, or
transactions herein described, not otherwise prohibited by this code or the
provisions of any general law or code of this state, including all games,
operations or transactions for profit commonly known as Keno, Tango, Movie
Tango, Beano, Sill Ball, Fortune, Quintain, Fascination or Inspiration, and
games, operations or transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may
be designated.
(Ord. 491 § 11, 1995; prior code § 4122).
9.24.040 Playing prohibited games unlawful.
It is unlawful in the city for any person to participate in play, play in or
engage in, either directly or indirectly any game, operation or transaction
prohibited by the provisions of Section
9.24.030.
(Prior code § 4123).
9.24.050 Permitting gambling prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or association, owning,
leasing, managing, controlling or having any interest in any property or
premises lying within the city to cause or permit the maintenance or operation
in or on such property or premises, having knowledge, or after reasonable
notice, of the existence thereof, of any game, operation or transaction
declared by the provisions of Section
9.24.030 hereof to be unlawful.
(Prior code § 4124).
Chapter 9.28
LOOKOUTS
Sections:
   
9.28.010   Prohibited.
9.28.010 Prohibited.
No person shall act as a lookout for a gambling game, house of prostitution or
other illegal act.
(Prior code § 4310).
Chapter 9.36
DISCHARGING OF WEAPONS
Sections:
   
9.36.010   Discharge of weapons prohibited.
   
9.36.020   Penalty for violation.
9.36.010 Discharge of weapons prohibited.
It is unlawful to fire or discharge, or cause to be fired or discharged within
the city limits, any firearm, rifle, pistol, shotgun, cannon, air rifle, air
gun, b.b. gun, pellet gun, gas operated gun, spring gun, slingshot, bow,
crossbow, or any other weapon designed to discharge or propel any projectile
capable of causing injury; provided, however, the provisions of this section
shall not apply to:
   (1)   Peace officers when acting in the line of duty;
   (2)   Persons otherwise lawfully acting to protect life or property;
   (3)   Persons so discharging in or upon an educational institution as a
curricular activity or a business establishment licensed by the city for such
purposes; or
   (4)   Any person who has obtained a permit from the city council to
discharge one of the above-referenced instruments for a business purpose in an
area zoned M-1.
   In issuing any such permit or permits, the city council shall designate the
particular location in the M-1 zone where such discharge is allowed, the period
of time during which such discharge is allowed and the specific business
purpose for which such discharge is allowed. The city council may further
condition any such permit to provide additional protection of the public
health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 418 § 1, 1988; Ord. 417 § 2 (part), 1988).
9.36.020 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm,
partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 417 § 2 (part), 1988).
Chapter 9.40
MINORS
Sections:
   
9.40.010   Purpose and intent.
   
9.40.020   Definitions.
   
9.40.030   Curfew restrictions.
   
9.40.040   Defenses to curfew violation.
   
9.40.050   Enforcement of curfew.
   
9.40.060   Daytime curfew restrictions.
9.40.010 Purpose and intent.
The city council has determined that a higher degree of governmental regulation
of minors is desirable and necessary to protect their health and safety. Due to
their lack of maturity and experience, minors are particularly vulnerable to
participate in unlawful activities and to become the victims of crime. Other
factors which necessitate a higher level of governmental regulation of minors
include their general inability to make critical decisions in an informed and
mature manner and the importance of the parental role in child rearing.
(Ord. 511 § 2, 1997)
9.40.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
defined as follows:
   A.   "Curfew hours" means:
      1.   Ten p.m. to six a.m. of the following day on Sunday through
Thursday; and
      2.   Eleven p.m. to six a.m. of the following day on Friday and Saturday.
   B.   "Emergency" refers to unforeseen circumstances or a situation that
calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to,
automobile accidents, fires, explosions, natural disasters, or any condition
requiring immediate action to prevent bodily injury or loss of life.
   C.   "Establishment" means any privately-owned place of business operated
for profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any
place of amusement or entertainment.
   D.   "Guardian" means:
      1.   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the minor; or
      2.   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   E.   "Minor" means any person under eighteen years of age.
   F.   "Operator" means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or
corporation operating, managing or conducting any business establishment. The
term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the
officers of a corporation.
   G.   "Parent" means a person who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person;
or
      2.   At least eighteen years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   H.   "Public place" means any place that the public or a substantial group
of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets,
highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
   I.   "Remain" means to:
      1.   Linger, stay or to be present; or
      2.   Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a peace
officer or the owner, manager, operator, or other person in control of the
premises.
(Ord. 511 § 2, 1997)
9.40.030 Curfew restrictions.
It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises
of any establishment within the city during curfew hours; or for any parent or
guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow the
minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours; or for any owner, operator, manager, or
employee of an establishment to knowingly permit a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. 511 § 2, 1997)
9.40.040 Defenses to curfew violation.
   A.    It is a defense to prosecution under Section
9.40.030 that the minor was:
      1.   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
      2.   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without detour or stop;
      3.   In a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate travel;
provided, that where the minor is not accompanied by his or her parent or
guardian, the minor must have the parent or guardian's written consent to be
involved in the intrastate or interstate travel;
      4.   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or from home from an
employment activity, without detour or stop;
      5.   Involved in an emergency;
      6.   On the sidewalk immediately adjacent to the minor's residence;
      7.   Attending an official school, religious, or other adult supervised
recreational activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or other
similar entity that takes responsibility for the safety of the minor, or going
to or returning home from such an activity, without detour or stop;
      8.   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; provided, that the minor has sent a letter signed by the
minor and his or her parent or guardian to a representative of the Los Angeles
County Sheriff's Department Norwalk Station indicating the location at which
the minor will be exercising his or her First Amendment rights, the purpose of
the activity, the curfew hours during which the activity will occur, and the
number of days of the activity not exceeding ninety days per letter at least
twenty-four hours in advance; or
      9.   Emancipated pursuant to the law of any state; provided, that the
minor maintains evidence of emancipation in his or her possession during curfew
hours.
   B.   It is a defense to prosecution under Section
9.40.030 that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly
notified a representative of the sheriff's department that a minor was present
on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. 511 § 2, 1997)
9.40.050 Enforcement of curfew.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a peace officer shall
ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or detain a minor under this section unless
the officer reasonably believes an offense has occurred and based upon the
minor's responses and other circumstances, no defense, as specified in Section
9.40.040, is applicable.
(Ord. 511 § 2, 1997)
9.40.060 Daytime curfew restrictions.
   A.   It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years, who is
subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to
remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
city between the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. on days when
such minor's school is in session. This section shall not apply:
      1.   When the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian, or
other adult person having the care or custody of the minor; or
      2.   When the minor is on an emergency errand directed by his or her
parent, guardian or other person having the care or custody of the minor
without detour or stop; or
      3.   When the minor is traveling directly to or from a medical
appointment or place of gainful employment; or
      4.   When the minor has permission to leave his or her school campus for
a school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-
issued, off-campus permit; or
      5.   When the minor is authorized to be absent from his or her school
pursuant to the provisions of California Education Code Section 48205, or any
other applicable state or federal law; or
      6.   When the minor is receiving home or private school instruction
pursuant to California Education Code Section 48222, or is receiving
instruction by a qualified tutor pursuant to California Education Code Section
48224, or when the minor is otherwise exempt by law from attendance at a public
or private full-time day school.
   B.   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to allow a minor to be in
violation of subsection (A) of this section.
(Ord. 511 § 2, 1997)
Chapter 9.42
THREATS WITH REPLICA FIREARMS
Sections:
   
9.42.010   Replica firearms and firearms--Definitions.
   
9.42.020   Unlawful acts.
9.42.010 Replica firearms and firearms--Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the term "replica firearm" includes any device or
object made of plastic, wood, metal or any other material, which is a facsimile
or toy version of, or is otherwise recognizable as, a pistol, revolver,
shotgun, sawed-off shotgun, rifle, machine gun, rocket launcher, or any other
firearm including, but not limited to, any firearm as that term is used in the
Dangerous Weapons Control Law, Chapter 1 of Title 2 of the California Penal
Code, including California Penal Code Section 12001, 12001.5 or 12020. The term
"firearm" shall also include air rifles, pellet guns and/or BB guns.
(Ord. 491 § 12, 1995; Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1987).
9.42.020 Unlawful acts.
Every person who, except in self defense, in the presence of any other person,
draws, exhibits or brandishes a replica firearm or who simulates a firearm in a
rude, angry and threatening manner, or who in any manner unlawfully uses the
same in any fight or quarrel and causes the victim to reasonably believe that
the person is actually in possession of an operable firearm is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 405 § 1 (part), 1987).
Chapter 9.44
PARADES
Sections:
   
9.44.010   Permit required.
   
9.44.020   Application for permit.
   
9.44.030   Issuance of permit.
9.44.010 Permit required.
No person shall hold, manage, conduct, carry on, or participate in, any parade,
march or procession of any kind or any other similar activity or bear or play
any drum, triangle, tambourine, or any wind or string instrument upon any
public street or alley in the city without first having applied for and
obtained a permit therefor from the Los Angeles County sheriff's office, and
such permit is approved by the city clerk as provided in this chapter.
(Prior code § 4314).
9.44.020 Application for permit.
Any person desiring to do any of the acts specified in Section
9.44.010 hereof shall file an application with the city clerk upon a form to be
supplied by the city without charge to the applicant setting forth the
following information in regard to the proposed event:
   (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (2)   The purpose;
   (3)   The date and time;
   (4)   The place and/or route;
   (5)   The nature, scope and extent of proposed event; (6) The number of
vehicles and persons participating.
(Prior code § 4315).
9.44.030 Issuance of permit.
   All applications filed pursuant to Section 9.44.0 shall be acted upon by the
city clerk within a reasonable time from the date of filing.
   Should the clerk after an investigation of the applicant and the facts
contained in the application determine that the applicant has stated true facts
in his application and the event as proposed will not interfere unduly with the
use of the streets and will not tend to cause a breach of the public peace, he
shall issue a permit, with the approval of the Los Angeles County sheriff's
office endorsed thereon, designating the time, place and route of such event.
(Prior code § 4316).
Chapter 9.48
PROTECTION OF STREETS
Sections:
   
9.48.010   Illegal dumping.
   
9.48.020   Flowing matter on streets.
9.48.010 Illegal dumping.
No person shall place, deposit, throw or dump, or cause to be placed,
deposited, thrown or dumped, any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes,
dirt, sand, rock, cement, glass, metal, carcass of any dead animal, offal,
refuse, plants, cuttings or trash, or rubbish of any nature whatsoever, or any
nauseous, offensive matter in or upon any public or private road, highway,
street, alley, public way, or any public or private property of any kind
whatsoever.
(Prior code § 4306).
9.48.020 Flowing matter on streets.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to deposit, drain, wash,
allow to run or divert into or upon any public road, highway, street or alley,
drainage ditch, storm drain or flood control channel owned or controlled by any
public agency within the city, any mud, sand, garbage, refuse, waste matter,
oil or petroleum.
(Prior code § 4307).
Chapter 9.50
PAINTING OF HOUSE NUMBERS ON CURBS
Sections:
   
9.50.010   Painting of house numbers on curbs prohibited without permit.
   
9.50.020   Business license required.
   
9.50.030   Minimum standards for curb numbering.
   
9.50.040   Exceptions.
   
9.50.050   Severability.
   
9.50.060   Civil remedies available.
   
9.50.070   Violations--Penalty.
9.50.010 Painting of house numbers on curbs prohibited without permit.
No person, firm, corporation or partnership shall paint, stencil or otherwise
mark upon any curb, street, roadway, alley or sidewalk within the city, any
house number or address without first having received a permit therefor from
the environmental services manager or his designee. There shall be no fee for
such permit, and the person, firm, corporation or partnership applying for such
permit shall submit written authorization from each owner of property,
permitting the placement of house numbers or street address on such curb of the
location in question.
(Ord. 387 § 1 (part), 1986).
9.50.020 Business license required.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged in the painting of house
numbers or street addresses on any curb within the city for any remuneration,
whether by donation or otherwise, shall be required to first obtain a business
license from the finance manager.
(Ord. 387 § 1 (part), 1986).
9.50.030 Minimum standards for curb numbering.
House numbers or street addresses placed on the curb face shall be of black
paint in figures three inches in height and impressed upon a background of
white paint a minimum of five inches in height and eleven inches in width. The
background shall be reflectorized through the use of glass beads or similar
reflectorized material meeting or exceeding the city's standard specifications
therefor.
(Ord. 387 § 1 (part), 1986).
9.50.040 Exceptions.
None of the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the city, its officers,
agents or employees, and house numbers or street addresses may be placed upon
curbs by contractors employed by the city.
(Ord. 387 § 1 (part), 1986).
9.50.050 Severability.
The city council declares that should any provision, section, paragraph,
sentence or word of this chapter be rendered or declared invalid by any final
court action in a court of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any
preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs,
sentences and words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 387 § 4, 1986).
9.50.060 Civil remedies available.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or in any other manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. 387 § 3, 1986).
9.50.070 Violation--Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter.
Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm,
partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 387 § 2, 1986).
Chapter 9.52
THROWING MISSILES
Sections:
   
9.52.010   Unlawful.
9.52.010 Unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to throw upon, along, or across any public
highway, road, street, alley, sidewalk, any missile capable of causing personal
injury or damage to personal property at or towards any person, or any vehicle.
(Prior code § 4313).
Chapter 9.56
GATES
Sections:
   
9.56.010   Construction.
9.56.010 Construction.
It is unlawful to construct or maintain any gate in any fence in such manner
that such gate may be opened outward over any portion of any public highway
open for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(Prior code § 4302).
Chapter 9.60
UNSIGHTLINESS
Sections:
   
9.60.010   Failure to remedy deemed misdemeanor.
9.60.010 Failure to remedy deemed misdemeanor.
Any person, firm or corporation who owns or has the care or management of any
real property and willfully permits any part of the property to become so
unsightly as to detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood, and
who fails to remedy the condition within thirty days from being ordered to do
so by the city council upon recommendation of the city planning commission is
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Prior code § 4318).
Chapter 9.64
SWIMMING POOLS, EXCAVATIONS, AND ABANDONED CHESTS
Sections:
   
9.64.010   Short title.
   
9.64.020   Code adopted.
   
9.64.030   Copies filed.
   
9.64.040   Amendments generally.
   
9.64.050   Sections amended.
9.64.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "City Excavation, Swimming Pool, and
Abandoned Chest Ordinance of the City of La Mirada" and may be cited as such.
(Ord. 53 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6500).
9.64.020 Code adopted.
There is hereby adopted as the city excavation, swimming, and abandoned chest
ordinance, except as it is hereafter amended, Ordinance No. 5307 of the county
of Los Angeles, as amended and in effect August 1, 1962.
(Ord. 53 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6501).
9.64.030 Copies filed.
Three copies of Ordinance No. 5307, as adopted in Section
9.64.020, have been deposited in the office of the city clerk, and shall be at
all times maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 53 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6502).
9.64.040 Amendments generally.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in ordinance No. 5307,
each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning
ascribed to it as set forth as follows:
   (1)   "County" or "county of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the
city of La Mirada;
   (2)   "Board of supervisors" means the city council of the city of La
Mirada;
   (3)   "County engineer" means the city engineer of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 53 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 6503).
9.64.050 Sections amended.
Ordinance No. 5307 as adopted in Section
9.64.020 is hereby amended, added to, and repealed as follows:
   (1)   The first paragraph of Section 10.3 of ordinance No. 5307, which first
paragraph precedes subparagraphs (a) to (e), is amended to read:
   "Section 10.3. Every person who shall own or be in possession of any
premises on which there is situated on May 1, 1957, or at any time thereafter,
a swimming pool, portable swimming or wading pool, fish pond, wading pool, or
any other outside body of water created by artificial means, designed or used
for swimming or other immersion purposes, by men, women, or children, any
portion of which is eighteen (18) inches deep or more and the surface area of
the water in which does not exceed ten thousand square feet shall maintain on
the lot or premises upon which such swimming pool, portable swimming or wading
pool, fish pond, wading pool or other artificial body of water is located and
completely surrounding such body of water, lot, or premises, a fence, wall, or
other structure not less than five (5) feet in height with no openings, except
doors or gates, with an area greater than fifty (50) square inches, except that
a rectangular opening having no horizontal dimension exceeding four (4) inches
may have a greater area, constructed as follows;"
   (2)   The last sentence of subparagraph (e) of Section 10.3 of Ordinance No.
5307 is hereby repealed;
   (3)   Subparagraph (h) of Section 13 of Ordinance No. 5307 is hereby
repealed;
   (4)   Section 15 of Ordinance No. 5307 is hereby amended to read:
   "Section 15. The City Council of the City of La Mirada finds that there are
numerous bodies of water, both natural and man-made, throughout the City of La
Mirada which are not included within the provisions of Section 10, 10.3, 11, or
14, that are a serious hazard to children and others because of their depth,
size, vegetable growth therein, nature of soil, and for many other reasons. The
City Council further finds that these bodies of water are attractive to
children and that children will use them for boating, floating, and bathing."
   (5)   Section 19 of Ordinance No. 5307 is hereby repealed.
(Ord. 53 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 6504).
Chapter 9.76
GATE-CRASHING
Sections:
   
9.76.010   Prohibited.
9.76.010 Prohibited.
No person, with intent gratuitously to avail himself of the entertainment or
recreation furnished or the privileges conferred therein, shall enter any
theater, stadium, athletic club, ball park, golf course, golf club, tennis
club, beach club, bathing beach, or other place of amusement, entertainment, or
recreation, for admission to which an admission fee or membership fee is
charged without first paying such admission fee or membership fee. Any person
who is a bona fide guest of a member of any club may enter such club in
accordance with the rules thereof. Any person may enter any place which is
within the purview of this section with the consent of the owner or manager
thereof. This section shall not be deemed to apply to the entry into any such
place by a law enforcement officer acting within the scope and course of his
official duties.
(Prior code § 4309).
Chapter 9.84
ABANDONED WELLS
Sections:
   
9.84.010   Person defined.
   
9.84.020   Capping well entrance required.
   
9.84.030   City may cap well.
9.84.010 Person defined.
As used in this chapter "person" means any person, individual, firm,
copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, city or any
other group or combination acting as a unit, in the plural as well as the
singular number.
(Prior code § 4130).
9.84.020 Capping well entrance required.
Every person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns or controls any
abandoned or unused well, including but not limited to water wells or oil
wells, and every person owning, or having possession of any premises on which
any such abandoned or unused well exists, shall cap or otherwise close the
mouth of or entrance to such well in such a manner as to prevent persons from
falling therein, and in such a manner that such capping or covering cannot be
removed by accident or inadvertence or such persons shall fill such a well.
(Prior code § 4131).
9.84.030 City may cap well.
Whenever any person fails or refuses to perform any act required by Section
9.84.020, the city may itself cap, cover or fill such well at the expense of
the property owner. It is not necessary to follow the provisions of this
section as a condition precedent to any criminal prosecution.
(Prior code § 4132).
Chapter 9.85
USE OF NEWSRACKS  *
Sections:
   
9.85.010   Permit required.
   
9.85.020   No fee required.
   
9.85.030   Issuance of permit--Only one permit required.
   
9.85.040   Renewable annually.
   
9.85.050   Newsrack identification.
   
9.85.060   Prohibition of newsracks where vehicles permitted.
   
9.85.070   Unlawful obstructions.
   
9.85.080   Display of certain matter prohibited.
   
9.85.090   Definition of explicit sexual acts.
   
9.85.120   Civil remedies available.
   
9.85.130   Severance clause.
 
Notes
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. 308.
9.85.010 Permit required.
No person, whether as a principal or agent, clerk or employee, either for
himself or any other person, or as an officer of any corporation, or otherwise
shall place or maintain a newsrack on or projecting onto a street right-of-way
in the city unless and until a newsrack permit has been obtained from the
planning director.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.020 No fee required.
No fee shall be required for the issuance of a newsrack permit.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.030 Issuance of permit--Only one permit required.
Upon proper application on forms provided by the planning director, providing
the information necessary to implement the provisions of Sections
9.85.050 and
9.85.070 and other information relevant to the implementation of this chapter
required by the planning director, the planning director shall issue the
applicant a newsrack permit. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, the planning director may not refuse to issue a newsrack permit
properly applied for. One permit shall permit the placement and maintenance of
any number of newsracks on the street right-of-way in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.040 Renewable annually.
A newsrack permit shall be renewable annually.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.050 Newsrack identification.
Every newsrack permittee shall permanently affix to each newsrack placed or
maintained on or projecting over any portion of the street right-of-way: (1)
the permittee's name, address, and phone number as required by Business and
Professions Code Section 1757; and (2) the permittee's permit number.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.060 Prohibition of newsracks where vehicles permitted.
No person shall place or maintain any newsracks on any portion of or projecting
onto, into or over any portion of the street right-of-way on which vehicles are
lawfully permitted.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.070 Unlawful obstructions.
No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained in the following
locations:
   (a)   Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;
   (b)   Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
   (c)   Within three feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box
or other emergency facility;
   (d)   Within three feet of any driveway;
   (e)   Within three feet ahead of, and fifteen feet to the rear of any sign
or pavement markings marking a designated bus stop measured parallel to the
flow of traffic;
   (f)   Within three feet of any bus bench;
   (g)   At any location where the newsrack causes, creates, or constitutes a
traffic hazard;
   (h)   At any location where the newsrack unreasonably obstructs or
interferes with access to, or the use and enjoyment of abutting property;
   (i)   Where the newsrack will endanger persons or property;
   (j)   Where the newsrack will unreasonably interfere with or obstruct the
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the street;
   (k)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians
is reduced to less than three feet.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.080 Display of certain matter prohibited.
Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on or
projecting over the street right-of-way shall not be displayed or exhibited in
a manner which exposes to public view from the street right-of-way any of the
following:
   (a)   Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual
organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or
effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront;
   (b)   Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses
or anal regions of any person or the breasts below a point immediately above
the top of the areolae of any female person beyond the age of puberty where
such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal,
gratification or affront;
   (c)   Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such
picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal,
gratification, or affront.
(Ord. 474 § 1, 1993; Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.090 Definition of explicit sexual acts.
"Explicit sexual acts," as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual
intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation,
bestiality, sadism, masochism, or excretory functions in conjunction with
sexual activity, masturbation, or lewd exhibition of genitals, whether any of
the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between
members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other act
of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person's genital, pubic
region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.120 Civil remedies available.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of
restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner
provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
9.85.130 Severance clause.
If any section, subsection, subpart, or provision of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
remainder of the chapter and the application of such to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 324 § 2 (part), 1982).
Chapter 9.90
GRAFFITI
Sections:
   
9.90.010   Purpose and intent.
   
9.90.020   Definitions.
   
9.90.030   Unlawful to apply graffiti.
   
9.90.040   Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited.
   
9.90.050   Possession of graffiti implements prohibited in designated public
places.
   
9.90.060   Accessibility to graffiti implements.
   
9.90.070   Removal provisions.
   
9.90.080   Rewards for information.
   
9.90.090   Reimbursement of cellular phone costs (Repealed by 731).
   
9.90.100   Penalties and civil liability of parents.
9.90.010 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The city council finds that graffiti on public or private property is
a blighting factor which not only depreciates the value of property which has
been the target of such vandalism but also depreciates the value of the
adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the
entire city.
   (b)   Graffiti has also been found to be a means of identification utilized
by gangs and its presence may encourage further gang-related activities. The
power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the
landscape, devaluing property and detracting from a sense of community enjoyed
by the residents of La Mirada goes beyond the cost of cleanup or removal. Not
only is graffiti vandalism of property a crime, but a social crime upon the
quality of life and freedom from intimidation citizens desire in their
neighborhoods.
   (c)   California Government Code Section 53069.3 authorizes the city, under
certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other
inscribed materials from private as well as public property. The council finds
and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and unless the
city causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to
remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result
that entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places in
which to be.
   (d)   It is the purpose and intent of the city council through the adoption
of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the
application of graffiti on privately and publicly-owned walls and structures.
Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of private property owners
as well as the entire community.
   (e)   It is the further intent of the city council, through the adoption of
this chapter, to provide to all of those who disregard the property rights of
others, that the law enforcement agencies of the city, sheriff's department,
and the district attorney's office, will strictly enforce the law and
vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in the defacement of public and
private properties.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this title, the following words shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section:
   "Adhesive label" means any so-called "bumpersticker," sheet of paper,
fabric, or plastic, or other substance with an adhesive backing.
   "Aerosol paint container" means any aerosol container which is adapted or
made for the purpose of applying spray painting, or other substance capable of
defacing property.
   "Felt tip marker" means any marker or similar implement with a tip which, at
its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch, containing ink or
other pigmented liquid.
   "Graffiti" means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design that
is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on or otherwise affixed to or
on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material to the extent that the
same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or, despite advance
authorization, is otherwise deemed by the city council to be a public nuisance.
   "Graffiti implement" means an aerosol paint container, a felt tip marker,
gum label, paint stick, etching tool, adhesive label, or any other device
capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in
width upon any surface of any material.
   "Paint stick or graffiti stick" means a device containing a solid form of
paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of being applied to a
surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth
of an inch in width.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.030 Unlawful to apply graffiti.
It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any trees or
structures including, but not limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, and
signs, ("structures" hereinafter in the chapter) located within the city. It
shall also be unlawful for any person to apply or affix any adhesive backed
label, sticker, "bumpersticker" or similar item, to any tree or structure not
owned or lawfully possessed by such person.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.040 Possession of graffiti implements by minors prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in
his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon public property, or
upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner of such
property. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the possession of
felt tip markers by minors attending, or traveling to or from school at which
the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at the school
which formally requires the possession of felt tip markers. The burden of proof
in any prosecution for violation of this section shall be upon the minor
student to establish the need to possess a felt tip marker.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.050 Possession of graffiti implements prohibited in designated public
places.
No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in
or upon any public park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or
while in or within ten feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or
similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public, except as may
be authorized by the city.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.060 Accessibility to graffiti implements.
   (a)    Furnishing to Minors Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell, exchange, give, loan, or
otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be exchanged, given, loaned, or
otherwise furnish, any graffiti implement to any minor without the consent of
the parent or other lawfully designated guardian which consent shall be given
in advance in writing.
   (b)   Display Requirements. No person or business engaged in commercial
enterprise shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any graffiti implement
except in an area from which the public shall be securely precluded without
employee assistance. Two such acceptable methods for displaying graffiti
implements for sale shall be by containment in (1) a completely enclosed
cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a
building or structure, and which shall, at all times except during access by
authorized representatives, remain securely locked; or (2) in an enclosed area
behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from
entry. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve such persons or business entity
from, at all times, complying with the requirements of the California Penal
Code Section 594.1(c) by posting signs as described therein.
   (c)   Storage Requirements. No person or business engaged in the business of
selling, providing or trading graffiti implements shall store any graffiti
implement except in either (1) a completely enclosed room which shall, at all
times except during access or actual occupancy by the owner or authorized adult
representative of the owner, remain securely locked; or (2) in a completely
enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to
a building or building structure, and which shall at all times except during
access by the owner or an adult representative of the owner, remain securely
locked. For purposes of this section, an owner or authorized representative of
the owner, shall be deemed to actually occupy a room even during brief periods
of absence if the room is contained within a larger structure which is occupied
by the owner.
   (d)   Civil Responsibility for Damages for Wrongful Display or Storage. Any
person who displays or stores or permits the display or storage of any graffiti
implement in violation of the provisions of this section shall be personally
liable for any and all costs, including attorneys fees and court costs,
incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, the repair of
any property containing graffiti, or such party's prosecution of a civil claim
for reimbursement or damages resulting from such graffiti removal or property
repair, arising from the use by any person of such wrongfully displayed or
stored graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of any of the
California Penal Code Sections, set forth in subsection (b) of this section, or
Section
9.90.030 of this chapter.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.070 Removal provisions.
   (a)   Right of City to Require Removal. It is unlawful for any person who is
the owner, or who has primary responsibility for control, or who has primary
responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property visible to the public,
including property under any such person’s ownership or control that is located
within any City right-of- way, to permit the property which is defaced with
graffiti to remain so defaced for a period longer than seventy-two (72) hours
after written notification or documented verbal notification by the City that
the graffiti must be removed. Property shall be considered no longer defaced
when the graffiti is removed or the defaced area is covered by paint that is
substantially similar in shade and color to the surface upon which the graffiti
is placed.
   (b)   Declaration of Nuisance.
      (1)   Graffiti as a Nuisance. The city council declares and finds
graffiti to be a nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and
procedures contained in this chapter.
   (2)   Graffiti Attracting Surface as a Nuisance. The existence of any
surface of a structure on any privately owned parcel of land which has been
defaced with graffiti after removal more than five times in twelve months is
hereby deemed to be a nuisance, and may be abated by the city's requiring
modifications thereto, or to the immediate area surrounding same, according to
the provisions and procedures set forth in Chapter 21.55 of this code. Such
modifications may include, but are not limited to: retrofitting of such
surfaces at the expense of the property owner(s) of the lot, not to exceed a
total cost of five hundred dollars, or at the cost of the city at the city's
option, with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as
necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for graffiti, or as
necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or efficient removal of graffiti
therefrom.
   (c)   Right of City to Remove.
      (1)   Use of Public Funds. Whenever the city becomes aware, or is
notified and determines that graffiti is so located on public or privately
owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place within the city,
the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or
for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to
provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where
the graffiti is located, unless the city manager, or his designee, determines
in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired
in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or
unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or
repairing the more extensive area.
      (2)   Right of Entry on Private Property.
         A.   Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private property
or property owned by a public entity other than the city, for purposes of
removal of graffiti, the city shall attempt to secure the consent of the
responsible party, and a release of the city from liability for private or
public property damage.
         B.   Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If a responsible party fails to
remove the offending graffiti within the time specified in this section, or if
the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending
graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on
terms acceptable to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the
city may commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of
the graffiti pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 21.55 of this code, which
procedures authorize the recovery of all costs incurred by the city in abating
graffiti including the recordation of a lien as to affected property.
      (3)   City Authorized to Obtain Restitution of Abatement Costs. In the
event a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the
time specified in this section and the City is required to undertake graffiti
abatement as a result thereof, the City shall be deemed to be a ‘victim’ and
responsible for the abatement pursuant to Penal Code Section 1202.4(k)(5).
Further, the City shall be authorized to obtain restitution for all costs of
abatement. In order to qualify for such restitution, efforts to obtain graffiti
clean-up from the responsible party must have been unsuccessful, clean-up is
necessary in order to protect the community from the continued nuisance
condition, and the City must have incurred specific costs to abate the graffiti
which have not and will not likely be recoverable from the responsible party.
The remedies set forth in this Subsection shall be in addition to any other
remedies available to the City to collect its costs incurred in abating
graffiti. Nothing herein shall be deemed to create any mandatory duty on the
part of the City to abate graffiti.
   (d)   Ease of Removal Provisions.
      (1)   Common Utility Colors and Paint Type. Any gas, telephone, water,
sewer, cable, telephone and other utility operating in the city, other than an
electric utility, shall paint their above-surface metal fixtures which are
installed after the effective date of this chapter, with a uniform paint type
and color as directed by the city manager.
      (2)   Conditions on Encroachment Permits. Encroachment permits issued by
the city may, among other things, be conditioned on (1) the permittee applying
an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object or structure of a type and
nature that is acceptable to the city manager, or his or her designee; (2) the
immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; (3) the right of the city
to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object or structure; (4) the
permittee providing city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti
material on demand for use in the painting of the encroaching object or
structure containing graffiti.
      (3)   Conditions on Discretionary Approvals. In imposing conditions upon
conditional use permits, variances, building permits to the extend permitted by
this code, or other similar land use entitlement or development or design
applications, the city may impose any or all of the following conditions, or
other similar or related conditions:
         A.   Use of Anti-graffiti Material. Applicant shall apply an anti-
graffiti material of a type and nature that is acceptable to the city manager,
or his or her designee, to such of the publicly-viewable surfaces to be
constructed on the site deemed by the city manager, or designee, to be likely
to attract graffiti (graffiti attracting surfaces);
         B.   Right of Access to Remove Graffiti. Applicant shall grant in
writing, the right of entry over and access to such parcels, upon forty-eight
hours posted notice, by authorized city employees or agents, for the purpose of
removing or "painting over" graffiti on graffiti attracting surfaces previously
designated by the director. Such grant shall be made an express condition of
approval and shall be deemed to run with the land;
         C.   Supply City with Graffiti-Removal Material. Applicant, and any
and all successors in interest, shall, for a period of two years after
approval, provide the city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti
material on demand for use in the painting over or removal of designated
graffiti attracting surfaces;
         D.   Owner to Immediately Remove Graffiti. Persons applying for
subdivision maps shall, as part of any conditions, covenants and restrictions,
covenant, which covenant shall run with the land in a form satisfactory to the
city, that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove any graffiti placed
on publicly viewable trees and structures thereon to city's satisfaction.
(Ord. 731 § 1, 2023; Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.080 Rewards for information.
   (a)   Pursuant to Section 53069.5 of the Government Code, the city does
hereby offer a reward in an amount to be established by resolution of the city
council, for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for
violation, within the city, of California Penal Code Section 594 or 594.3 by
the use of graffiti, Penal Code Section 640, 640.5, 640.6, or Section
9.90.030,
9.90.040, or
9.90.050 of this chapter. In the event of multiple contributors of information,
the reward amount shall be divided by the city in the manner it shall deem
appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending
violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense,
shall constitute a conviction.
   (b)   Claims for rewards under the section shall be filed with the city.
Each claim shall:
      (1)   Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property
damaged or destroyed.
      (2)   Identify by name the person who was convicted.
      (3)   Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred.
   (c)   No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the city council unless the
city investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that
the requirements of this section have been satisfied. The investigation must
determine that the claimant's information was relevant and directly responsible
for the arrest and conviction of the suspect.
   (d)   The person committing the graffiti vandalism, and if an unemancipated
minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of the minor, shall be civilly liable
for any reward paid pursuant to this section pursuant to the provisions of the
California Government Code Section 53069.5.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.090 Reimbursement of cellular phone costs.
Repealed by 731. (Ord. 731 § 2, 2023; Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
9.90.100 Penalties and civil liability of parents.
   (a)    Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by either six months in jail, a one thousand dollar
fine, or by such fine and imprisonment, and by the performance of community
service in the form of graffiti clean-up to the maximum extent permitted by
California Penal Code Section 594 and/or any other provision of law. Each such
person, firm, corporation, or partnership shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any
violation of the provisions of this code is committed, continued, or permitted
by such person, firm, corporation, or partnership, and shall be deemed
punishable thereof as provided in this section.
   (b)   Additional Penalties Available. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the
city's intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional
penalties upon conviction:
      (1)   Litter or graffiti clean-up pursuant to California Vehicle Code
Section 42001.7, upon conviction of violation of California Vehicle Code
Sections 23111, 23112, or 23113(a).
      (2)   Suspension or delay in issuance of driver's license pursuant to
California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6 upon a graffiti vandalism conviction.
      (3)   Performance of community service, including graffiti removal
service by any minor determined to be a ward of the court as a result of
committing an act of vandalism in the city, as provided in California Welfare
and Institutions Code Section 728.
      (4)   Performance of community service, including graffiti removal
service of up to one hundred hours by any minor determined to be a ward of the
court as a result of committing a drug related offense in the city, as provided
in California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 729.8.
   (c)   It is the city's further intent that pursuant to California Penal Code
Section 640.6(a), all acts of graffiti vandalism occurring within the city
shall be prosecuted as misdemeanors pursuant to California Penal Code Section
594 et seq., or this chapter.
   (d)   Any parent or legal guardian whose minor child possesses a graffiti
implement, shall be personally liable for any and all costs to any person or
business incurred in connection with the removal of graffiti caused by the
child, or by graffiti implement, and for all attorney's fees and court costs
incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages or
reimbursement.
(Ord. 468 § 1 (part), 1993).
Chapter 9.96
SKATEBOARDS AND OTHER WHEELED DEVICES PROHIBITED
Sections:
   
9.96.010   Skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar wheeled
devices prohibited on posted public property.
   
9.96.020   Skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar wheeled
devices prohibited on posted private property in commercial zones and
industrial zones open to the public.
   
9.96.030   Applicability of chapter.
   
9.96.035   Electric personal assistive mobility devices prohibited on
pedestrian walkways and sidewalks.
   
9.96.040   Penalty for violation.
9.96.010 Skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar wheeled devices
prohibited on posted public property.
It is unlawful and is declared a public nuisance for any person to ride a
skateboard, or utilize roller skates, in-line skates or similar self-powered
wheeled device, upon any public property within the city where notice of such
prohibition has been posted and is clearly visible at at least two entrances to
the prohibited area or in the immediate area where such activity is prohibited.
This section shall not apply to persons participating in any city-sponsored
program, event or class in which use of the self-powered wheeled devices
described herein are utilized, permitted or required.
(Ord. 484 § 1, 1994; Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1993).
9.96.020 Skateboards, roller skates, in-line skates and similar wheeled devices
prohibited on posted private property in commercial zones and industrial zones
open to the public.
It is unlawful and it is declared a nuisance for any person to ride a
skateboard, roller skates, or similar self-powered wheeled device upon private
property in a commercial zone or industrial zone which is open to the public,
within the city, where notice of such prohibition has been posted and is
visible at at least two entrances to the prohibited area, or in the immediate
area where such activity is prohibited. This section shall not apply to persons
participating in any city-sponsored program, event or class in which use of the
self-powered wheeled devices described herein are utilized, permitted or
required.
(Ord. 484 § 2, 1994; Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1993).
9.96.030 Applicability of chapter.
The provisions of Sections
9.96.010 and
9.96.020 of this chapter shall apply to skateboards, roller skates, wheeled
scooters, and any other similar wheeled device utilizing wheels less than five
inches in diameter and not otherwise regulated by state or federal law.
(Ord. 578 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 467 § 2 (part), 1993).
9.96.035 Electric personal assistive mobility devices prohibited on pedestrian
walkways and sidewalks.
It is unlawful to operate an electric personal assistive mobility device on any
city-owned or maintained pedestrian walkway, sidewalk, or other area primarily
designed and intended for use by pedestrians, within the city. "Electric
personal assistive mobility device" means a self-balancing, non-tandem two-
wheeled device, that can turn in place and is designed to transport only one
person, with an electric propulsion system averaging less than 750 watts (1
horsepower), or otherwise as defined in California Vehicle Code Section 313.
(Ord. 578 § 1 (part), 2003)
9.96.040 Penalty for violation.
   (a)   Criminal Violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any
provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any
person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of
its requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and upon conviction
thereof shall be punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for
a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second
violation within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for
each additional violation within one year.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail
to comply with the requirements of Sections
9.96.030 and
9.96.035. Any person violating any provision of Sections
9.96.030 and
9.96.035 or failing to comply with any of the requirements of such sections
shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be
punishable by (a) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first
violation; (b) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation
within one year; or (c) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each
additional violation within one year.
   (c)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil
process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or
in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 578 § 2, 2003; Ord. 467 § 3, 1993).
Chapter 9.98
ADMISSION CHARGE AND LOUD OR UNRULY PARTIES
Sections:
   
9.98.010   Definitions.
   
9.98.020   Admission charge parties prohibited.
   
9.98.030   Imposition of fees for police personnel at nuisance parties.
   9.98.040   Administrative penalties for conducting or allowing an admission
charge or nuisance party.
9.98.010 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, "Admission charge" means a tangible benefit,
monetary or otherwise, which is expressly or impliedly required as a condition
of admittance to a party. Customary courtesies and clearly noncommercial
activity such as gifts by guests and voluntary sharing of expenses for meals
shall not be considered to be an "admission charge." "Admission charge" shall
not include donations for political, community service, charitable or religious
purposes.
   The term "party" or "parties" means three or more persons meeting together
for social, recreational, or amusement purposes.
(Ord. 541 § 3 (part), 1999).
9.98.020 Admission charge parties prohibited.
No person shall require, impliedly or expressly, any admission charge to any
party conducted in a residential zone.
(Ord. 541 § 3 (part), 1999).
9.98.030 Imposition of fees for police personnel at nuisance parties.
   (a)   When any loud (as defined in La Mirada Municipal Code Section
9.04.010) or unruly party occurs or is held, and it is determined that there is
a disruption to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person
in charge of the premises and the person responsible for the party, or if
either of those persons is a minor, then the parents or guardians of the minor,
will be held jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing sheriff
personnel for special security assignment over and above the law enforcement
services normally provided by the city and the sheriff's department, and the
same may be given a written warning containing notice of the provisions of this
section.
   Sheriff personnel utilized during a second response to the same location
within seventeen days after a first warning is issued, to control the
disturbance to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, shall be
deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the services
normally provided. A party requiring such a second sheriff response is deemed
to be a "nuisance party." Furthermore, those persons deemed liable for the cost
of the special security assignment shall be deemed to have consented to such
liability by failing to immediately take all steps necessary to avoid the need
for the second sheriff response. The disturbance causing the second response
shall be deemed to be a continuation of the disturbance causing the first
response.
   (b)   The costs of such special security assignment may include costs of
personnel, damages to city property, and injuries to city and sheriff
personnel. The charges assessed will be the actual cost of service for
controlling the disturbance and restoring the public peace, health, safety or
general welfare at the location of the disturbance. Such charges shall be
consistent with the current rate being charged to the city by the county of Los
Angeles.
   (c)   In addition, charges for damage to public property shall be determined
and set forth in an official written estimate from the Los Angeles County
department of public works or the city environmental services department. The
city reserves the right to elect any other legal remedies when deemed
necessary.
   (d)   When a second sheriff's response to a party following issuance of a
warning occurs, the sheriff's department shall provide the city with a copy of
the first response warning issued at the disturbance and with all city-required
information. This information shall include the number and type of sheriff
personnel and units used, and time spent, to control the disturbance. The city
will bill the responsible party or parties for costs of providing the special
security assignment plus an additional twenty-five percent of said costs as
costs of administration to process the bill and collect the charges. Failure to
pay the charge, as billed by the city, shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. Such costs shall be deemed to be a personal debt of those liable for
payment, and may be collected as a debt on a contract.
(Ord. 541 § 3 (part), 1999).
9.98.040 Administrative penalties for conducting or allowing an admission
charge or nuisance party.
   It is unlawful for any person to conduct or allow a party to be conducted in
violation of Section
9.98.020 ("admission charge party"), or to conduct a nuisance party, as defined
in Section
9.98.030, or allow a nuisance party to be conducted. In addition to any other
penalties provided in this chapter, any person conducting an admission charge
party or nuisance party, or allowing an admission charge or nuisance party to
be conducted, on residential property under such person's ownership or control,
or if such person is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor,
shall be subject to the following administrative penalties which shall be
administered as set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of this code:
   A.   For a second admission charge or nuisance party conducted within any
seventeen (17) consecutive day period, the administrative penalty shall be
$100.
   B.   For a third admission charge or nuisance party conducted within any
seventeen (17) consecutive day period, the administrative penalty shall be
$200.
   C.   For a fourth or additional admission charge or nuisance party conducted
within any seventeen (17) consecutive day period, the administrative penalty
shall be $500. (Ord. 659 § 3, 2012).
Chapter 9.100
URINATING OR DEFECATING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:
   
9.100.010   Urinating or defecating in public places.
   
9.100.020   Penalty for violation.
   
9.100.030   Civil remedies available.
   
9.100.040   Severability.
9.100.010 Urinating or defecating in public places.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no person shall urinate or defecate
in any public place, or on any public property, or in any place within view of
any other person who is annoyed or offended thereby. This section shall not
apply to persons using any established and lawful toilet facilities, provided
such use is authorized by the owner or other person in control of such
facilities.
(Ord. 457 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.100.020 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any
provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be
deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 457 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.100.030 Civil remedies available.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a nuisance
and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining
order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by
law for the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 457 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.100.040 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason deemed or held to be invalid or unconstitutional by
the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any
preemptive legislation, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portion of this chapter. The city council declares that it would have
adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter and each section, subsection,
sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any
one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or other
portions might subsequently be declared invalid or unconstitutional.
(Ord. 457 § 1 (part), 1992).
Chapter 9.102
ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE RESIDENTIAL UNITS
Sections:
   
9.102.010   Purpose and intent.
   
9.102.020   Definitions.
   
9.102.030   Procedures.
   
9.102.040   Allegation of nuisance; investigation.
   
9.102.050   Nuisance abatement hearing.
   
9.102.060   Hearing procedure.
   
9.102.070   Appeal procedure.
   
9.102.080   Civil abatement.
9.102.010 Purpose and intent.
The city has determined that certain activities which have been identified as
public nuisances under state law are present and occurring in structures and
places within the city. State law provides for the enjoining, abatement and
prevention of such nuisances. The city desires to supplement the general laws
relating to the abatement of such public nuisances by establishing a process
whereby such nuisances may be abated by a voluntary cooperative effort between
the city and the owner of the property whereon such public nuisances are
occurring. The procedures established in this chapter describe and establish
this process and further, establish provisions for obtaining judicial relief in
circumstances where voluntary abatement is not achieved.
(Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the definitions
ascribed to them as follows:
   "Criminal activities" as used herein shall refer to any activity punishable
as a misdemeanor or felony as defined by local, state or federal laws,
including, but not limited to, the offenses set forth in California Penal Code
Section 186.22(e).
   "Criminal street gang" as used herein shall have the meaning as set forth in
California Penal Code Section 186.22(f) and shall further include any ongoing
organization, association or group of three or more persons, whether formal or
informal, having as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more
criminal acts, as specified in California Penal Code Section 186.22(e), having
a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, and whose members
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
gang activity.
(Ord. 491 § 13 (part), 1995; Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.030 Procedures.
   (a)   Every building or place used for the purposes of criminal activity by
a criminal street gang, gangs or individual members thereof, or wherein or
whereupon such criminal activity takes place, or as described in California
Penal Code Section 186.22a, is a public nuisance and may be abated as set forth
herein.
   (b)   Every structure or place used for the purpose of unlawfully selling,
serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing, or giving away any controlled
substance, precursor and analog specified in state law, and every building or
place where such activity occurs or as is defined in Health and Safety Code
Section 11570 is a public nuisance and may be abated as set forth herein.
   (c)   Abatement procedures provided by state law which, respectively, relate
to California Penal Code Section 186.22a or Health and Safety Code Section
11570 may be commenced by the city attorney as provided herein.
(Ord. 491 § 13 (part), 1995; Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.040 Allegation of nuisance; investigation.
   (a)    Written Allegations. Any person may submit to the city written
allegations regarding the existence of a nuisance as defined herein at a
specific structure or place. Such written allegations shall be factual in
nature and provide specific details which serve to support the allegations.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the police department or any code enforcement
agency of the city, may identify a structure or place which is believed to be a
nuisance as defined herein.
   (b)   Investigation of Allegations. The police department and city shall
investigate all allegations regarding the existence of the nuisance utilizing
appropriate investigative procedures. Such investigation may include, but is
not limited to, a review of calls for service for nuisance-related activities,
statements or admissions of the property owner or occupants of the subject
structure or place, and declarations from adjacent property owners or
occupants.
   The chief of police shall determine if the results of the investigation
warrant proceeding to a nuisance abatement hearing.
   If the nuisance abatement hearing is determined to be justified, the city
manager, or his designee, shall proceed as set forth in Section
9.102.050.
   If a nuisance abatement hearing is not found to be justified, a written
notice of such decision shall be mailed by first class mail to the party who
submitted the written allegations.
(Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.050 Nuisance abatement hearing.
   When the chief of police has determined that a nuisance abatement hearing is
justified, the city manager, or his designee, shall establish a date, time and
place for such hearing.
   Notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail to the owner(s) of
record of the property at the address as shown on the last equalized tax
assessment roll, and to the party who filed by the allegations.
   The notice shall be sent not less than ten calendar days prior to the date
established for such hearing.
   The notice shall contain the following:
      (1)   Identification of the street address and assessors parcel number of
the subject property;
      (2)   Identification of the alleged nuisance and the evidence in support
thereof;
      (3)   A description of the hearing process and the rights of the property
owner;
      (4)   An explanation of the alternative civil abatement process; and
      (5)   A description of the appeal process.
(Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.060 Hearing procedure.
   (a)   General Provisions.
      (1)   The city manager, or his designee, shall serve as the nuisance
abatement hearing officer.
      (2)   The hearing officer shall have the power and duty to administer
oaths and affirmations and to certify to official acts.
      (3)   The hearing shall be recorded by means of audio tape recording or
any such other means as the hearing officer deems appropriate.
      (4)   All persons presenting oral testimony shall be sworn prior to
taking such testimony.
      (5)   All written evidence shall be signed and dated by the person
submitting the same.
   (b)   Presentation of Evidence.
      (1)   Each party may call and examine all witnesses, present evidence,
rebut any evidence presented against the party and be represented by anyone the
party may choose.
      (2)   All relevant evidence shall be admitted and considered by the
hearing officer, whether such evidence be oral or written. Irrelevant or
repetitious testimony shall be excluded by the hearing officer.
   (c)   Decision of Hearing Officer.
      (1)   The hearing officer shall, not more than five business days after
the hearing, render a written decision which shall, on the basis of the
evidence as presented, determine the existence or nonexistence of the alleged
nuisance.
      (2)   If a nuisance is found to exist, the hearing officer shall describe
the nuisance with particularity and shall specify a reasonable time frame for
the voluntary abatement of the nuisance(s) by the property owner by any lawful
means. Further, the decision shall explain the civil abatement alternative if
voluntary abatement fails to abate the nuisance.
      (3)   The written decision shall be served on the property owner and
interested parties by certified mail.
(Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.070 Appeal procedure.
   The property owner may appeal the decision of the hearing officer on any
grounds, on or before the tenth day after the date of the hearing officer's
decision. Such appeal shall be written and shall describe with particularity
the grounds for the appeal. Such appeal shall be placed on the first available
city council agenda.
   The city council shall consider the appeal in conjunction with and
respective to the record of the nuisance abatement hearing. The city council
may revise, amend or otherwise alter the decision of the hearing officer in its
sole discretion insofar as such is supported by the evidence.
(Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
9.102.080 Civil abatement.
When the property owner or other interested party responsible for the subject
structure or place fails to abate the nuisance within the time frame as
established for such abatement, the city attorney is authorized to proceed with
a civil action to abate the identified nuisance pursuant to the applicable
state or federal law. Such abatement action may include seeking a temporary
injunction and any applicable damages, costs, and remedies. In the event such
damages and costs are not satisfied, such shall become a lien and charged
against the subject structure or place.
(Ord. 459 § 1 (part), 1992).
Chapter 9.106
CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
Sections:
   
9.106.010   Purpose.
   
9.106.020   Definitions.
   
9.106.030   Camping on public property.
   
9.106.040   Camping on private property.
   
9.106.050   Storage of personal property on public property.
   
9.106.060   Enforcement.
   
9.106.070   Violations.
9.106.010 Purpose.
Public areas within the city should be accessible and available to residents
and the public at large for their intended uses. The unauthorized use of public
areas for camping and the storage of personal property interferes with the
rights of other members of the public to use public areas for their intended
purposes and can create a public health or safety hazard that adversely affects
residential and commercial areas. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain
public areas in clean, sanitary and accessible condition to prevent the
misappropriation of public areas for personal use, and to promote the public
health and safety by ensuring that public areas remain readily accessible for
their intended uses. (Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 501 § 1 (part), 1996).
9.106.020 Definitions.
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the
definitions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning
and application of words and phrases used in this chapter.
   “Camp” or “tent camp” or “camping” means to pitch a tent, use, or occupy
camp materials or a camp for the purpose of occupancy, habitation, or
sheltering for survival, and in such a way as will facilitate sleeping or
storage of personal belongings, carrying on cooking activities, taking measures
to keep protected from the elements including heat and cold, or any of these
activities in combination with one another or in combination with either
sleeping or making preparations to sleep. A “camp” or “campsite” is a location
where people camp or are camping. Camp, tent camp, or camping does not include
vehicles, automobiles or recreational vehicles used for shelter and/or sleeping
on public property, which is regulated in Section 10.16.065.
   “Camp materials” may include, but are not limited to, tents, chairs, tarps
or tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, flameless stoves, blankets, sleeping
or bedding materials, food or food storage items, and/or similar items that are
or appear to be used as living and/or sleeping accommodations, or to assist
with living and/or sleeping activities.
   “Essential city-owned or operated public utilities” means all city owned or
controlled property, whether in fee title, or as holder of an easement or
lease, on which the city operates public utilities or other essential services,
including, but not limited to La Mirada City Hall, La Mirada Civic Center, La
Mirada Community Sheriff’s Station, La Mirada Resource Center, La Mirada
Activity Center, La Mirada Community Gymnasium, La Mirada Theatre for the
Performing Arts, the La Mirada Public Works facility and the La Mirada Transit
facility.
   “Personal property” means tangible personal belongings or possessions, which
shall include any movable or tangible thing that is subject to ownership;
property that can be seen, weighed, measured, felt, or touched, including, but
not limited to, furniture, appliances, camp materials, as defined in this
section, money, books, and shopping carts or carts or laundry carts as defined
in Business and Professions Code Section 22435.
   “Public park” means all park land, open spaces, dedicated parks, planted
parkways, triangles and traffic circles maintained by the city, except the
parkway strips between curb and sidewalk along the streets and highways of the
city, or as otherwise defined in this code.
   “Public property” means a city-owned or controlled place, including, but not
limited to any public street, alley, public right-of-way, public parking lot,
public park, public parkway, public sidewalk, public recreational area, public
recreational facility, open space, essential city-owned or operated public
utilities, and any and all other publicly-owned or controlled property in the
city.
   “Public rights-of-way” means all city-owned or controlled rights-of-way or
any other publicly owned or controlled right- of-way, whether held in fee title
or as holder of an easement for right-of-way or public access purposes. Public
rights-of- way include, but are not limited to, any public road, street,
sidewalk, or private street or other property that is subject to a public
access easement dedicated or granted to the city for vehicular, pedestrian,
utilities or other means, and any planter strip or landscaped area located
adjacent to or contained within streets that is part of the public right-of-
way.
(Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025; Ord. 501 § 1 (part), 1996).
9.106.030 Camping on public property.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to camp between the hours of one-half
(½) hour after sunset of one day and six (6:00) a.m. of the next day in or on
any public property without the prior, written consent of the City Manager or
designee.
   (b)   In addition to the prohibition on camping on public property in
subsection (a), camping is not allowed at any time in any of the following
places:
      (1)   Any area where camping is otherwise prohibited by law or this code.
      (2)   Property of any essential city-owned or - operated public
utilities.
      (3)   Any place where camping, a camp, or camp materials create a
physical impediment to emergency or non- emergency ingress, egress, or access
to property, whether private or public, or on public sidewalks or other public
rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, driveways providing access to
vehicles, and entrances or exits from buildings and/or other real property.
      (4)   Any vehicle lane, bicycle lane, or roundabout within any public
right-of-way.
      (5)   On any street or public right-of-way the city has closed to camping
due to construction, heavy vehicle use, or other use of the roadway that is
incompatible with camping in the right-of-way. The city is not required by this
section to close a street to vehicle traffic or close a street to camping.
   (c)   Camping, when and where allowed, is subject to all of the following:
      (1)   Individuals, camp materials, camps or personal property may not
obstruct sidewalk accessibility or passage, clear vision, fire hydrants, city
or other public utility infrastructure, or otherwise interfere with the use of
the right-of-way for vehicular, pedestrian, bicycle, or other passage.
      (2)   Individuals may not accumulate, discard, or leave behind garbage,
debris, unsanitary or hazardous materials, or other items of no apparent
utility in the public rights-of-way, on city property, or any adjacent public
or private property.
      (3)   Open flames, recreational fires, burning of garbage, bonfires, or
other fires, combustible fuel-based flames, or heating deemed unsafe by the
city or the county sheriff are prohibited. Flameless cooking stoves and other
flameless devices for keeping warm are permitted.
      (4)   Dumping of gray water (i.e., wastewater from baths, sinks, and the
like) or black water (i.e., sewage) into any facilities or places not intended
for gray water or black water disposal is prohibited. This includes, but is not
limited to, city streets, public rights-of-way, public waterways and storm
drains, which are not intended for disposal of gray water or black water.
      (5)   Unauthorized connections or taps to electrical or other utilities,
or violations of building, fire or other relevant codes or standards, are
prohibited.
      (6)   Items used for camping must be readily portable, such as tents.
Individuals may not build or erect structures that are not readily portable,
such as structures constructed out of plywood, wood materials, pallets, or
other similar materials.
      (7)   Digging, excavation, terracing of soil, alteration of ground, water
or infrastructure, or damage to vegetation or trees is prohibited.
(Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025)
9.106.040 Camping on private property.
It is unlawful for any person to camp between the hours of one-half (½) hour
after sunset of one day and six (6:00) a.m. of the next day, whether inside or
outside of a vehicle, in or on any private property, including, but not limited
to vacant lots, parking areas, and residential and commercial properties,
unless the person camping in or on such private property:
   (a)   Is the owner thereof, or the lessee of such property or the houseguest
of such owner or lessee, or possesses written permission of the owner of such
property, his or her agent or the person in lawful possession of such property;
and
   (b)   The person(s) camping have access to sanitary facilities approved by
the city or health officer of the county, including, but not limited to toilet,
hand washing and trash disposal facilities at all times people are authorized
to be present for camping.
(Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025)
9.106.050 Storage of personal property on public property. 
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property
on any public property, except as otherwise approved in writing by the City
Manager.
   (a)   Personal property shall be deemed to be stored if it has not been
removed from the property within 24 hours of service of written notice provided
pursuant to subsection (c) of this section.
   (b)   All personal property stored in violation of this section may be
impounded by the city pursuant to this section.
   (c)   Before impoundment of any personal property, the enforcement officer
shall notify the owner of the personal property in writing, if their identity
is reasonably ascertainable; or, if the identity of the owner is not reasonably
ascertainable, cause a written notice to be posted in a prominent place at or
near where the personal property is located, advising that the city will
impound the personal property if not removed within 24 hours. Such notice shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The date the notice was posted;
      (2)   The date the removal is scheduled to begin if personal property is
not voluntarily removed;
      (3)   The time period during which removal will occur, which cannot
exceed four hours;
      (4)   Where personal property will be stored if removed by the city;
      (5)   How personal property may be claimed by its owner;
      (6)   The date on which stored items will be disposed of; and
      (7)   Contact information for an outreach provider that can provide
services and shelter alternatives.
      Notwithstanding the foregoing, personal property shall be deemed stored
and may be immediately impounded if the city has erected signs in the public
area where the personal property is located conspicuously stating that any
personal property stored in that area is subject to immediate impoundment and a
phone number for further information.
   (d)   Following removal of personal property, the city shall post a notice
for a minimum of ten days at or as near as possible to the location where the
personal property was collected, and on the city’s website. This notice shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The date the personal property was removed;
      (2)   Where the personal property is being stored;
      (3)   How personal property may be claimed by its owner, including the
phone number and hours of a person claiming ownership;
      (4)   The date on which stored items will be disposed of; and
      (5)   Contact information for an outreach provider that can provide
services and shelter alternatives.
   (e)   Personal property removed by the city pursuant to this section will be
stored by the city for a minimum of 90 days, or the duration required or
permitted by law at the time of removal.
   (f)   The city shall maintain an inventory reasonably identifying personal
property removed pursuant to this section, where the personal property was
approximately located prior to removal, and the identity of the owner, if
known.
   (g)   The city shall release personal property to the owner identified in
the inventory or, if identity of the owner is not known, to a person who claims
ownership of the property and can describe the property with particularity. The
city shall not require presentation of any identification to retrieve property.
   (h)   The city may dispose of any personal property that remain unclaimed
after 90 days, or such duration as required or permitted by law.
   (i)   Nothing in this section shall prevent, restrict, or otherwise limit
the city’s right to immediately remove, without prior notice: (1) evidence of a
crime or contraband from public property; (2) personal property located on
public property that poses an immediate threat to the health or safety of the
public; (3) items that are perishable, that have no apparent use, are not
identifiable as belonging to an individual, or that are in an unsanitary
condition due to saturation or contamination from bodily fluids, whether human
or animal, or other contamination; and (4) any personal property otherwise
authorized by law to be removed without prior notice. For all evidence,
property, and items removed pursuant to this subsection, except “(3) items,” a
post- removal notice shall be provided as set forth in subsection (d) of this
section.
   (j)   Weapons, drug paraphernalia, or other contraband and items that appear
to be either stolen or evidence of a crime, shall be given to law enforcement
officials.
(Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025)
9.106.060 Enforcement.
   (a)   The City Manager, or their designee, is specifically authorized to
modify or suspend enforcement of any section or element of this chapter in the
event of a declared emergency, pursuant to administrative rules or policies,
weather conditions (including, but not limited to, extreme heat or cold), or
for any other reason within the City Manager’s authority, regardless of whether
an emergency has been declared.
   (b)   The City Manager, or their designee, may adopt administrative rules or
policies governing or guiding enforcement of this chapter, including, but not
limited to ensuring consistent and appropriate enforcement for various
circumstances.
(Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025)
9.106.070 Violations and remedies.
   (a)   Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor
pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code. At the city’s discretion, it may issue
administrative citations as permitted by Chapter 1.08 of this code.
   (b)   In addition to all other remedies, an individual may be issued a
written exclusion order by an enforcement officer temporarily prohibiting said
individual from a public park or essential city-owned or operated public
utility on which violations described in this section occurred, for a period of
30 days, if within a one-year period, the individual:
      (1)   Is issued two or more citations concerning the same public park or
essential city-owned or operated public utility for violating this chapter; or
      (2)   Is issued one or more citations for violating any state law(s)
while in or upon the same public park or essential city-owned or operated
public utility.
      The foregoing exclusion order shall only apply to the particular public
park or essential city-owned or operated public utility in which the offending
conduct occurred.
   (c)   An individual issued a written exclusion order may file a written
objection to the order with the City Manager within two business days of its
issuance. If a written objection is filed, the matter shall be placed on the
City Council’s agenda not earlier than two days after receiving the objection.
The exclusion order shall be stayed during the pendency of the appeal. The
objection may be heard by the City Council at a regular or special meeting. At
the hearing, city staff shall provide the City Council with information
regarding the basis for the exclusion order, and the individual shall be
allowed to present relevant evidence. City Council may affirm the order upon
finding that the criteria in subsection (c) of this section have been met by a
preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the City Council is final.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council may appoint a hearings officer
as its designee for the purpose of conducting appeals of exclusion orders. In
such case, the decision of the hearings officer shall be final.
   (d)   The remedies or penalties provided by this chapter are cumulative to
each other and to the remedies or penalties available under all other laws of
this state.
(Ord. 741, § 1 (part), 2025)
Chapter 9.108
NONCHARITABLE SOLICITING
Sections:
   
9.108.010   Permit required.
   
9.108.020   Application for permit.
   
9.108.030   Permit filing fee.
   
9.108.040   Application investigation--Permit issuance conditions.
   
9.108.050   Possession of permit required.
   
9.108.060   Permit denial and revocation.
   
9.108.070   Appeal procedure.
9.108.010 Permit required.
   It is unlawful for any person to engage in commercial solicitation
activities as a noncharitable solicitor within the city without first obtaining
a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "noncharitable solicitor" shall mean any
person who, for noncharitable purposes, travels from house to house, from
business to business, or otherwise from place to place, taking or attempting to
take orders for the sale of goods or merchandise, personal or intangible
property of any nature for future delivery, or for services of any kind to be
furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries
or displays for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or is collecting
advance payments for such sales or services.
   "Noncharitable solicitor" also means any person who, for noncharitable
purposes, travels from house to house, from business to business, or otherwise
from place to place, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, merchandise or
personal or intangible property of any nature, and offering and/or displaying
the same for sale or making sales and delivering such items, or services of any
kind, to any person at the place of sale or elsewhere.
   For purposes of this section, the term "noncharitable purposes" shall mean
and include purposes not intended to benefit nor benefitting, any "charity," as
defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 17510.2(d).
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
9.108.020 Application for permit.
Applicants for a permit under this chapter shall file with the finance director
a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the director,
providing the following:
   (a)   The name, birth date, and description of the applicant;
   (b)   The permanent home address and full local and business address of the
applicant and the applicant's employer, if any;
   (c)   A brief description of the nature of the business, the goods or
services to be sold, proposed method of delivery, and any vehicles to be
utilized in connection therewith;
   (d)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials establishing the exact relationship;
   (e)   The length of time for which the permit is desired, not to exceed one
year;
   (f)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of
any misdemeanor or felony within the previous ten years, the nature of the
offense, the date of conviction, and the punishment or penalty imposed
therefor;
   (g)   A statement as to the nature and date of any revocation of any permit
held by the applicant to sell goods or services to the public within the
previous ten years;
   (h)   Evidence of the applicant or applicant's employer possessing a current
city business license to conduct solicitation activities;
   Where the applicant is a business entity utilizing noncharitable solicitors,
the applicant shall provide all of the required information as to such business
entity and as to each person who shall actually solicit.
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
9.108.030 Permit filing fee.
At the time of filing the application for a permit under this chapter, a fee in
an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the
finance director to cover the cost of investigation of the facts stated
therein, and the cost of the identification card required to be carried by each
solicitor. Such fee shall be paid by each business entity applicant on behalf
of each person who shall actually solicit.
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
9.108.040 Application investigation--Permit issuance conditions.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a complete application for a permit under this
chapter, the finance director may cause an investigation of the applicant and
application to be made. The application shall be approved or denied within
fourteen days of receipt.
   (b)   If, as a result of such investigation, the finance director determines
that any false or material misrepresentation has been made, or that the
applicant does not satisfy the requirements of this chapter, the applicant
shall be provided written notice that the application is disapproved and that
no permit will be issued.
   (c)   If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant is found to
satisfy the requirements of this chapter, the finance director shall approve
the application and issue a permit and an identification card for each
solicitor. Such card shall contain the signature of the issuing officer, and
shall show the name and business or residential address of the permittee, the
kind of goods or services permitted to be sold thereunder, the date of issuance
and the term of the permit, as well as a description of any vehicle to be used
by a permitted solicitor. Each card shall also clearly state that issuance of
such permit and identification card does not constitute an official endorsement
by the city of the permittee or of anything sought to be sold by the solicitor.
No permittee shall sell or attempt to sell goods or services of a different
nature than described in the permit. Each permittee shall provide written
notice to the finance director of any changes occurring with respect to
information set forth in an application made pursuant to this chapter, within
five business days thereof.
   (d)   The finance director shall keep a written record of all permits issued
for such time as required by law.
   (e)   Each permittee shall comply with the provisions of Section
9.109.040 of this title, with respect to the manner of solicitation.
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
9.108.050 Possession of permit required.
Each permitted solicitor shall maintain in his possession, at all times while
soliciting, the original identification card and a valid driver's license,
identification card or other form of identification bearing the solicitor's
name and photograph, and shall exhibit the card and picture identification to
each prospective customer or law enforcement officer for inspection upon
request.
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
9.108.060 Permit denial and revocation.
   (a)   Any permit applied for or issued under the provisions of this chapter
may be denied or revoked after notice and hearing opportunity for any of the
following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
solicitation activities;
      (3)   Any violation of this code;
      (4)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner
as to constitute a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public;
      (5)   Conviction of a misdemeanor or felony involving fraud, theft,
dishonesty, or injury to any person, within the previous ten years, or
revocation of any permit to sell goods or services to the public within the
previous five years;
   (b)   A permit may be revoked pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Section
9.109.050 of this title, applicable to revocation of charitable solicitation
permits.
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
9.108.070 Appeal procedure.
Any person aggrieved by a denial of a permit may appeal such denial in
accordance with the provisions of Section
9.109.060 of this title, applicable to denials of charitable solicitation
permits, provided, however, that a nonrefundable fee in such amount as may be
established by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the appellant at
the time of filing such appeal.
(Ord. 520 § 1 (part), 1998).
Chapter 9.109
CHARITABLE SOLICITING
Sections:
   
9.109.010   Definitions.
   
9.109.020   Charitable solicitation permit required.
   
9.109.030   Identification.
   
9.109.040   Manner of solicitation.
   
9.109.050   Revocation.
   
9.109.060   Appeal.
   
9.109.070   Penalty for violation of chapter.
9.109.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
defined as follows:
   (a)   "Charity" means and has that definition set forth in California
Business and Professions Code Section 17510.2(d)which defines "charity" as
including "any person who, or any nonprofit community organization, fraternal,
benevolent, educational, philanthropic, or service organization, or
governmental employee organization which, solicits or obtains contributions
solicited from the public for charitable purposes or holds any assets for
charitable purposes." Whenever the term "charitable purposes" is utilized in
this chapter, such term shall mean and include such purposes as will directly
benefit or are purported to benefit any charity.
   (b)   "Solicit" or "solicitation" means:
      (1)   Any request, plea, demand, or invitation, or attempt thereof, to
give money or property for any charitable purpose, without prior invitation,
appointment or consent, made upon any private property in the city in which the
solicitor has no possessory or ownership interest; or
      (2)   The sale of, offer to sell, or attempt to sell, for any charitable
purpose and without prior invitation, appointment or consent, any
advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon device, magazine
subscription, membership, merchandise, ticket of admission, or any other thing
or service upon any private property in the city in which the solicitor has no
possessory or ownership interest.
   (c)   "Solicitor" means any person who solicits.
(Ord. 520 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.109.020 Charitable solicitation permit required.
   (a)   No person shall solicit, or permit or cause any other person to
solicit on said person's behalf, where it is represented that any proceeds of
such solicitation are to be used for charitable purposes, or otherwise engage
in any "solicitation for charitable purposes" or "sales solicitation for
charitable purposes," as those terms are defined in California Business and
Professions Code Section 17510.2, or any successor provision thereto, without
first obtaining and being the holder of a valid charitable solicitation permit
issued by the finance director. The fee for such permit shall be in such amount
as may be set by resolution of the city council and which will compensate the
city for the actual costs of the permit and identification card(s) required to
be in the possession of each solicitor at all times while soliciting, and the
cost of administering this chapter.
   (b)   The foregoing permit shall be required only of the person in charge of
charitable solicitations on behalf of a charity, but no person shall solicit as
agent, servant or representative of an unpermitted person required under the
provisions of this section to have a charitable solicitation permit.
   (c)   Each person applying for a charitable solicitation permit or renewal
of an existing permit shall file with the finance director a sworn statement
setting forth the name of the charity on which behalf the charitable
solicitation is to be made, together with the address and telephone number of
the charity (and if an organization, the names and business addresses of its
officers); the name of the person or persons who are to act as charitable
solicitors; the total amount to be raised; the estimated total amount to be
expended as compensation or reward for such charitable solicitation, or the
percentage of the total amount intended to be raised or realized in the drive
or campaign such estimated total of expenditures represents; and the purpose
for which the money or property derived from such charitable solicitation is to
be used. This statement shall be verified by declaration or affidavit of the
person, or chief officer of the organization, for whom charitable solicitation
is to be made, or if solicitation is to be for an unorganized class of persons,
verification shall be made by the person in charge of such charitable
solicitation.
   To the extent not required above, each applicant shall also provide to the
finance department as part of the sworn statement of the information required
to be disclosed pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section
17510.3, the name and address of each person who shall actually solicit for
charitable purposes. This sworn statement shall be on such form as provided by
the finance department and shall constitute the required application.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, provided none of the information given in
connection with an application for an initial charitable solicitation permit
has changed, an applicant for renewal shall only be required to verify the same
under penalty of perjury and pay the required permit fee.
   (d)   Before issuing a charitable solicitation permit, the finance
department may investigate the information provided in the application. Unless
upon such inquiry or from such statement the finance department discovers any
false material statement or representation, or that the applicant does not
represent a bona fide charity, as defined herein and in California Business and
Professions Code Section 17510.2, or that the solicitation activities proposed
would violate any provision of California Business and Professions Code Section
17510 et seq., or any other law, the application shall be approved. Each
complete application for a charitable solicitation permit shall be approved or
denied within fourteen days of receipt or the application shall be deemed
approved. The permit shall be valid for one year unless revoked or renewed as
provided herein. If denied, the basis for denial shall be provided in writing
within seven calendar days by mail to the applicant.
   (e)   In accordance with the requirements of California Business and
Professions Code Section 17510.3, upon commencement of any charitable
solicitation, each charitable solicitor shall exhibit to the prospective donor
or purchaser a card entitled "Solicitation or Sale for Charitable Purposes
Card," or alternatively, a solicitation brochure, which card or brochure shall
truthfully contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the charitable campaign, each organization,
or fund on behalf of which all or any part of the money collected will be
utilized for charitable purposes;
      (2)   If there is no organization or fund, the manner in which the money
collected will be utilized for charitable purposes;
      (3)   The amount, stated as a percentage of the total gift or purchase
price, that will be used for charitable purposes;
      (4)   If the charitable solicitor is a paid fundraiser and is paid a set
fee rather than a percentage of the total amount raised, the card or brochure
shall show the total cost that is estimated will be used for direct fundraising
expenses;
      (5)   If the charitable solicitation is not a sales solicitation for
charitable purposes, the card or brochure may state, in place of the amount of
fundraising expenses, that an audited financial statement of these expenses may
be obtained by contacting the organization at the address disclosed;
      (6)   The non-tax-exempt status of the organization or fund, if the
organization or fund for which the money or funds are being solicited does not
have a charitable tax exemption under both federal and state law;
      (7)   The percentage of the total gift, donation, or purchase price which
may be deducted as a charitable contribution under both federal and state law.
If no portion is so deductible, the card or brochure shall state that this
contribution is not tax deductible;
      (8)   If the organization making the charitable solicitation represents
any nongovernmental organization by any name which includes, but is not limited
to, the term "officer," "peace officer," "police," "law enforcement," "reserve
officer," "deputy," "California Highway Patrol," "Highway Patrol," or "deputy
sheriff," or "firefighter," "firemen" or "fire department," which would
reasonably be understood to imply that the organization is composed of law
enforcement or fire department or firefighting personnel, the charitable
solicitor shall give the total number of members in the organization and the
number of members working or living within the county where the charitable
solicitation is being made, and if the solicitation is for advertising, the
statewide circulation of the publication in which the solicited ad will appear;
      (9)   If the organization making the charitable solicitation represents
any nongovernmental organization by any name which includes, but is not limited
to, the term "veteran," or "veterans," which would reasonably be understood to
imply that the organization is composed of veterans, the charitable solicitor
shall give the total number of members in the organization and the number of
members working or living within the county where the solicitation is being
made. This subsection (e)(9) does not apply to federally chartered or state
incorporated veterans' organizations with two hundred or more dues paying
members or to a thrift store operated or controlled by a federally chartered or
state incorporated veterans organization. This subsection (e)(9) does not apply
to any state incorporated community-based organization that provides direct
services to veterans and their families and qualifies as a tax-exempt
organization under Section 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(19) of the Internal Revenue Code
and Section 23701(d) of the California Revenue and Taxation Code;
   (f)   When the charitable solicitation is not a sales solicitation for
charitable purposes, any charitable solicitor who receives no compensation of
any type from, or in connection with, a solicitation by any charitable
organization, may comply with the provisions of subsection (e) of this section,
by providing the name and address of the charitable organization on behalf of
which all or any part of the money collected will be utilized for charitable
purposes, by stating the charitable purpose for which the solicitation is made,
and by stating to the person solicited that information about revenues and
expenses of the organization, including its administration and fundraising
costs, may be obtained by contacting the organization's office at the address
disclosed. The organization shall provide this information to the person
solicited within seven days after receipt of the request;
   A charitable solicitor who receives no compensation of any type from, or in
connection with, a solicitation or sales solicitation by a charitable
organization which has qualified for a tax exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of
the Internal Revenue Code, and who is eighteen years of age or younger shall be
exempt from the provisions of subsection (e) of this section;
   (g)   Each charitable solicitor receiving money or property from any person
as a result of any solicitation shall provide a written receipt to such person.
This receipt shall indicate the amount of money or a description of property
received, as well as the name, business or home address and telephone number of
the charitable solicitor. The receipt shall also state whether or not the money
or property received constitutes a state or federal tax deduction;
   (h)   Each charitable solicitor, or the charity on whose behalf such
solicitation is made, shall maintain full and complete written records of all
money and property received as a result of the permitted charitable
solicitation activities. Such records shall be available for review by the
finance director, or designee, during normal business hours.
(Ord. 520 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.109.030 Identification.
   (a)   Each charitable solicitor who shall actually solicit shall be issued,
and shall maintain in his possession at all times while soliciting, an original
identification card and a driver's license, identification card, or other form
of identification which bears the solicitor's name and photograph. The permit
and identification card shall also state that issuance of such permit does not
constitute an official endorsement by the city of the permittee or of the
subject charity.
   (b)   Solicitors shall display the permit and identification card to, and
allow the same to be examined by, any and all persons to whom any solicitation
is to be made, prior to the time of the solicitation, and to any law
enforcement officer upon request.
   (c)   A charitable solicitor soliciting on behalf of a charitable
organization whose membership is comprised of at least fifteen members at least
seventy-five percent La Mirada residents, shall be deemed to comply with this
section provided each solicitor, while soliciting, is dressed in a recognizable
uniform, or is bearing some other form of conspicuous identification, of such
charitable organization.
(Ord. 520 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.109.040 Manner of solicitation.
   (a)   Solicitations shall not be made by any person under the age of sixteen
unless accompanied by an adult.
   (b)   No person shall solicit between the hours of seven- thirty p.m. and
nine a.m. of the following day.
(Ord. 520 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.109.050 Revocation.
   Any charitable solicitation permit may be revoked or suspended by the
finance director, pending a hearing, when there is probable cause to believe
that any fraud or criminal act has been or is being committed by the permittee
or agents thereof in connection with any permitted solicitation. In all other
cases, where any permittee is found to have included any material misstatement
or misrepresentation in the application, the permit may be revoked or suspended
after a hearing on the matter.
   When a hearing is to be conducted as provided herein, the finance director
shall schedule such hearing to occur between seven and twenty-one calendar
days, and shall provide notice by first class mail of such hearing to the
permittee at the address set forth in the application on file. Said hearing
shall be held before the city manager who shall bear the burden of proof and
his or her decision shall be based upon written findings and shall be final.
(Ord. 520 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.109.060 Appeal.
Any person, business entity or organization aggrieved by a denial of a
charitable solicitation permit may appeal to the city manager by filing a
written request for an administrative hearing with the city clerk within thirty
days after service of notice of the finance director's decision. The city
manager shall bear the burden of proof and no fee shall be charged for such
appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final.
(Ord. 520 § 2 (part), 1998).
9.109.070 Penalty for violation of chapter.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to
violate any provision, or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with any of its requirements
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be
punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person,
firm, partnership or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense
for each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of
this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm,
partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided
in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. The violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through
civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent
injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of
nuisances.
(Ord. 520 §§ 3, 4, 1998).
Chapter 9.110
USE OF CITY-OWNED FACILITIES, RECREATION AND ATHLETIC FACILITIES, AND ADJOINING
OPEN SPACE AREAS RESTRICTED
Sections:
   
9.110.010   Restrictions adopted.
   
9.110.020   Enforcement.
   
9.110.030   Use of public parks--Hours.
9.110.010 Restrictions adopted.
It is unlawful for any person to wilfully violate any rule or regulation
hereinafter established by resolution of the city council, governing the
public's use of city-owned facilities, recreation and athletic facilities, and
adjoining open space areas.
(Ord. 514 § 1 (part), 1997).
9.110.020 Enforcement.
Prior to enforcement of this chapter, any person who is observed violating any
of the rules and regulations applicable to city-owned facilities, recreation
and athletic facilities, and adjoining open space areas, as adopted by the city
council, shall be verbally or in writing advised thereof by an officer or
employee of the city, or law enforcement officer, and such person shall
immediately cease and desist activities constituting the violation, or such
person shall leave the premises. In the event such person does not thereafter
immediately discontinue the activities constituting the violation, or leave the
area, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished
as provided for in this code.
(Ord. 514 § 1 (part), 1997).
9.110.030 Use of public parks--Hours.
Except as specifically permitted by the city council or its designee, no person
shall enter or be within any public park in the city during posted hours of
closure as set by resolution of the city council or when closed to protect
public safety and the period of the temporary closure is posted. Posting shall
consist of posting the hours conspicuously at the entrance to each park.
(Ord. 553 § 1, 2000; Ord. 528 § 1, 1998; Ord. 303 § 1 (part), 1980).
Chapter 9.112
SHOPPING CARTS
Sections:
   
9.112.010   Purpose.
   
9.112.020   Definitions.
   
9.112.030   Removal of shopping carts from public property.
   
9.112.040   Disposal.
   
9.112.050   Tag tampering prohibited.
   
9.112.060   Impound appeal.
   
9.112.070   Unauthorized removal or possession of shopping carts.
   
9.112.080   Penalties applicable to owners of shopping carts.
   
9.112.090   Exemption for retail establishments utilizing cart retrieval
services.
9.112.010 Purpose.
Abandoned shopping carts located outside the premises or parking areas of
retail establishments and on public or private properties and viewable from the
public rights-of-way are injurious to the public health, safety, and welfare
and constitute a public nuisance. This nuisance is caused by persons unlawfully
removing shopping carts from the premises or parking areas of retail
establishments, by certain retail establishments failing to maintain adequate
supervision of their premises and parking areas and failing to implement
effective cart removal prevention programs or cart retrieval programs. The
purpose of this chapter is to establish reasonable regulations for the
collection and impound of abandoned shopping carts and to supplement provisions
of state law regarding the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the
premises and parking areas of retail establishments.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.020 Definitions.
   "Authorized contractor" means a private company providing shopping cart
retrieval services, as designated by the city council.
   "City" means the city of La Mirada or its designated representatives.
   "Owner-identified shopping cart" means a shopping cart that has a
permanently affixed sign that identifies, in accordance with Business and
Professions Code Section 22435.1, the owner of the cart or the retailer, or
both; notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized
removal of the cart from the owner's premises; notifies the public that the
unauthorized removal of the cart from the cart owner's premises or parking area
or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law; and
lists a valid telephone number or address for returning the cart to the owner
or retailer.
   "Person" means an individual or entity.
   "Public property" means all real property in the city in which a public
agency has a fee simple, easement, leasehold interest, or any possessory
interest. This includes but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks and
flood control facilities.
   "Retail establishment" means any establishment utilizing shopping carts
outside of the establishment.
   "Shopping cart" or "cart" means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a
similar device generally used in retail establishment by a customer for the
purpose of transporting goods of any kind.
   "Unidentified shopping cart" means a shopping cart that is not an owner-
identified shopping cart.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.030 Removal of shopping carts from public property.
   (a)   Upon the discovery of an unidentified shopping cart on public
property, the city or its authorized contractor may remove the cart. Such carts
shall be tagged with date and location and shall be impounded for thirty
calendar days at a location selected by the city. A claim for a cart shall be
presented to the city manager or designee, and shall be accompanied by proof of
ownership of the cart. A person demonstrating proof of ownership of a cart
stored by the city shall pay the city's tagging and retrieval fee, as set by
city council resolution, prior to the cart being released.
   (b)   Upon the discovery of any owner-identified shopping cart on public
property, the city or its authorized contractor may remove the cart and
promptly return it to the owner or premises identified thereon, or store the
same for safekeeping and promptly notify the owner where it may be retrieved.
Such safe storage shall not be deemed to be an impoundment, and no tagging and
retrieval fee or civil penalty may accrue as a result thereof.
   Alternatively, any owner-identified shopping cart which is not retrieved
within three business days from the date the owner of the cart, or his or her
agent, receives actual notice including, but not limited to, telephonic notice,
from the city of the shopping cart's discovery and location, may be impounded
and stored in accordance with the provisions of Business and Professions Code
Section 22435.7. Each such cart shall be tagged with the date and location of
impoundment. Pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 22435.7(g)
written notice shall be mailed to the owner of any owner-identified shopping
cart which is impounded pursuant to this section, which shall specify the date
and time of such impoundment, the location where the cart may be retrieved, the
cost of retrieval and that failure to retrieve such cart within thirty calendar
days may result in the cart being disposed of as permitted by law.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to a cart attended by any person who can
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the city or its authorized contractor,
ownership of the shopping cart or written permission of the owner, to have the
cart in his/her possession.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.040 Disposal.
After the expiration of the thirty-day period specified in Section
9.112.030(a), the city, or its authorized contractor with the city's approval,
may sell an unclaimed unidentified shopping cart at public auction or otherwise
dispose of the cart.
After the expiration of the thirty-day period specified in Section
9.112.030(b), the city may sell or otherwise dispose of any unclaimed owner-
identified shopping cart as authorized by Business and Professions Code Section
22435.7(g).
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.050 Tag tampering prohibited.
   (a)   No person shall remove any tag affixed by the city or its authorized
contractor to any shopping cart with the intent of interfering with the
enforcement of this chapter or evading any of its provisions.
   (b)   No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative
of the city or its authorized contractor who is engaged in tagging, removing or
transporting a shopping cart in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.060 Impound appeal.
Any person who can demonstrate that he or she is a cart owner may appeal the
imposition of a tagging and retrieval fee by presenting evidence that the cart
removal and storage was not performed substantially in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Appeals shall be made in writing to the city
manager or designee within ten calendar days of paying the fee. An office
hearing will be held within thirty calendar days of the receipt of such appeal
request. The shopping cart owner or authorized representative may appear and be
heard on the matter. If the city manager or designee determines that the
shopping cart was not removed and stored in substantial accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the tagging and retrieval fee shall be refunded.
The decision of the city manager or designee shall be final.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.070 Unauthorized removal or possession of shopping carts.
It is unlawful to do any of the following acts:
   (1)   Remove an unidentified shopping cart from the premises or parking area
of a retail establishment;
   (2)   Be in possession of an unidentified shopping cart that has been
removed from the premises or the parking area of a retail establishment;
   (3)   Leave or abandon a shopping cart on public or private property and at
a location other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment.
   Any cart in the possession of, or abandoned by, any person found to be in
violation of subsections (1), (2) or (3) above, may be impounded in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Section
9.112.030 applicable to unidentified shopping carts, whether or not such cart
is actually located on public or private property.
   This section shall not apply to any person who can satisfactorily
demonstrate ownership of the shopping cart, or to any person having written
permission of the owner to have the cart in his or her possession.
   Removal, possession and abandonment of owner identified shopping carts,
shall be governed by the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section
22435.2. Any cart in the possession of any person found to be in violation of
Business and Professions Code Section 22435.2 may be impounded by the city
provided, however, that written notice shall be given to the identified owner
of the impoundment of such cart. Provided the owner or representative thereof
makes a proper claim for such cart within thirty calendar days of the date of
mailing of such notice, no costs of retrieval shall be imposed upon such owner
or representative. In the event any such cart remains unretrieved for thirty
days following the mailing of such notice, the city may sell or otherwise
dispose of such cart.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.080 Penalties applicable to owners of shopping carts.
   (a)   Pursuant to the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section
22435.7(f), upon a fourth failure and upon each successive failure thereafter
within any six consecutive month period by an owner of an owner identified
shopping cart, to retrieve any such cart or carts for which notice of discovery
thereof has been given by the city pursuant to this chapter, a civil penalty in
the amount of fifty dollars shall be paid by such owner.
   (b)   Upon a fourth failure and upon each successive failure thereafter
within any six consecutive month period by an owner of an unidentified shopping
cart, to retrieve any such cart or carts within the thirty-day period specified
in Section
9.112.030(b), a civil penalty in the amount of fifty dollars shall be paid by
such owner.
   (c)   No more than one failure to retrieve may accrue for any given day as
to any owner, regardless of the number of such owner's carts retrieved on such
day.
   (d)   Any and all civil penalties authorized by this section shall be deemed
to be imposed without prior notice being given by the city. The city manager or
designee shall maintain records of facts relevant to the imposition of any and
all civil penalties. Within ninety days, and at the city's discretion and
convenience, notice of assessment of a civil penalty or penalties shall be
given to affected shopping cart owners by first class mail addressed to their
respective retail establishments. Such notice shall set forth the date and
circumstances surrounding the imposition of each civil penalty and shall
further state that the amount of the penalty is payable within thirty days of
the date of the notice. Thereafter, each civil penalty imposed shall be paid
within such period unless, within ten calendar days of the date of such notice,
the shopping cart owner files a written appeal with the city council or its
designee. Thereafter, a hearing will be scheduled and conducted within thirty
calendar days at which time the owner or authorized representative may appear
and be heard on the matter. If the city council or designee determines that the
city did not substantially comply with applicable provisions of this chapter,
or finds that any civil penalty was otherwise not properly imposed, the owner
shall not be required to pay such civil penalty. The decision of the city
council or designee shall be final.
   (e)   In the event any civil penalty, not successfully appealed, remains
unpaid after thirty days of the date of the notice thereof, such penalty shall
constitute a civil debt of the shopping cart owner and may be collected as a
contract debt by way of legal action or otherwise as permitted by law.
Furthermore, such civil penalties may be added to any tagging and retrieval
fees which may accrue to such shopping cart owner. In such instance, the entire
amount of tagging and retrieval fees, plus accrued civil penalties shall be
paid prior to any impounded shopping carts being released to such owner.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
9.112.090 Exemption for retail establishments utilizing cart retrieval
services.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any shopping cart owner
which has retained a shopping cart retrieval service as of the day any of the
owner's carts is impounded, and for at least three months prior thereto, shall
not be required to pay a tagging and retrieval fee, nor shall the same be
subject to the accrual of any civil penalties pursuant to this chapter,
provided that throughout such period the city has had written notification that
the shopping cart retrieval service has been ready and willing to retrieve any
of the owner's abandoned shopping carts within twenty-four hours of receipt of
telephonic notice by the city. The burden of establishing such exemption shall
be upon the shopping cart owner.
   This exemption shall not apply, however, if, on three or more prior
occasions within a one-year period, the city has informed a designated shopping
cart retrieval service of the presence of an abandoned shopping cart and the
same has not been removed by the service within twenty-four hours of the city's
notification.
(Ord. 516 § 2 (part), 1997).
Chapter 9.114
NARCOTICS AND GANG-RELATED CRIME PREVENTION PROGRAM
Sections:
   
9.114.010   Definitions.
   
9.114.020   Duties of the landlord.
   
9.114.030   Administrative procedures.
   
9.114.040   Recovery of possession by landlord.
   
9.114.050   Enforcement.
   
9.114.060   Lien authorized.
9.114.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   (a)   "Controlled substance" means any drug, substance, or immediate
precursor, as listed in the Uniform Controlled Substances Act, Health and
Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.
   (b)   "Drug-related nuisance" means any activity related to the possession,
sale, use or manufacture of a controlled substance that creates an unreasonable
interference with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and/or safety of
residents of the premises. Such activity includes, but is not limited to, any
activity commonly associated with illegal drug dealing, such as noise, steady
traffic day and night to a particular unit, barricaded units, the display or
observance of weapons, drug loitering as defined in Health and Safety Code
Section 11532, or other drug-related occurrences which, taken as a whole, tend
to substantially affect or interfere with any tenant's beneficial use and
enjoyment of any rented property.
   (c)   "Gang-related crime" means any crime in which the perpetrator is a
known member of a gang, or any crime motivated by gang membership, in which the
victim or the intended victim of the crime is a known member of a gang.
   (d)   "Illegal drug activity" means a violation of any of the provisions of
Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 11350) or Chapter 6.5 (commencing with
Section 11400) of the Health and Safety Code, or any successor provisions
thereto.
   (e)   "Landlord" means any owner of record, lessor, or sublessor (including
any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or other entity) who receives or is
entitled to receive rent for the use of any rental unit, or the agent,
representative or successor of any of the foregoing.
   (f)   "Premises" means any rental unit and the land on which it and any
other buildings of a complex are located and common areas, including but not
limited to, garage facilities, streets, alleyways, stairwells, elevators, and,
as the context permits or requires, any public or private property which is
immediately adjacent to any of said areas.
   (g)   "Rental unit" means any dwelling as defined in Section 19.104.080 of
this code, including, but not limited to, any single and multi-family
residence, duplex, and/or condominium in the city of La Mirada. This term shall
also include any mobile home, whether rent is paid for the mobile home, the
land upon which the mobile home is located, or both. It shall also mean any
recreational vehicle, as defined in California Civil Code Section 799.24, if
located in a mobile home park or recreational vehicle park, whether rent is
paid for the recreation vehicle, the land upon which it is located, or both.
   (h)   "Tenant" means any tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee or any person
entitled to use or occupancy of a rental unit, or any other person residing in
the rental unit.
(Ord. 530 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.114.020 Duties of the landlord.
A landlord shall not cause or knowingly permit:
   (a)   Any premises under his or her control to be used or maintained for any
illegal drug activity, gang-related crime, or in such manner as to constitute a
drug-related nuisance; or
   (b)   Any tenant to use or occupy premises under the landlord's control, if
the tenant commits, permits, maintains or is involved in any illegal drug
activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises.
(Ord. 530 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.114.030 Administrative Procedures.
The city manager, or his or her designee, may promulgate such administrative
procedures as may be necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 530 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.114.040 Recovery of possession by landlord.
   (a)   Grounds for Eviction. Notwithstanding any provision of this code to
the contrary, a landlord may bring an action to recover possession of a rental
unit upon any of the following grounds:
   (1)   The tenant is committing or permitting to exist any illegal drug
activity, gang-related crime, or drug-related nuisance on the premises; or
   (2)   The tenant has been convicted of a crime wherein the underlying
offense involves illegal drug activity, drug-related nuisance activity or a
gang-related crime on the premises.
(Ord. 530 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.114.050 Enforcement.
   (a)   Provided the owner of record or agent thereof, and any known manager
of a premises has been served with a written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, advising that the sheriff's department or other law
enforcement agency having jurisdiction within the city has determined that the
landlord is in violation of Section
9.114.020 hereof and has failed to comply with the provisions of that section
within ten business days of the date of service of said notice, or to file an
appeal within said period as provided herein, then the city may file an action
for injunctive relief or utilize any other remedy provided by law to compel
compliance, including but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a
nuisance.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, the written notice shall also identify
the offending tenant(s), unit number if applicable, and the specific violation
(s), and shall state the date(s) and time(s) of any observed criminal activity
and any resulting arrest(s), and shall further state that as to such tenant(s)
the landlord is required to serve and diligently prosecute either a three day
notice to quit or a thirty day notice to vacate. The term "diligently
prosecute" shall mean such prosecution by the landlord as is necessary to cause
the subject rental unit to be completely vacated by all occupants. No such
vacated rental unit may be re-rented, leased or otherwise reoccupied by the
prosecuted tenant(s) prior to the expiration of a twelve-month period following
the vacation of the rental unit by the tenant(s).
   (c)   The required notice shall also state that within said ten-day period,
the landlord may file a written appeal of the determination of violation with
the city manager who shall cause the mailer to be set for hearing. Written
notice of the date and time of said hearing shall be served by first class
mail, addressed to the landlord's last known business address. Following the
conclusion of the hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse, or reverse
subject to conditions, the sheriff's department's or other law enforcement
agency's determination of violation. The city manager's decision shall be based
upon written findings and shall be final.
   (d)   In the event no appeal is timely filed or an appeal is denied, the
city may immediately proceed to enforce the provisions of this chapter against
such landlord by way of criminal or civil code enforcement action including an
action for injunctive relief, or by any other remedy provided by law to compel
compliance including, but not limited to, all remedies available to abate a
nuisance.
   (e)   A court rendering a judgment pursuant to this section may, in addition
to any other penalty or remedies provided by law, impose a civil penalty in the
maximum amount permitted by law, payable to the city of La Mirada, and/or
require the payment of the city's attorney's fees, costs of investigation, and
discovery and court costs.
(Ord. 530 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.114.060 Lien authorized.
Any judgment for money, including permitted fees and costs, may be recorded as
a lien against the subject property in an amount not to exceed five thousand
dollars and if multiple defendants exist, they shall be jointly and severally
liable for any payments so ordered.
(Ord. 530 § 1 (part), 1999).
Chapter 9.116
GARAGE SALES
Sections:
   
9.116.010   Definitions.
   
9.116.020   Permit required.
   
9.116.030   Term of permit.
   
9.116.040   Permit--Nontransferable.
   
9.116.050   Display of permit.
   
9.116.060   Manner of sale.
9.116.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, a "garage sale" means the sale or offering for sale of
used goods or other personal property held at a private residence by the
occupants and is limited to the sale of common household goods such as
clothing, interior furnishings, small appliances, toys and other similar items
where such goods are personal property and are set out for the public display
in any open garage, yard or patio of such private residence. "Garage sale" also
means and includes estate sales arising from the death of an occupant of the
property.
(Ord. 538 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.116.020 Permit required.
No person shall conduct, cause, or permit to be conducted a garage sale without
first obtaining a garage sale permit. The fee for such permit shall be in such
amount as is set by resolution of the city council and which shall compensate
the city for the actual costs of the permit processing and enforcement and the
costs of administering this chapter.
(Ord. 538 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.116.030 Term of permit.
   (a)   A permit issued under the provisions of this section will be valid for
a period consisting of two consecutive days. No person will be granted a permit
to conduct more than two garage sales during any calendar year.
   (b)   Any person who has not conducted two garage sales during the preceding
calendar year and who moves to a new residence where two garage sales have been
conducted may be issued a permit for a garage sale to be held at the new
residence location under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   Any person who is acting in a representative capacity of a deceased
person may be issued a permit to conduct a garage sale at the residence of the
deceased. Issuance of such permit shall not limit the right of such person to
obtain a garage sale permit in his or her individual capacity.
(Ord. 538 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.116.040 Permit--Nontransferable.
A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be nontransferable.
(Ord. 538 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.116.050 Display of Permit.
The permit required under this chapter shall be conspicuously displayed on the
premises where the garage sale is conducted during the hours of the garage
sale.
(Ord. 538 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.116.060 Manner of sale.
Garage sales shall be conducted in accordance with the following conditions:
   (a)   Garage sales may only be conducted on Saturdays and Sundays;
   (b)   Each garage sale may be held from eight a.m. to six p.m.;
   (c)   The merchandise offered for sale is limited to the resident's personal
goods. The sale of merchandise acquired for the purpose of resale is
prohibited;
   (d)   One sign with an area not greater than six square feet may be posted
on the private property where the sale is held;
   (e)   Directional signs with an area not greater than six square feet may be
posted on private property other than the property on which the sale will be
held with the property owner's permission and shall be removed promptly at the
conclusion of the garage sale;
   (f)   No signs advertising the garage sale may be erected, or posted on, or
attached to, public property.
(Ord. 538 § 1 (part), 1999).
Chapter 9.117
USE OF THE CITY SEAL AND LOGOS
Sections:
   
9.117.010   Declaration of intent.
   
9.117.020   Prohibited acts.
   
9.117.030   Definitions.
9.117.010 Declaration of intent.
Prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there was no
mechanism by which the city could prevent confusion on the part of the public
if the city's seal or logos are used without authorization so that members of
the general public would reasonably believe that a document bearing the seal or
logos was generated by the city or that the person or entity responsible for
creation of the document is employed by or affiliated with the city. In the
absence of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the public
could become confused, deceived or misled by such documents, which is
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and the effective
operation of the city.
(Ord. 544 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.117.020 Prohibited acts.
No person who is not an officer, employee or agent of the city shall place an
imitation, copy or replication of the city seal or logos on any document so as
to cause another person to reasonably believe that the document bearing the
seal or logos was generated by the city or that the person or entity
responsible for creating the document is employed by or affiliated with the
city. Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties specified in Chapter 1.07
of Title 1 of this municipal code.
(Ord. 544 § 1 (part), 1999).
9.117.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings
set forth below:
   "City" means the city of La Mirada, California.
   "Document" means any handwritten, typewritten, printed, photostatted,
photocopies, or computer generated form of communication or representation,
including letters, words, pictures, symbols or combinations thereof.
   "Logos" means individually and collectively, the logos of the city that is
displayed on official city-approved documents and stationery.
   "Seal" means the seal of the city that are displayed on official city-
approved proclamations, resolutions, the city website, and other documents.
(Ord. 544 § 1 (part), 1999).
Chapter 9.120
FOURTH OF JULY BLOCK PARTIES
Sections:
   
9.120.010   Permit required.
   
9.120.020   Conditions of approval.
   
9.120.030   Operational requirements.
   
9.120.040   Application procedure.
   
9.120.050   Assumption of the risk and liability.
9.120.010 Permit required.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct any block party, as defined herein,
without having first obtained a permit. For purposes of this chapter, the term
"block party" shall mean and include any gathering of persons, for social,
recreational or amusement purposes, upon any public street.
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 2000)
9.120.020 Conditions of approval.
No permit to conduct a block party shall be granted unless, from the
application filed, it appears that the applicant will satisfy or has satisfied
the following conditions:
   (1)   The block party will be conducted on a cul-de-sac street;
   (2)   The block party will be conducted within the hours of three p.m. to
ten p.m. on July 4;
   (3)   At least seven of the ten closest residents have given their written
consent to the block party provided, however, that the precise location of the
party must not be directly in front of the home of any nonconsenting resident
who will be home during the hours of the block party;
   (4)   The applicant is an owner-occupant of a residence of the cul-de-sac
street and is at least eighteen years of age and will serve as the block party
host;
   (5)   The detailed, scaled diagram of the proposed location and layout
required to be provided, depicting any and all tables, chairs or other objects
proposed to be located within the street, clearly demonstrates that emergency
vehicles will be able to easily access any and all residences within the limits
of the block party and the immediate vicinity thereof.
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 2000).
9.120.030 Operational requirements.
In addition to conducting the block party in accordance with the conditions of
approval set forth in Section
9.120.020, each person conducting a block party must comply with the following
requirements:
   (1)   At no time may alcohol be consumed on city property.
   (2)   All evidence of the block party, including all chairs, tables, traffic
cones or delineators, and any and all trash and garbage, must be removed from
the street by midnight on July 4th.
   (3)   "Safe and sane" fireworks may be safely discharged on private property
with the approval of the owner thereof, or on the street within the enclosed
area of the block party.
   (4)   The block party permit must be accessible and available for inspection
by public safety personnel upon request at any time during the party.
   (5)   All vehicles driven by attendees of the party must be lawfully parked
on private or public property.
   (6)   No driveway may be blocked, and free and clear access to the public
streets must be promptly provided any time any resident advises the party host
of the need to exit in his or her vehicle.
   (7)   At no time shall any form of admission fee, regardless of form, be
charged in order to attend or participate in a block party.
   (8)   All provisions of the La Mirada Municipal Code including, but not
limited to, the provisions of Chapter 9.98 relating to admission charge and
loud or unruly parties shall apply at all times while the block party is being
conducted.
   (9)   Traffic cones and/or delineators expressly approved by the city must
be in place at all times during the block party, and in the location approved
and/or required by the city. Such location shall not exceed one hundred feet
from the top of the cul-de-sac.
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 2000).
9.120.040 Application procedure.
   (a)   Each person desiring to conduct a Fourth of July block party must file
with the finance director an application and detailed drawing to scale
containing the information described in Section
9.120.020(5), no less than thirty days prior to July 4th.
   (b)   Each applicant must submit a clean-up deposit in an amount set by
resolution of the city council, which shall be returned provided that all
trash, expended fireworks, and any and all other remnants of the block party
have been timely removed from the area of the street upon which the block party
was conducted.
   (c)   Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application
fee in such amount as may be established and amended from time to time by the
city council
   (d)   Each application must be filed by an owner-occupant, eighteen years of
age or older, whose residence is located on the cul-de-sac street upon which
the block party is to be conducted. The applicant shall be the party host and
shall be personally responsible for the conduct of party attendees.
   (e)   Each applicant shall execute an indemnity protecting the city against
any and all claims arising out of the issuance of a block party permit to the
applicant.
   (f)   Following the filing of a timely, complete application, a city
representative will inspect the proposed location and will prepare a verbal or
written report which shall be considered by the permit review board in
determining whether or not a permit may be granted. Thereafter, the permit
review board will consider all facts set forth in the application to ensure
that, as proposed, the block party would be in compliance with all requirements
of this chapter and that all risks to the public health and safety have been
minimized. Based upon that evaluation, the permit review board shall deny,
grant, or conditionally grant a block party permit, and that decision shall be
final.
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 2000).
9.120.050 Assumption of the risk and liability.
   By filing an application for a block party, each applicant is deemed to: (a)
be aware of all rules and regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to
the conduct of block parties; (b) agree that in the event it is determined that
the manner in which the block party is being conducted violates any provision
of this chapter or the La Mirada Municipal Code, or any other applicable law or
regulation, and provided verbal notice of such violation has been given to the
applicant by any representative of the city or any sheriff's deputy, the
violation will be immediately stopped or the block party will immediately be
discontinued; and (c) agree to assume all risks of liability for loss or damage
to property or persons arising out of the grant of the block party permit and/
or events occurring at the block party.
   Notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary, in the event the
sheriff's department determines that the block party is being conducted in a
manner constituting an immediate threat to the public health, safety or
welfare, the sheriff's department shall be authorized to order the block party
to be immediately terminated, whereupon all attendees shall immediately
disperse and the party host shall promptly restore the area and remove all
evidence of the block party from the street.
(Ord. 546 § 1 (part), 2000).
Chapter 9.124
MAINTENANCE OF FORECLOSED AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
Sections:
   
9.124.010   Findings, purpose and intent.
   
9.124.020   Definitions.
   
9.124.030   Recordation of transfer of loan or deed of trust; assignment of
rents.
   
9.124.040   Registration.
   
9.124.050   Maintenance requirements.
   
9.124.060   Security requirements.
   
9.124.070   Additional authority.
   
9.124.080   Enforcement.
9.124.010 Findings, purpose and intent.
   The city council finds, determines and declares that:
   (a)   The presence of vacant or abandoned residences can lead to
neighborhood decline; and
   (b)   The presence of vacant or abandoned residences can create an
attractive public nuisance; and
   (c)   The presence of vacant or abandoned residences can contribute to lower
property values; and
   (d)   The presence of vacant or abandoned residences can discourage
potential buyers from purchasing a home adjacent to or in neighborhoods with
vacant abandoned residences; and
   (e)   In many instances, the lenders and trustees in foreclosures fail to
adequately maintain and secure these vacant residences; and
   (f)   It is the intent of the city council of the City of La Mirada, in
enacting this chapter, to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the
city and its citizens by protecting its residential neighborhoods from decline
and depreciation.
   (g)   It is the purpose and intent of the city council of the City of La
Mirada through the adoption of this chapter, to establish a registration
program for properties that are vacant or abandoned, due to foreclosure or
otherwise, as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming
blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and the lack of security of
abandoned properties. (Ord. 626, § 1, 2009).
9.124.020 Definitions.
   For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this
chapter are defined as follows:
   (a)   "Abandoned" means a condition in which a property is vacant or
distressed.
   (b)   "Accessible" means capable of being accessed through a compromised or
insecure gate, fence, wall, or entrance, or unsecured or capable of being
breached so as to allow access to the interior space of a structure by
unauthorized persons.
   (c)   "Agreement" means any agreement or written instrument which provides
that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one
owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange of said
property.
   (d)   "Assignment of rents" means an instrument that transfers the
beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender or entity to another.
   (e)   "Beneficiary" means a lender party of a note secured by a deed of
trust.
   (f)   "Buyer" means any person or entity who agrees to transfer anything of
value in consideration for property described in an agreement for sale of said
property.
   (g)   "Days" means consecutive calendar days.
   (h)   "Deed of Trust" means an instrument by which title to real estate is
transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. In the
State of California, the term "deed of trust" is used instead of the term
"mortgage." This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust
(i.e., 2nd trust deed, 3rd trust deed, etc.).
   (i)   "Deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale" means a recorded document that
transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of
trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.
   (j)   "Default" means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation,
monetary or conditional.
   (k)   "Distressed" means a condition in which a property;
      (1)   Is in receipt of a current notice of default or notice of trustee's
sale;
      (2)   Is the subject of a pending tax assessor's lien sale;
      (3)   Is the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained
by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; or
      (4)   Is transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure or sale.
   (l)   "Evidence of vacancy" means any condition that on its own, or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that
the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to,
conditions violating property maintenance standards set forth in this code,
overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or
mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of
trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds
or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with
residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents,
government employees, utility employees or similar persons, that the property
is vacant.
   (m)   "Foreclosure" means the process by which a property, placed as
security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the
trustor defaults.
   (n)   "Local" means within eighty miles of the subject property.
   (o)   "Notice of default" means a recorded notice that a default has
occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with
a trustee's sale.
   (p)   "Out of area" means in excess of eighty (80) miles of the subject
property.
   (q)   "Owner" means any person or entity having a legal or equitable title
or any interest in any property.
   (r)   "Owner of record" means the person currently having record title to
the property at the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office.
   (s)   "Property" and/or "Properties" means any improved or unimproved real
property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed or permitted to be
used for residential purposes, and shall include the buildings and structures
located on such property. This includes any real property being offered for
sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as "residential" whether or not it is
legally permitted or zoned as "residential."
   (t)   "Securing" means such measures as may be directed by the Building
Official or his or her designee that render the property inaccessible to
unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing offences and
walls, chaining or padlocking of gates, the repairing of doors, windows or
other openings.
   (u)   "Trustee" means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of
trust on a property.
   (v)   "Trustor" means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property
to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.
   (w)   "Vacant" means a condition of property in which any building or
structure thereon is not legally occupied. (Ord. 626, § 1, 2009).
9.124.030 Recordation of transfer of loan or deed of trust; assignment of
rents.
   Within thirty days of the purchase or transfer of a loan or deed of trust
secured by property located in the City of La Mirada, the new beneficiary or
trustee shall record, with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office, an
assignment of rents, or similar document, that lists the name of the
corporation or individual, the mailing address and contact phone number of the
new beneficiary or trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with
the loan or deed of trust. (Ord. 626, § 1, 2009).
9.124.040 Registration.
   (a)   Upon default by the trustor, any beneficiary or trustee who holds a
deed of trust on a property located within the City of La Mirada shall perform
an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, prior
to recording a notice of default with the Los Angeles County Recorder's Office.
If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by
this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary or trustee shall, within
thirty days of the inspection, register the property with the building official
or his or her designee on forms provided by the city.
   (b)   The registration form shall contain the name of the beneficiary or
trustee, whether a corporation or an individual, the direct street or office
mailing address of the beneficiary or trustee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact
name and phone number for the beneficiary or trustee, and in the case of a
corporation or out-of-area beneficiary or trustee, the local property
management company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of
the property. A registration fee in such amount as established by resolution of
the city council, and covering the cost of administering the provisions of this
Chapter 9.124, shall be paid annually.
   (c)   A registration shall be valid for one year from the date the
registration form is received by the city. Subsequent registrations are due
annually for as long as the property is abandoned.
   (d)   This chapter shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed
of trust involved in the foreclosure or transferred under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure or sale.
   (e)   Property shall be subject to this chapter's requirements as long as
any such property remains vacant.
   (f)   Any person, firm or corporation that has registered a property under
this chapter must report, in writing, any change of information contained in
the registration within thirty days of the change to the building official.
(Ord. 626, § 1, 2009).
9.124.050 Maintenance requirements.
   (a)   All vacant properties within the city shall be kept free of weeds, dry
brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of papers or documents, except those required by federal, state or
local law, and discarded personal items, including but not limited to,
furniture, clothing, appliances, printed materials or any other items that
contribute to the appearance that the property is abandoned or that constitute
evidence of vacancy.
   (b)   All vacant properties shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or
similar markings by removing or painting over the graffiti with an exterior
grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.
   (c)   Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained
according to the standards set forth in the La Mirada Municipal Code and
applicable land use approvals for the property in question. Maintenance
required for visible front and side yards also includes, but is not limited to,
regular watering, cutting, pruning and mowing of landscape and removal of all
yard trimmings.
   (d)   Pools and spas shall be secured in a safe and lawful condition with
approved fences and devices as required by the city's building code. Pools and
spas shall be drained and kept dry or kept in working order so that the water
remains clear and free of pollutants and debris.
   (e)   All properties shall be maintained in compliance with
Chapter 21.72, and in such a manner so as not to constitute a public nuisance
as described and prohibited in
Chapter 21.15, of this code.
   (f)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to excuse any violation of any
other provision of this code pertaining to maintenance or security of property
or structures. (Ord. 626, §1, 2009).
9.124.060 Security requirements.
   (a)   All vacant and abandoned properties within the city shall be
maintained and secured in such a manner so as not to be accessible to
unauthorized persons. Sufficient security includes, but is not limited to, the
closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and any other opening of such size
that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property, its buildings
or its structures, and when necessary, the replacement or reglazing of windows.
   (b)   If the property is owned by a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary,
trustee or owner, such out-of-area beneficiary, trustee or owner shall hire a
local property management company or other responsible person to monitor the
property for compliance with this chapter.
   (c)   The property shall be posted with the name and twenty- four-hour
contact phone number of the local property management company in a manner
sufficient to allow an individual to contact and notify the local property
management company of any problems or concerns regarding the property. The
posting shall be placed on the interior of a first floor window facing the
street to the front of the property so that it is visible from the street, or
secured to the exterior of the building or structure facing the street to the
front of the property so that it is visible from the street. (Ord. 626, § 1,
2009).
9.124.070 Additional authority.
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this code or otherwise
by law, the building official or his or her designee shall have the authority
to require the beneficiary, trustee, owner, or owner of record of any property
subject to this chapter to implement additional maintenance or security
measures, including but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or
other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site
inspection frequency, or other measures as may be reasonably required to
prevent the decline of the condition or appearance of the property. (Ord. 626,
§ 1, 2009).
9.124.080 Enforcement.
   (a)   The city manager or his or her designee, including but not limited to
police officers, code enforcement officers, or other enforcement officials
shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
   (c)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the enforcement remedies set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be intended to limit any of the civil,
administrative or criminal remedies available to the city, nor shall it be
intended to limit the city from engaging in efforts to obtain voluntary
compliance by means of warnings, notices, administrative citations or
educational programs. (Ord. 626, § 1, 2009)
Chapter 9.128
REWARDS FOR INFORMATION ON CRIMES
Sections:
   
9.128.010   General provisions.
   
9.128.020   Limitations.
   
9.128.030   Period to provide information.
   
9.128.040   Claim information.
   
9.128.050   False claims.
9.128.010 General provisions.
   (a)   California Government Code Section 53069.5 authorizes the city to
offer a reward for information leading to the determination of the identity of,
and the apprehension of, any person or persons whose willful misconduct results
in injury or death to any person or who willfully damages or destroys any
property, within the City of La Mirada. Such misconduct, whether consisting of
one or more criminal acts, is individually and collectively referred to herein
as "criminal incident."
   (b)   If the victim of the criminal incident is any student, or any person
employed by or performing volunteer services for the city, or if the criminal
incident involved willful damage to or destruction of any property of the city
or property of any other local agency (as defined in California Government Code
Section 54951), or state or federal agency located within the city, then the
person(s) convicted of committing the crime(s) shall be liable for any reward
paid pursuant to this section. If that person is an unemancipated minor, then
the parent or guardian of the minor shall be jointly and severally liable for
any reward paid pursuant to this section. (Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 2012).
9.128.020 Limitations.
   Only one (1) reward may be paid per criminal incident. The amount of the
award shall be determined by the city manager and shall not exceed five
thousand dollars ($5,000). In the event of multiple, qualified reward claimants
for the same criminal incident, then the foregoing reward amount shall be
proportionately divided in a manner deemed appropriate by the city manager.
(Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 2012).
9.128.030 Period to provide information.
   For a reward to be considered, the information must be received by the city
or sheriff's department within 90 days of the first date of the reward offer,
unless otherwise extended by the city council. (Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 2012).
9.128.040 Claim information.
   (a)   Any claim for a reward under this section shall be filed with the city
clerk in writing and shall specifically identify the name, address and
telephone number of the claimant. By submitting a claim, the claimant shall be
deemed to acknowledge that the claim may be subject to disclosure under the
California Public Records Act.
   (b)   No claim for a reward shall be allowed by the city unless an
authorized representative of the city:
      (i)   Investigates and verifies the validity of the information provided
and that it reasonably led to the identification, arrest, and conviction; and
      (ii)   Recommends that the reward be paid. (Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 2012).
9.128.050 False claims.
   Any person who submits a claim for a reward pursuant to this chapter, and
who knows, or with ordinary care should know, that any fact stated in the claim
is false, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 662 § 1 (part), 2012).
Chapter 9.132
MAINTAINING AND REGISTERING VACANT OR ABANDONED
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES AND STOREFRONTS
Sections:
   
9.132.010   Vacant or abandoned commercial properties and storefronts.
   
9.132.020   Property owner’s obligation to register a vacant or abandoned
commercial property or storefront.
   
9.132.030   Maintenance of vacant or abandoned commercial properties and
storefronts required.
   
9.132.040   Enforcement.
   
9.132.050   Violations and penalties.
9.132.010 Vacant or abandoned commercial properties and storefronts.
   For purposes of this section, a property or storefront shall be defined as
vacant or abandoned if it is:
   (a)   Unoccupied and unsecured; or
   (b)   Unoccupied and secured by boarding or other similar means; or
   (c)   Unoccupied and has multiple structural or property maintenance related
municipal code violations; or
   (d)   Unoccupied for over thirty consecutive days.
   For the purpose of this section, a commercial property or storefront shall
be any area within a building that may be separately owned, or individually
leased or rented for any purpose other than for a residential use listed in
Section
21.18.020 of this code.
(Ord. 698 § 2 (part), 2017).
9.132.020 Property owner’s obligation to register a vacant or abandoned
commercial property or storefront.
   The owner of a vacant or abandoned commercial property or storefront shall,
within thirty days after it has become vacant or abandoned, register the
commercial property or storefront with the city on a form provided by the city.
The completed form shall be filed with the City Clerk. The form shall:
   (a)   Describe the methods by which the owner has secured the commercial
property or storefront against unauthorized entry;
   (b)   Provide a contact phone number for the commercial property or
storefront owner or party responsible for maintenance of the commercial
property or storefront;
   (c)   State the most recent legal use of the commercial property or
storefront;
   (d)   State the square footage of the commercial property or storefront;
   (e)   Declare any future plans for the commercial property or storefront;
and
   (f)   Provide such other information as the city may require.
   A registration fee in such amount as established by resolution of the City
Council, and covering the costs of administering the provisions of this
chapter, shall be paid annually.
(Ord. 698 § 2 (part), 2017).
9.132.030 Maintenance of vacant or abandoned commercial properties and
storefronts required.
   All vacant or abandoned commercial properties and storefronts within the
city shall be kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk,
debris, building materials, any accumulation of papers or documents, except
those required by federal, state, or local law, and discarded personal items,
including but not limited to, furniture, clothing, appliances, printed
materials, or any other items that contribute to the appearance that the
property is abandoned or that constitute evidence of vacancy.
   All vacant or abandoned commercial properties and storefronts shall be
maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removing or
painting over the graffiti with an exterior grade paint that matches the color
of the exterior of the structure. The owner shall, within twenty-four hours of
being notified or becoming aware of the presence of graffiti, cause the same to
be removed or painted over, as described above.
   Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained according to
the standards set forth in this municipal code and applicable land use
approvals for the property in question. Maintenance required for visible front
and side yards also includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, cutting,
pruning, and mowing of landscape and removal of all trimmings resulting
therefrom.
   The property shall be posted with the name and twenty-four hour contact
phone number of the local property management company or responsible party in a
manner sufficient to allow an individual to contact and notify the local
property management company or responsible party of any problems or concerns
regarding the property. The posting shall be placed on the interior of a first
floor window facing the street to the front of the property so that it is
visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building or
structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible
from the street.
(Ord. 698 § 2 (part), 2017).
9.132.040 Enforcement.
   Los Angeles County Sheriffs’ Deputies, and La Mirada Public Safety and Code
Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter,
respond to complaints of violations, act on observations of violations, and to
issue citations to persons found in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 698 § 2 (part), 2017).
9.132.050 Violations and penalties.
   Each and every person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by an
administrative or criminal citation, or both, and subject to those fines listed
in Municipal Code Section
1.08.090 . Each and every such person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall
be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this
section.
(Ord. 698 § 2 (part), 2017).
Chapter 9.133
CANNABIS PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
9.133.010   Definitions.
   
9.133.020   Prohibited activities.
   
9.133.030   Exceptions.
   
9.133.040   Violation and penalty.
9.133.010 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth in the MAUCRSA and otherwise as set forth below:
   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether
crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis that is
used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes. “Cannabis” does not include
the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant
which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” also does not include industrial
hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.
   “Cannabis product” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing
cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   “Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging,
labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis product
for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes the activities of
any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10
of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of state law
that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses. Commercial cannabis
activity does not include the cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing,
or transportation of cannabis by a qualified patient for his or her personal
medical use so long as the qualified patient does not provide, donate, sell, or
distribute cannabis to any other person. Commercial cannabis activity also does
not include the cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing,
transportation, donation, or provision of cannabis by a primary caregiver,
exclusively for the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified
qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does
not receive remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full
compliance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.765.
   “Concentrated cannabis” means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a
process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the
product’s potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a
concentrate.
   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to
a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer intended to result in the
commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer.
   “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the California
Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.
   “MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act as codified in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, and any
successor provisions thereto, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, association, club,
society, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, sole
proprietorship, collective, cooperative, coop, non-profit, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other organization, group, or entity or combination
of organizations or entities of any kind whatsoever, however formed, as well as
trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and/or assigns, and shall also
include any owner, operator, manager, proprietor, employee, agent, officer,
volunteer, salesperson, trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns. The term “person” shall also include all persons who have an ownership
or leasehold interest in any real property, premises, and/or structures in
which commercial cannabis activity is occurring.
   “Qualified patient” means a person who is entitled to the protections of
California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as the same may be amended
from time to time.
   “Primary caregiver” shall have the same meaning as is defined in California
Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), as the same may be amended from time
to time.
(Ord. 700 § 4 (part), 2017).
9.133.020 Prohibited activities.
   A.   Commercial cannabis activity, whether or not for profit, is prohibited
in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain, conduct, allow, or
engage in commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the city.
   B.   A property owner shall not rent, lease, or otherwise permit any person
or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real
property in the city. A property owner shall not allow any person or business
to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis
activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that
is located in the city.
   C.   Subsection A above shall prohibit all activities for which a state
license is required pursuant to the MAUCRSA, or successor provisions thereto,
as the same may be amended from time to time.
   D.   Subject to the exceptions set forth in Section
9.133.030 below, and to the extent not already prohibited by subsection A
above, all deliveries of cannabis or cannabis products, to or from any location
in the city, are expressly prohibited. No person shall conduct or perform any
delivery of any cannabis or cannabis products, which delivery either originates
or terminates within the city.
(Ord. 700 § 4 (part), 2017).
9.133.030 Exceptions.
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from transporting
cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or
distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does
not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the
city and is otherwise in compliance with state law.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person 21 years of age or
older from engaging in any activities authorized under California Health and
Safety Code Section 11362.1.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any commercial cannabis activity
that the city is required by state law to permit within its jurisdiction
pursuant Business and Professions Code Section 26054(c) and (d), as the same
may be amended from time to time, or any other provision of the MAUCRSA.
(Ord. 700 § 4 (part), 2017).
9.133.040 Violation and penalty.
   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this
Chapter 9.133  of this municipal code, the city attorney or city prosecutor may
bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any
person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought
pursuant to this chapter, a court of competent jurisdiction may award
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding
the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1.08  of this municipal code, no provision of this chapter authorizes a
criminal prosecution, arrest, or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by
Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71, et seq., or Section 11362.1, et seq.,
as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict
between the penalties enumerated under
Chapter 1.08  of this municipal code and any penalties set forth in state law,
the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern.
(Ord. 700 § 4 (part), 2017).
Chapter 9.140
UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF A CATALYTIC CONVERTER PROHIBITED
Sections:
   
9.140.010   Unlawful possession of a catalytic converter.
   
9.140.020   Definitions.
   
9.140.030   Violations.
9.140.010 Unlawful possession of a catalytic converter.
    A.   It shall be unlawful to possess any catalytic converter that is not
attached to a vehicle, unless the possessor has valid documentation or other
proof to verify they are in lawful possession of the catalytic converter.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly falsify or cause to be
falsified any information in any documentation or other proof intended to show
valid proof of ownership or possession of a catalytic converter.
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 2022).
9.140.020 Definitions.
   A.   For purposes of this chapter, "lawful possession" includes:
      1.   Being the lawful owner of the catalytic converter; or
        2.   In possession of the catalytic converter with the lawful owner’s
written consent.
      It is not required to prove the catalytic converter was stolen to
establish the possession is not a "lawful possession".
   B.   For purposes of this chapter, "documentation or other proof" means
written document(s) that clearly identify the vehicle from which the catalytic
converter originated based on the totality of the circumstances, and includes,
but is not limited to, the following types of documents:
      1.   Bill of sale from the original owner with the signature of the
vehicle owner authorizing removal of the catalytic converter, as well as the
name, address, and telephone number of the vehicle owner.
      2.   Documentation from an auto-body shop or similar business proving
that the owner relinquished the catalytic converter to the auto-body shop or
similar business.
      3.   Verifiable electronic communication from the previous owner to the
possessor relinquishing ownership of the catalytic converter.
      4.   Photographs of the vehicle from which the catalytic converter
originated and clearly showing the license plate number and vehicle
identification number (VIN) of the car from which the catalytic converter was
removed.
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 2022).
9.140.030 Violations.
   A.   Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation and shall be subject to all remedies and enforcement measures
authorized by the La Mirada Municipal Code. Each and every catalytic converter
unlawfully possessed is a separate violation of this chapter.
   B.   It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance
with
Chapter 1.08 of Title 1 of this code, for any person to violate any provision
of this chapter.
   C.   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000, imprisonment for a
period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   D.   The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive
remedies. The city is authorized to pursue any proceedings or remedies provided
by law.
(Ord. 724 § 2 (part), 2022).
Title 10
   VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:
   
10.04   Traffic Regulations
   
10.08   Abandoned Vehicles
   
10.12   Speed Limits
   
10.16   Parking
   
10.18   Preferential Parking Program
   
10.20   Parking Lots
   
10.24   Truck Routes
   
10.25   Bicycle Routes and Regulations
   
10.29   Equestrian Regulations
Chapter 10.04
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
10.04.010   Short title.
   
10.04.020   Code adopted.
   
10.04.030   Copies filed.
   
10.04.040   References explained.
   
10.04.050   Section 15.64.060 repealed.
   
10.04.060   Existing regulations adopted.
   
10.04.070   Enforcement.
   
10.04.080   Removal of vehicles.
   
10.04.090   Safe place defined.
   
10.04.100   Report to sheriff of repossessed vehicle.
   
10.04.110   Certain skateboarding practices prohibited.
   
10.04.120   Enforcement of parking regulations--Authorization.
10.04.010 Short title.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "traffic ordinance
of the city of La Mirada," and may be cited as such.
(Prior code § 4500).
10.04.020 Code adopted.
There is adopted as the traffic ordinance of the city, except as it is
hereafter amended, Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code, entitled "Vehicles
and Traffic" (Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 6544, as subsequently amended
inclusive of County Ordinance No. 12299) as in effect as of January 13, 1981.
(Ord. 332 § 1, 1982; prior code § 4501).
10.04.030 Copies filed.
Three copies of Title 15 as adopted in Section
10.04.020 have been deposited with the city clerk and shall be at all times
maintained by the city clerk for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 332 § 2, 1982; prior code § 4502).
10.04.040 References explained.
Title 15 as adopted in Section
10.04.020 is amended as follows:
   (1)   Sections 15.16.010 to 15.16.080 thereof are hereby repealed;
   (2)   Whenever in Title 15 reference is made to the unincorporated area of
the county of Los Angeles, such area shall be deemed to include in its true
geographical location the area of the city of La Mirada;
   (3)   Whenever in Title 15 the words "board" or "commission" are used, they
shall be deemed to refer to the city council of the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 332 § 3, 1982; prior code § 4503).
10.04.050 Section 15.64.060 repealed.
Section 15.64.060 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted by
Section
10.04.020, is repealed.
(Ord. 332 § 4, 1982; Ord. 61 § 2, 1963).
10.04.060 Existing regulations adopted.
It is the intention of the city to provide reasonable traffic and parking
rules, regulations and laws. All intersections, safety zones, crosswalks,
roadway or curb parking, loading, standing regulation markings, stop signs,
boulevard stop signs, speed limit signs, slow signs, danger signs, caution
signs, warning signs, traffic signals, and all other traffic control signs and
devices, parking limit signs, roadway markings relative to traffic direction
and control, and also relative to parking, now painted or marked or posted or
in place or designated or authorized by existing county ordinances, or by the
county road commission, or by the county sheriff or by the State Highway
Patrol, or by other agencies to whom such authority was delegated by the state
or county shall so continue as if found, established or designated by the city
council and shall be enforced pursuant to this chapter as part of the traffic
regulations of the city until the city council adopts rules or regulations, or
laws to the contrary. No person shall drive, stand, or park a vehicle in
violation thereof. The foregoing shall remain enforceable as long as they
conform with the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state of California or
until changed by the city council. Hereafter, future designations relative to
the foregoing shall be done pursuant to authorization given or granted by the
city council to any person, agency or organization.
(Prior code § 4504).
10.04.070 Enforcement.
The enforcement of the rules, regulations and laws of this chapter shall be by
the California State Highway Patrol, the county sheriff's department and the
law enforcement agency of the city.
(Prior code § 4505).
10.04.080 Removal of vehicles.
   (a)   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle
upon any street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours.
   (b)   The sheriff, chief of police or any other regularly employed and
salaried law enforcement officer of the city shall remove or cause to be
removed to a safe place every vehicle which has been parked or left standing
upon a street or highway for seventy-two or more consecutive hours.
(Ord. 84 § 1, 1965; prior code § 4506).
10.04.090 Safe place defined.
As used in this section and Section
10.04.070 the words "safe place" include, but are not limited to any garage,
parking lot, or open space, owned by, maintained by, or under the jurisdiction
of the city, county of Los Angeles, or state of California, and also every
privately owned garage, the owner or proprietor of which will accept such
vehicles.
(Prior code § 4507).
10.04.100 Report to sheriff of repossessed vehicle.
Every person who recovers possession or takes possession of any motor vehicle
under the provisions of any conditional sale or lease contract or chattel
mortgage hereafter termed "repossessed" or "repossessing" shall, within twenty-
four hours after repossessing such vehicle if repossessed within the city,
complete and file in person at the sheriff's station which serves the city, a
form furnished by the sheriff setting forth the following information:
   (1)   The make, model, year, motor number, serial number, and license number
of such vehicle;
   (2)   The name and address of the registered owner of such vehicle;
   (3)   The name and address of the legal owner of such vehicle at the time of
repossession;
   (4)   The name and address of the person or agency repossessing the vehicle;
   (5)   Date, time, and exact location of repossession;
   (6)   Such other information as the sheriff shall find to be necessary for
the identification of vehicles reported to the sheriff as having been stolen,
or necessary for the prevention of fraud in the repossession of motor vehicles.
(Prior code § 4508).
10.04.110 Certain skateboarding practices prohibited.
No person shall ride a skateboard on or across a public street, and no person
shall ride a skateboard while in any way attached to or holding on to any
moving vehicle.
(Ord. 242 § 1, 1975).
10.04.120 Enforcement of parking regulations--Authorization.
Any city employee over eighteen years of age, when designated to do so by the
city administrator, may enforce any parking regulations established by any
ordinance or resolution of the city, including those contained in this code, by
following the procedure for the issuance of citations and giving citation
notices as authorized by California Penal Code Sections 834, 853.5, 853.6 and
853.6a, and by California Vehicle Code Sections 40202 et seq. The city
administrator is authorized to designate any person in the employ of the city
to enforce the parking regulations as herein provided.
(Ord. 491 § 14, 1995; Ord. 259 § 1, 1977).
Chapter 10.08
ABANDONED VEHICLES  1
Sections:
   
10.08.010   Declaration of public nuisance-Definitions.
   
10.08.020   Exclusions.
   
10.08.030   Chapter not exclusive regulation.
   
10.08.040   Right of entry for abatement or removal.
   
10.08.050   Authorization of right of entry.
   
10.08.060   Assessment of administrative costs.
   
10.08.070   Public hearing required--Notice.
   
10.08.080   Notice of hearing to California highway patrol.
   
10.08.090   City council designated as hearing officer-- Procedure.
   
10.08.100   Removal of vehicle--Disposal.
   
10.08.110   Notice of removal and documents of title to department of motor
vehicles.
   
10.08.120   Unpaid administrative and removal costs-Assessment against
property.
   
10.08.130   Abandonment of wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle--
Misdemeanor.
   
10.08.140   Failure or refusal to abate nuisance--Misdemeanor.
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions authorizing cities to abate and remove abandoned,
1 wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts from private or public
  property, see California Vehicle Code § 22660.
10.08.010 Declaration of public nuisance--Definitions.
   In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the
authority granted by the state of California under Section 22660 of the Vehicle
Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts
thereof as public nuisances, the city council hereby makes the following
findings and declarations:
   The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or
inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not
including highways is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the
value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite
plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for
rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general
welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or
inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not
including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby
declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   As used in this chapter:
   (1)   "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be
propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks;
   (2)   "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained
and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway
includes street;
   (3)   "Public property" does not include "highway."
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4400).
10.08.020 Exclusions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
   (1)   A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other
public or private property; or
   (2)   A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler,
licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is
necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial
enterprise;
   (3)   A vehicle or part thereof which is parked or stored in a lawful manner
on private property and is not plainly visible from a public street and is not
parked or stored in the front or side yard setback area of such private
property.
   Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or
private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 22650) of Division II of the Vehicle Code and this
chapter.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4401).
10.08.030 Chapter not exclusive regulation.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition
to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter
enacted by this city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having
jurisdiction.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4402).
10.08.040 Right of entry for abatement or removal.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be
administered and enforced by the sheriff's office. In the enforcement of this
chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property
to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity
of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof
declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4403).
10.08.050 Authorization of right of entry.
When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person
or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private
property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or
parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4404).
10.08.060 Assessment of administrative costs.
The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be
assessed as administrative costs under this chapter.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4405).
10.08.070 Public hearing required--Notice.
A public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of the
vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal
of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located.
Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing by
certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the owner of the land as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and
legal owner of record unless the vehicle is in such condition that
identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If any of the
foregoing notices are returned undelivered by the United States Post Office,
the hearing shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date
of such return.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4406).
10.08.080 Notice of hearing to California highway patrol.
Notice of hearing shall also be given to the California Highway Patrol
identifying the vehicle or part hereof proposed for removal, such notice to be
mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4407).
10.08.090 City council designated as hearing officer-- Procedure.
   (a)   All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city council
which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and
testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof
and the circumstances concerning its location on private property or public
property. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of
evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in
person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration
at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the
land, with his reasons for such denial.
   (b)   The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action
as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of
this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof
if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the
public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or part thereof has
been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public
property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and
disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and
the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on
which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall
include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct
identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the
site.
   (c)   If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the
land without the consent of the land owner and that he was not subsequently
acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not assess costs of
administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land
owner.
   (d)   If an interested party makes a written presentation to the city
council but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4408).
10.08.100 Removal of vehicle--Disposal.
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to
be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the
decision if such notice is required by Section
10.08.090, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing
removal following appeal, the vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by
removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has
been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4409).
10.08.110 Notice of removal and documents of title to department of motor
vehicles.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof,
notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the
vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to
the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4410).
10.08.120 Unpaid administrative and removal costs-Assessment against property.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against
the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section
10.08.090 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, such costs
shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the
Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection.
The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4411).
10.08.130 Abandonment or wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle--
Misdemeanor.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or
leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or
unlicensed vehicle or part thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public
property not including highways within the city for a period in excess of six
days unless such vehicle or part thereof is completely enclosed within a
building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or
other public or private property or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in
a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a
licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard, or unless such
vehicle or part thereof is parked or stored in a lawful manner on private
property and such vehicle or part thereof is not plainly visible from a public
street and is not parked or stored in the front or side yard setback area of
such private property.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4412).
10.08.140 Failure or refusal to abate nuisance--Misdemeanor.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an
abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse
to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement
provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable.
(Ord. 131 § 1 (part), 1968; prior code § 4413).
Chapter 10.12
SPEED LIMITS
Sections:
   
10.12.010   Speed limits specified for certain streets.
   
10.12.020   Speed limits specified for the purposes of electronic enforcement.
   
10.12.030   Findings and direction to traffic engineer.
10.12.010 Speed limits specified for certain streets.
The city council hereby determines upon the basis of an engineering and traffic
survey that the speed permitted by state law is greater than is reasonable or
safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets or portions thereof
referred to below, and it is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limits
as to such streets or portions thereof shall be designated below when signs are
erected giving notice thereof.
 
Name of Street or                                         Declared Prima Facie
Portion Affected                                          Speed Limit
                                                          (miles per hour)
Canary Avenue - Gannet Street to southerly terminus of    25
Canary Avenue
Gannet Street - Canary Avenue to westerly city limits     25
Gateway Drive                                             25
Heron Avenue - Macaw Street to Phoebe Avenue              25
Industry Circle                                           25
Macaw Street - Heron Avenue to easterly terminus of Macaw 25
Street
 
(Ord. 592 § 3 (part), 2005).
10.12.020 Speed limits specified for the purposes of electronic enforcement.
The City Council hereby determines upon the basis of an Engineering and Traffic
Survey that the speed permitted by state law is greater than is reasonable or
safe under the conditions found to exist upon the streets or portions thereof
referred to below. The City of La Mirada uses laser/radar enforcement on most
arterial highways and major collector streets. Section 40802 of the California
Vehicle Code requires that electronic enforcement of speed limits on these
streets be justified by an Engineering and Traffic Survey conducted within the
last seven years. The speeds set forth herein are based on speed checks of the
85th percentile, collision rates, roadside developments and average daily
traffic. It is hereby declared that the prima facie speed limits as to such
streets or portions thereof as designated below when signs are erected giving
notice thereof.
Name of Street or  Declared Prima Facie
Portion Affected   Speed Limit
                   (miles per hour)
Name of Street or                         Declared Prima Facie
Portion Affected                          Speed Limit
                                          (miles per hour)
Adelfa Drive (Between Rosecrans Avenue    35 mph
and Santa Gertrudes Avenue)
Alicante Road (Between La Mirada          35 mph and 25 mph near Behringer Park
Boulevard and Hillsborough Drive)
Alondra Boulevard (Between Valley View    45 mph
Avenue and La Mirada Boulevard)
Artesia Boulevard (Between Valley View    45 mph
Avenue and Knott Avenue)
Avenida San Martin-Highpoint Drive
(Between Hillsborough Drive (0.25 miles
north of Alicante Road)and Hillsborough   35 mph
Drive (0.25 miles west of Beach
Boulevard)
Biola Avenue (Between Imperial Highway    30 mph
and Stage Road)
Desman Road (Between Trojan Way and 0.73  35 mph
miles east of Trojan Way)
Firestone Boulevard North (Between Valley 25 mph
View Avenue and Phoebe Avenue)
Firestone Boulevard North (Between Phoebe 40 mph
Avenue and Knott Avenue)
Foster Road (Between Marquardt Avenue and 25 mph
Valley View Avenue)
Foster Road (Between La Mirada Boulevard  40 mph and 25 mph in school zone
and Santa Gertrudes Avenue)
Hillsborough Drive (Between Alicante Road 40 mph
and Beach Boulevard)
Imperial Highway (Between Los Angeles
County boundary east of Duffield Avenue   45 mph
and La Habra City boundary east of
Tigrina Avenue)
Knott Avenue (Between Desman Road and     40 mph
Firestone Boulevard North)
La Mirada Boulevard (Between
Unincorporated Los Angeles County         40 mph
boundary at Leffingwell Road and Buena
Park City boundary at Alondra Boulevard)
Leffingwell Road (Between Telegraph Road  45 mph
and Scott Avenue
Northam Street (Between Trojan Way and    35 mph
Desman Road)
Phoebe Avenue (Between Alondra Boulevard  35 mph
and Firestone Boulevard North)
Rosecrans Avenue (Between City of Santa
Fe Springs boundary 1,500 feet west of
Valley View Avenue and Fullerton City     45 mph
boundary at 500 feet east of Beach
Boulevard)
Santa Gertrudes Avenue (Between
Unincorporated Los Angeles County         45 mph
boundary at Lemon Drive/Ocean Avenue and
La Mirada Boulevard)
Stage Road (Between Santa Fe Springs City
boundary at Valley View Avenue and Buena  45 mph
Park City boundary east of Barbata Road)
Telegraph Road (Between Leffingwell Road  45 mph
and Imperial Highway)
Trojan Way (Between Alondra Boulevard and 40 mph
Firestone Boulevard North)
Valley View Avenue (Between Imperial      45 mph
Highway and Artesia Boulevard)
 
(Ord. 653, § 3, 2012; Ord. 592 § 3 (part), 2005; Ord. 709 § 2, 2019).
10.12.030 Findings and direction to traffic engineer.
   (a)   Both sixty-five and fifty-five miles per hour are speeds which are
more than reasonable or safe for the streets specified in this chapter.
   (b)   The speeds specified in this chapter are the prima facie speeds which
are most appropriate to facilitate the orderly movement of traffic and are
speed limits which are reasonable and safe.
   (c)   The traffic engineer or designee thereof is authorized and directed to
install and maintain appropriate signs upon the street, or portions thereof,
specified in this chapter, giving notice of the prima facie speed limits
declared herein.
(Ord. 592 § 3 (part), 2005).
Chapter 10.16
PARKING  *
Sections:
   
10.16.010   Hours.
   
10.16.020   Vehicle restrictions.
   
10.16.030   Vehicle and motor vehicle defined.
   
10.16.040   Parking of trailers and semitrailers prohibited.
   
10.16.050   Parking regulations--La Mirada Mall.
   
10.16.055   Parking regulations--City property.
   
10.16.060   Regulation of parking in city-owned off-street parking facilities
and public parks.
   
10.16.065   Use of vehicles for human habitation on public property.
   
10.16.070   Authority to tow vehicles.
   
10.16.080   Parking regulations--Curb markings.
   
10.16.090   Parking restrictions applicable to nonconforming vehicles on city
streets.
 
Notes
* For statutory provisions authorizing the regulation of parking by local
  authorities, see Veh. Code 22506 and 22507.
10.16.010 Hours.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of
Chapter 10.04  to the contrary, it is unlawful for any person to park any
vehicle or motor vehicle between the hours of two a.m. to six a.m., of any day,
on any paved portion of a major or secondary street or highway. "Major or
secondary street or highway" means those streets and highways as shown. and
designated as major or secondary streets or highways on the master plan of
streets and highways as adopted for the city.
(Ord. 61 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 4510).
10.16.020 Vehicle restrictions.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of
Chapter 10.04 to the contrary, it is unlawful for any person to park:
   (1)   Any motor vehicle over six thousand pounds gross weight; or
   (2)   Any motor vehicle over seven feet in width; or
   (3)   Any vehicle which is not a motor vehicle;
   (4)   Any vehicle or motor vehicle which has been immobilized by the removal
of any tire, wheel or other part thereof, or which has been immobilized by the
use of blocks or other supporting or arresting devices, on any public street or
highway between the hours of two a.m. to six a.m. of any day.
   The provisions of subsection (4) shall not apply to any vehicle receiving
emergency roadside repairs for a period not exceeding one hour.
(Ord. 61 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 4511).
10.16.030 Vehicle and motor vehicle defined.
   "Vehicle" and "motor vehicle," as used in Sections
10.16.010 and
10.16.020, have the same definitions therefor and mean the same as defined by
Sections 415 and 670 of the Vehicle Code of the state.
(Ord. 61 § 1 (part), 1963; prior code § 4512).
10.16.040 Parking of trailer and semitrailers prohibited.
   No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any semitrailer
or trailer shall park or permit the parking of such vehicle upon any public
street or alley unless such vehicle (semitrailer or trailer) is at all times
while so parked attached to a motor truck, motor vehicle or truck tractor
capable of moving such trailer or semitrailer upon the public streets, highways
or alleys in a reasonable and lawful manner. As used in this section,
"semitrailer," "trailer," "park," "vehicle," "motor truck," "motor vehicle" and
"truck tractor" shall have the same definitions therefor and mean the same as
such words are defined in Division 1 of the Vehicle Code of the state.
(Ord. 236 § 1, 1975).
10.16.050 Parking regulations--La Mirada Mall.
   (a)   The city council finds and declares that there is and are privately
owned and maintained off-street parking facilities, located at the La Mirada
Mall, between Rosecrans Avenue, Adelfa Drive, Ocaso Avenue and La Mirada
Boulevard, generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular
parking.
   (b)   Sections 22350, 22507.8, 23103 and 23109 of the Vehicle Code shall
apply to the off-street parking facility (La Mirada Mall), as more particularly
described in subsection (a) of this section.
   (c)   The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not
apply to any facility unless the owner or operator has caused to be posted in a
conspicuous place at each entrance to such off-street parking facility a
notice, not less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not
less than one inch in height, to the effect that such off-street parking
facility is subject to public traffic regulation and control.
(Ord. 262 § 1, 1977).
10.16.055 Parking regulations--City property.
   It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle at any
off-street parking facility owned or operated by the city in a stall or space
designated for physically handicapped persons, if, immediately adjacent to and
visible from such stall or space, there is posted a sign consisting of a
profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background,
unless the vehicle displays either one of the distinguishing license plates or
a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code or
to disabled veterans, as specified in Section 9105 of the California Vehicle
Code.
(Ord. 262 § 2, 1977).
10.16.060 Regulation of parking in city-owned off-street parking facilities and
public parks.
   (a)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, other than a city-
owned vehicle, in any city-owned parking facility in any public park within the
city between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m.
   (b)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, other than a city-
owned vehicle, in any city-owned off-street parking facility between the hours
of twelve midnight and six a.m.
     (c)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle, other than a city-
owned vehicle, in any space designated "City Business Use Only," within the
City Hall North parking lot, Monday through Friday between the hours of six
a.m. and five-thirty p.m., other than for the purpose of conducting business
with a city or library office, or attending a city or library sponsored event.
(Ord. 518 § 1, 1998; Ord. 375 § 1, 1986; Ord. 325 § 2, 1982).
10.16.065 Use of vehicles for human habitation on public property.
It is unlawful for any person to use any vehicle, recreational vehicle, or
temporary recreational vehicle, for human habitation on any public street or
alley, city parking lot, city right-of-way, or public property without the
prior, written approval fo the City Manager, or their designee. (Ord. 741, § 2,
2025).
10.16.070 Authority to tow vehicles.
Any vehicle, other than a city-owned vehicle, standing, stopped or parked in
violation of Section
10.16.060 shall be subject to being towed away by any peace officer or other
authorized employee of the city.
(Ord. 325 § 3, 1982).
10.16.080 Parking regulations--Curb markings.
   (a)   The city administrator is authorized, subject to the provisions and
limitations of this code, to place, and when required herein shall place, the
following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said
curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:
      (1)   RED shall mean no standing or parking at any time except as
permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone
marked or signed as a bus zone.
      (2)   YELLOW shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time of
any day except that loading or unloading of passengers for a period not to
exceed three minutes, and loading or unloading of materials for a period not to
exceed twenty minutes, are permitted.
      (3)   WHITE shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose
other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing
mail in an adjacent mail box, and in such cases for a period of time not to
exceed three minutes. Such restrictions shall apply any time of any day.
      (4)   GREEN shall mean no standing or parking for longer than twenty
minutes at any time of any day.
      (5)   BLUE indicates parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of
physically handicapped persons.
   (b)   When the city administrator, as authorized, has caused curb markings
to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to such
legible curb marking in violation of such markings.
(Ord. 331 § 2, 1982).
10.16.090 Parking restrictions applicable to nonconforming vehicles on city
streets.
   (a)   For purposes of this Section
10.16.090, a “nonconforming vehicle” means and refers to any vehicle (including
recreational vehicle), trailer, tractor-trailer, or any other combination of
vehicle and trailer, when any part of such vehicle, trailer, tractor-trailer,
or other combination of vehicle and trailer, together with all fixtures,
accessories, or property affixed thereto (other than single element radio
antennas), measures more than:
      (i)   Eight feet in width; or
      (ii)   Seven and one-half feet in height; or
      (iii)   Twenty feet in length.
   (b)   No owner or operator of any nonconforming vehicle shall park, cause,
or allow to be parked such nonconforming vehicle on any highway, street, alley,
public way, or public place within any zoning district of the city, at any
time, without displaying a valid parking permit issued specifically for the
nonconforming vehicle pursuant to this Section
10.16.090 (“parking permit” herein). Issuance of a parking permit may be
subject to payment of a fee in such amount as established by resolution of the
City Council.
   (c)   The restrictions of this section shall not apply to any vehicle
otherwise authorized to park on city streets by express provision of state or
federal law (e.g., licensed delivery vehicles while lawfully engaged in
delivery activities).
   (d)   A city resident may obtain a parking permit authorizing temporary
parking of a non-conforming vehicle on a highway, street, alley, public way, or
public place where and when vehicle parking is otherwise permitted, subject to
the provisions of subsection (e), below. Such parking permit shall be valid for
a period of seventy-two consecutive hours. A nonconforming vehicle may be
issued up to twenty permits per city residential address within any calendar
year, and permits may be used consecutively for a maximum of two (2), seventy-
two hour periods. A valid and current parking permit authorizes parking only
during the specific 72-hour period indicated on the permit.
   (e)   When parked pursuant to a parking permit, a nonconforming vehicle must
otherwise be parked legally, and any portion of the vehicle must be within one
hundred feet of the permittee’s residential property line. A nonconforming
vehicle must comply with street sweeping and other applicable parking
regulations at all times. A current and valid parking permit must be displayed
in the windshield area in order to be deemed effective. No utilities, such as
electrical cords, which are used by or connected to the nonconforming vehicle,
may cross the public right-of-way while the vehicle is parked.
   (f)   Possession or display of a parking permit shall not excuse any
violation of any other provision of law or this code.
   (g)   It is unlawful for any person to transfer, convey, or sell any parking
permit and any such transfer, conveyance, or sale shall immediately invalidate
the parking permit.
   (h)   Any person found by substantial evidence to have violated this Section
10.16.090 three or more times within any one-year period may be denied issuance
of a parking permit for up to six months.
   (i)   Use of a parking permit in violation of any provision of this code
shall result in the immediate invalidation of such permit.
   (j)   Violation of this Section 10.16.090 is punishable as an infraction.
See
Chapter 1.08 of this municipal code.
(Ord. 696 § 2, 2017).
Chapter 10.18
PREFERENTIAL PARKING PROGRAM
Sections:
   
10.18.010   Definitions.
   
10.18.020   Establishment of districts.
   
10.18.030   Issuance of permits.
   
10.18.040   Posting signs in preferential parking districts.
   
10.18.050   Exemption from parking restrictions.
   
10.18.060   Vehicles excepted from this chapter.
   
10.18.070   Application for and term of permit.
   
10.18.080   Prohibited activities.
   
10.18.090   Permit revocation.
   
10.18.100   Guest permits.
   
10.18.110   Dissolving a district.
   
10.18.120   Penalties.
10.18.010 Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   (a)   "Dwelling unit" means a house, apartment, condominium, mobilehome or
other type of residence, in conformance with the city's zoning ordinance and
related zoning maps, having an address assigned consistent with the house
numbering maps maintained by the city. An apartment having numbers or letters
assigned in addition to the street address shall be deemed to be a dwelling
unit.
   (b)   "Guest" means any person visiting or intending to visit, for any
purpose, either a resident or merchant located in a preferential parking
district.
   (c)   "Merchant" means a person who, as proprietor, operates a commercial
business involved in the retailing of goods or services within a preferential
parking district.
   (d)   "Permit" means a permit issued to an individual to park in a
preferential parking district in the city.
   (e)   "Preferential parking district" or "district" means certain streets or
portions thereof, including dwelling units and businesses adjacent thereto,
designated by the resolution establishing the district, wherein vehicles
displaying a valid permit applicable to that district shall be exempt from
parking restrictions established pursuant to this chapter.
   (f)   "Resident" means a person who lives in a dwelling unit located in a
preferential parking district.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.020 Establishment of districts.
The city council may, by resolution, and at its discretion or upon receipt of a
petition signed by no less than two-thirds of all property owners of record
and/or lawful lessees of properties comprising all developed frontage of the
street or streets proposed for designation, designate a street or portion
thereof, together with dwelling units and/or businesses adjacent thereto, as a
preferential parking district. Any person signing such a petition may be
required to provide satisfactory evidence that he or she satisfies the
requirements of this section.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.030 Issuance of permits.
   (a)   Permits shall be issued by the city manager or his or her designee
("city manager" herein in this chapter). Each permit issued shall remain
property of the city at all times.
   (b)   The number of permits to be issued to any one dwelling unit or to any
merchant's business establishment, including its employees, shall be determined
by the number of residents and merchants, as well as the parking conditions
within each district, and shall be set forth in the resolution establishing the
district.
   (c)   Permits may be issued only to the following persons: residents,
merchants, employees of merchants, or guests within specified districts.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.040 Posting signs in preferential parking districts.
Upon the adoption by the city council of a resolution designating a
preferential parking district and the specific parking regulations applicable
thereto, the city manager shall cause signs to be erected in the district,
indicating prominently thereon the parking restrictions and the fact that motor
vehicles with valid permits shall be exempt therefrom.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.050 Exemption from parking restrictions.
   (a)   A motor vehicle displaying a valid permit affixed to the vehicle's
interior rear-view mirror may park or be parked in the district for which the
permit is issued without being subject to parking restrictions in this chapter
or the resolution establishing the preferential parking district; provided,
however, that nothing herein shall affect or excuse a violation of any other
provision of this code or the California Vehicle Code applicable to parking of
motor vehicles.
   (b)   A preferential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the
permittee an on-street parking space within any district.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.060 Vehicles excepted from this chapter.
No person shall, without a permit, park any motor vehicle in a preferential
parking district in violation of any parking restrictions set forth herein or
in a resolution establishing a preferential parking district, except for the
following:
   (a)   Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, fuel or delivery vehicles doing
business in the district.
   (b)   Vehicles delivering life support and health commodities to residential
areas or schools located in the preferential parking district.
   (c)   Police vehicles and other public safety or emergency vehicles operated
by or under the authority of a governmental entity while engaged in the
performance of official duties.
   (d)   Any other vehicle expressly authorized by law to park within the
district, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
10.18.070 Application for and term of permit.
   (a)   Each person desiring to obtain a permit shall submit an application on
such form as may be provided by the city, together with the filing fee as
established by resolution of the city council. No permit shall be issued unless
the applicant is at least eighteen years of age, possesses a valid California
driver's license, and is a resident or merchant within the district to be
established. Residency shall be established by a valid driver's license. Permit
issuance is subject to terms and conditions as may be set forth in this chapter
or in the resolution establishing the district.
   (b)   Each permit shall be valid for the period set forth in the resolution
establishing the district, and may be renewed in accordance with procedures set
forth in that resolution or in the manner provided for a new permit if no such
procedures have been established.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.080 Prohibited activities.
   (a)   Unless exempted by provisions of this chapter, no person shall park a
motor vehicle in any preferential parking district in violation of any parking
restrictions set forth in this chapter or resolution establishing a
preferential parking district. A violation of subsections (b), (c), (d), or (e)
of this section shall constitute an infraction.
   (b)   No person shall falsely represent himself/herself as eligible for a
parking permit or furnish false information to the city manager in an
application for a permit.
   (c)   No permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall thereafter be
assigned, transferred or used for any consideration, monetary or otherwise.
Only the person to whom a permit has been issued may use the permit.
   (d)   No person shall copy, produce or create a facsimile or counterfeit
parking permit, nor shall any person use or display a facsimile or counterfeit
preferential parking district permit.
   (e)   No person shall display a permit that has been revoked.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.090 Permit revocation.
   (a)   The permit of any permittee who has violated the provisions of
subsection (b), (c) or (d) of section
10.18.080 may be revoked following written notice by the city of the permit
revocation. Upon notification of such revocation, the permittee shall, within
fifteen business days of the date of such notice, either surrender the permit
to the city manager or file a written request with the city clerk for a hearing
before the city manager or designated representative.
   (b)   The written request must be received within said fifteen-day period to
be considered timely, and upon receipt of a timely request, the revocation
shall be stayed pending a final decision following the hearing
   (c)   A hearing shall be held by the city manager, unless continued by
agreement, no less than ten business days after the date notice of the hearing
is mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the permittee. At the
hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the permit
should be revoked.
   (d)   The city manager may give oral notice of the decision at the close of
the hearing, or may send notice of the decision by mail to the permittee. The
decision of the city manager shall be final. If the decision to revoke is
sustained following the hearing, the permittee shall, within twenty-four hours,
surrender the permit to the city clerk.
   (e)   Any revoked permit not timely surrendered shall immediately be deemed
null and void, and of no force or effect.
   (f)   No permittee who has had a permit revoked may re-apply for another
permit for twenty-four months following the effective date of the revocation.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.100 Guest permits.
The rules governing the issuance of guest permits shall be as set forth in the
resolution establishing the district.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.110 Dissolving a district.
The procedures set forth in Section
10.18.020 of this chapter shall be utilized by the city council in determining
whether to dissolve a preferential parking district.
(Ord. 583 § 1 (part), 2003)
10.18.120 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail
to comply with any of the requirements of subsections (b) through (e) of
Section
10.18.080. Any person violating any said subsections or failing to comply with
any of their requirements shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and upon
conviction thereof shall be punishable by: (a) a fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars for a first violation; (b) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for
a second violation within one year; or (c) a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars for each additional violation within one year.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil
process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction, or
in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 583 §§ 2, 3, 2003)
Chapter 10.20
PARKING LOTS
Sections:
   
10.20.010   Premises defined.
   
10.20.020   Conduct with motor vehicle prohibited.
   
10.20.030   Deposit of refuse prohibited.
   
10.20.040   Parking and leaving vehicle prohibited.
   
10.20.050   Entry without business purpose prohibited.
   
10.20.060   Possession of open alcoholic beverages prohibited.
   
10.20.070   Interference with use of premises.
   
10.20.080   Signs permitted.
   
10.20.090   Violation of civil rights.
10.20.010 Premises defined.
As used in this chapter, "premises" means any property within the city which is
commercially zoned or used, and shall also include parking lots which are
appurtenant to or used in conjunction with any commercially zoned or used
properties.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4170).
10.20.020 Conduct with motor vehicle prohibited.
No person on any premises shall race or accelerate the motor of any vehicle, or
bring to a sudden start or stop any motor vehicle, or blow or honk the horn of
any motor vehicle, except where reasonably necessary in the operation thereof.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4171).
10.20.030 Deposit of refuse prohibited.
No person shall place, throw or deposit any garbage, refuse or waste material
upon, in or outside of any premises, except in waste or refuse receptacles
provided therefor on the premises.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4172).
10.20.040 Parking and leaving vehicle prohibited.
No person shall enter any premises in a motor vehicle of any description, park
the vehicle and leave the premises, without obtaining the consent of the
permittee or owner of the premises.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4173).
10.20.050 Entry without business purpose prohibited.
No person shall enter any premises in a motor vehicle except for the purpose of
conducting business with the permittee, owner, manager or proprietor thereof,
and no such person shall enter the premises for the primary purpose of cruising
a motor vehicle on the premises, racing a motor vehicle on the premises, or as
a short cut to another street or alley, or for the purpose of annoying or
endangering any person or persons or other vehicle or vehicles lawfully on the
premises.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4174).
10.20.060 Possession of open alcoholic beverages prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person on any premises to have in his possession any
container, containing any alcoholic beverage which has been opened, or a seal
broken, or the contents of which have been partially removed. This section does
not apply within premises licensed under Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, nor to
anyone keeping an alcoholic beverage in a vehicle in the manner authorized by
the Vehicle Code of the state of California.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4175).
10.20.070 Interference with use of premises.
A person remaining on any premises after being asked by the permittee,
proprietor, manager or employee thereof to leave and refusing to do so is
guilty of a misdemeanor. It is unlawful for a group of two or more persons to
loiter on any of the premises.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4176).
10.20.080 Signs permitted.
Persons owning, operating, .managing or conducting such premises may, but shall
not be required to, place signs upon the premises giving notice of the
provisions of Sections
10.20.010 through
10.20.080. Enforcement of such sections shall not be dependent upon the
placement of any such signs.
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4177).
10.20.090 Violation of civil rights.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the denial
to any person of those rights guaranteed by the Unruh Civil Rights Act (Civil
Code Sections 51 et seq.).
(Ord. 126 § 1 (part), 1967; prior code § 4178).
Chapter 10.24
TRUCK ROUTES
Sections:
   
10.24.010   Designation.
   
10.24.020   Driving on required when.
   
10.24.030   Streets designated.
10.24.010 Designation.
Whenever in this code, any street or portion thereof is designated or described
as a street the use of which is permitted by any commercial vehicle exceeding a
maximum gross weight limit of six thousand pounds, the city manager shall
designate such street or portion thereof by appropriate signs as "truck traffic
routes" for the movement of commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum gross
weight limit of six thousand pounds.
(Ord. 388 § l, 1986; Ord. 75 § 1 (part), 1964; Ord. 22 § 1 (part), 1961; prior
code § 4600).
10.24.020 Driving on required route.
When any such truck traffic route or routes are established and designated by
appropriate signs, no person shall drive or park any commercial vehicle
exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of six thousand pounds on any street or
portion of a street except those so designated as "truck traffic routes,"
except as permitted by Section 35703 of the Vehicle Code of the state of
California. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to passenger buses
under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 1031 to 1036, inclusive, of the Public Utilities Code.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any state highway (Beach
Boulevard and Santa Ana Freeway).
(Ord. 388 § 2, 1986; Ord. 75 § 1 (part), 1964; Ord. 22 § 1 (part), 1961; prior
code § 4601).
10.24.030 Streets designated.
The following streets and parts of streets are declared to be truck traffic
routes for the movement of commercial vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight
of six thousand pounds:
   (1)   Valley View Avenue;
   (2)   Imperial Highway;
   (3)   Leffingwell Road;
   (4)   Telegraph Road;
   (5)   Artesia Boulevard;
   (6)   Beach Boulevard;
   (7)   Firestone Boulevard, north;
   (8)   Firestone Boulevard, south.
(Ord. 388 § 3, 1986; Ord. 75 § 1 (part), 1964; Ord. 22 § 1 (part), 1961; prior
code § 4602; Ord. 43 § 1, 1962; prior code § 4602.1).
Chapter 10.25
BICYCLE ROUTES AND REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
10.25.010   Definitions.
   
10.25.020   Bicycle lane.
   
10.25.030   Bicycle.
   
10.25.040   Bicycle path.
   
10.25.050   Bicycle route.
   
10.25.060   Operation of bicycles.
10.25.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall for the purpose
of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by the Vehicle
Code of the state as of the effective date of the ordinance codified herein, or
as hereafter amended, which meanings are adopted by reference and made part of
this chapter: "authorized emergency vehicle," "authorized emergency vehicle
(privately owned)," "crosswalk," "driver," "intersection," "motorcycle," "motor
truck," "motor vehicle," "vehicle," "operator," "person," "private road or
driveway," "residential district," "roadway," "safety zone," "sidewalk,"
"street," or "highway" and "through highway." (Ord. 187 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.25.020 Bicycle lane.
"Bicycle lane" as used in this chapter or any resolution adopted pursuant
thereto means a separate lane established on a public street, on designated
bicycle routes, between the traffic lane and the curb, for the exclusive use of
bicycles, where warranted by traffic conditions, as authorized by Section 21207
of the California Vehicle Code, provided such bicycle lanes are designated by
means of an eight-inch white strip painted on the pavement and/or by other
appropriate traffic-control devices.
(Ord. 239 § 1, 1975; Ord. 211 § 1, 1974; Ord. 187 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.25.030 Bicycle.
"Bicycle," as used in this chapter or any resolution pursuant hereto, means a
device upon which any person may ride, propelled by human power through a belt,
chain or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle
arrangement.
(Ord. 187 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.25.040 Bicycle path.
"Bicycle path," as used in this chapter or any resolution pursuant hereto,
means a specifically designated area which is designated for the sole purpose
of accommodating bicycles.
(Ord. 187 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.25.050 Bicycle route.
"Bicycle route," as used in this chapter or any resolution pursuant hereto,
means a recommended route for bicycle travel along bicycle paths and other
facilities which safely accommodate bicycles and their riders.
(Ord. 187 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.25.060 Operation of bicycles.
   (a)   Bicycle lanes may be established on bicycle routes in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter and the location of such routes shall be
designated by resolution adopted pursuant thereto.
   (b)   The city staff shall cause the placing of appropriate traffic control
devices as may be warranted to designate bicycle routes and to establish
bicycle lanes.
   (c)   No motor vehicle shall be driven within a bicycle lane or path except
as may be necessary to execute the following movements:
      (1)   Entering a driveway;
      (2)   Exiting from a driveway;
      (3)   Entering an intersection;
      (4)   Departing from an intersection; provided, however, that in no case
shall a motor vehicle be driven within a bicycle lane for a distance in excess
of one hundred feet during execution of any of the above movements.
   (d)   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle on a roadway or sidewalk
adjacent to which or upon which bicycle lanes have been designated, except
within such bicycle lane or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of
this chapter. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent
to which there is a bicycle path which parallels the roadway and which bicycle
path when measured from the edge of the roadway to the edge of the bicycle path
nearest the roadway is no more than seventy-five feet distant, except within
such bicycle path or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this
chapter.
   (e)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway or within a designated bicycle
lane shall at no time ride more than two abreast, nor more than one abreast
when approaching a designated bike ramp or a bicycle rider proceeding in the
opposite direction.
   (f)   Upon approaching an intersection any person riding or operating a
bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles within or approaching such
intersection, except that all vehicles which must stop before entering an
intersection because of a stop sign and all vehicles making a left or right
hand turn at an intersection shall not proceed into the intersection nor make
such a turn without first yielding the right-of-way to all bicycles within or
approaching the intersection and shall proceed only when it is safe to do so.
(Ord. 187 § 1 (part), 1972).
Chapter 10.29
EQUESTRIAN REGULATIONS
Sections:
   
10.29.010   Definitions.
   
10.29.020   Major streets.
   
10.29.030   Equestrian crossing.
   
10.29.040   Equestrian trails.
10.29.010 Definitions.
"Equestrian" means on horseback, of horses, horsemen, or horseback riding.
(Ord. 192 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.29.020 Major streets.
"Major streets" as used in this chapter refers to the following streets within
the corporate limits of the city:
      Leffingwell Road
      Imperial Highway
      Rosecrans Avenue
      Alondra Boulevard
      Artesia Boulevard
      Valley View Avenue
      Telegraph Road
      La Mirada Boulevard
      Santa Gertrudes Avenue
(Ord. 192 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.29.030 Equestrian crossing.
The equestrian crossing of major streets within the city shall be restricted to
signalized intersections.
(Ord. 192 § 1 (part), 1972).
10.29.040 Equestrian trails.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate, or for any person, firm or
corporation to cause or permit to be driven or operated, any motorized vehicle
on any trail within the city of La Mirada clearly marked for equestrian use
only.
(Ord. 344 § 1, 1983).
Title 12
   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS  *
Chapters:
   
12.04   Improvements Required
   
12.06   Delivery Receptacles Prohibited in Public Rights-of-Way
   
12.08   Preservation, Protection and Removal of Parkway Trees
   
12.10   City Wide Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities
 
Notes
* For statutory provisions authorizing cities to maintain streets and
  sidewalks, see Gov. Code 40401. See also Gov. Code 37353 and 40404.
Chapter 12.04
IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
Sections:
   
12.04.010   Designated.
   
12.04.020   Building permit.
   
12.04.030   Variance.
   
12.04.040   Appeal.
   
12.04.050   Estimate of costs.
   
12.04.060   Fund created.
12.04.010 Designated.
   By reason of the fact that changes will occur in the local neighborhoods and
the city generally due to the increase in vehicular traffic, including
trucking, increase in pedestrian traffic and other activities associated with
the city's development and growth, the following improvements are deemed to be
necessary to prevent congestion and other hazards that are related to the
intensified use of the land, and these requirements must be met and complied
with before any building permit may be issued:
   All street, highway and alley improvements shall have either been installed
or a performance bond in a reasonable amount to be determined by the city
engineer, with sureties to be approved by the city attorney, shall have been
filed with the city clerk, or cash in a like amount shall have been deposited
with the finance director to be placed in a trust fund. The improvements shall
meet the standards established by the city and shall include curb, gutter,
sidewalk, street and alley paving, street trees, street signs, street lights,
and all required utilities.
   EXCEPTIONS: Curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and street paving already existing,
and approved by the city engineer for continued use need not be replaced.
   Sidewalks shall not be required in residential zones where seventy-five
percent or more of the existing street frontage on that side of the street
between intersecting streets has been developed without sidewalks.
   Sidewalks shall not be required in industrial zones except in those
locations where the planning director determines there may be school pedestrian
traffic. When so determined by the planning director, sidewalks shall be
required in industrial zones.
   Lots having no frontage on a planned local street shall be excluded from the
requirements of this section.
   Where curbs, gutters, sidewalks or street paving are not presently installed
along the street frontage between intersecting streets, the applicant, if
granted a variance by the planning commission, shall enter into a standard
improvement agreement with the city to install these improvements when directed
to do so by the city.
(Ord. 64 § 2, 1963; Ord. 46 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6700).
12.04.020 Building permit.
The building official shall not approve the issuance of a building permit until
the requirements of Section
12.04.010 have been met.
(Ord. 64 § 3, 1963; Ord. 46 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6701).
12.04.030 Variance.
   (a)   Applications for a variance from the provisions of Section
12.04.010 shall be made in writing to the planning commission in such form as
is approved by the planning commission. The planning commission may provide
forms for such purposes and may prescribe the type of information to be
provided thereon. No petition shall be received unless it complies with such
requirements. The planning commission shall give the applicant for such
variance an opportunity to be heard if he so desires, and thereafter may grant
or deny the application for the variance or may grant thy same upon such
conditions as the planning commission deems necessary for the preservation of
the safety, health or property of the general public.
   (b)   The planning commission upon such application, or on its own motion,
may grant a variance from the provisions of this section for one or more of the
following reasons:
      (1)   The construction of sidewalks or curbs and gutters in the area
involved is included in a budgeted city project or within an approved
assessment district;
      (2)   Because of the location of the property, the terrain or condition
thereof, the construction of sidewalks or curbs and gutters would be
impractical or unnecessary or would impose undue hardship on the owner of the
property.
(Ord. 64 § 4, 1963; Ord. 46 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6702).
12.04.040 Appeal.
   (a)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning commission
including any city official may, within fifteen days after the action and
decision of the planning commission concerning the variance application, appeal
to the city council by filing with the city clerk such notice of appeal. Except
in the case of an appeal by a city official, such notice of appeal shall be
accompanied by a ten dollar filing fee.
   (b)   Unless the city council, within thirty days after notice of appeal has
been filed, determines to grant a hearing or to refer the matter back to the
planning commission for rehearing, the appeal shall be deemed dismissed and the
decision of the planning commission shall thereupon become final.
   (c)   The city council may consider the appeal on the record, if any, made
before the planning commission, or de novo; and thereafter the city council may
refer the matter back to the planning commission for further consideration or
may reverse, affirm or modify the decision of the planning commission subject
to the same standards and limitations imposed upon the planning commission by
this section, except as herein expressly otherwise provided, the decision of
the city council shall be final.
(Ord. 46 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6703).
12.04.050 Estimate of costs.
Whenever the installation of curbs, gutters, sidewalks or paving is found to be
impracticable by the city engineer by reason of the then existing width or
condition of the existing street, the city engineer shall estimate what the
reasonable cost of installing the sidewalk, curb, gutter, or paving to be, and
the cost shall be deposited with the city by the owner, lessee or agent
constructing or arranging for the construction of the building or dwelling.
(Ord. 64 § 5, 1963; Ord. 46 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6704).
12.04.060 Fund created.
   (a)    All funds received by the city pursuant to Section
12.04.050 shall be deposited in a special trust fund, denominated the "curb,
gutter, sidewalk, and paving special fund." All sums so deposited shall be kept
separate and apart from all other funds or accounts of the city. Funds
deposited in the special fund may be expended only to improve public streets or
rights-of-way by the construction of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, or paving at
the property or parcel for which the sums or amounts were paid into the fund.
   (b)   In the event that after all improvements have been made as to an
individual parcel, and funds still remain on deposit therefor, the balance
shall be forthwith paid to the person initially making the deposit. Further, in
the event any deposit is unused or partially unused at the expiration of
fifteen years after such deposit has been made, any and all sums remaining
shall be forthwith paid to the person initially making the deposit. No sums on
deposit with the city shall be deemed to accrue interest, nor shall the city be
liable to pay to any person any interest charge or other charges.
(Ord. 64 § 6, 1963; Ord. 46 § 1 (part), 1962; prior code § 6705).
Chapter 12.06
DELIVERY RECEPTACLES PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sections:
   
12.06.010   Delivery receptacles prohibited.
   
12.06.020   Exceptions.
12.06.010 Delivery receptacles prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to place, install or maintain, or cause to be
placed, installed or maintained, within any city-owned right-of-way, including,
but not limited to, city-owned sidewalks, walkways or streets, any container,
receptacle or other device, designed or intended to accept the deposit of any
letter, package, box or other object for purposes of forwarding by a delivery
service.
(Ord. 512 § 1 (part), 1997).
12.06.020 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any form of delivery
receptacle installed, utilized or maintained by the United States government,
including the USPS, or any other public entity having legal authority to so do.
(Ord. 512 § 1 (part), 1997).
Chapter 12.08
PRESERVATION, PROTECTION AND REMOVAL OF PARKWAY TREES
Sections:
   
12.08.010   Purpose.
   
12.08.020   Definitions.
   
12.08.030   Director--Authority and responsibility.
   
12.08.040   Abatement of hazards.
   
12.08.050   Inspection.
   
12.08.060   Interference with work prohibited.
   
12.08.070   Development activity--Tree plans.
   
12.08.080   Injuring trees prohibited.
   
12.08.090   Requirements for tree protection during construction.
   
12.08.100   Removal of tree for construction or renovation.
   
12.08.110   Permits required.
   
12.08.120   Permit application requirements.
   
12.08.130   Conditions of approval.
   
12.08.140   Criteria for approving permit.
   
12.08.150   Term of permit.
   
12.08.160   Decision on permit application.
   
12.08.170   Liability insurance required for tree trimming or removal business.
   
12.08.180   Permit revocation.
   
12.08.190   Enforcement of penalties.
12.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to preserve and protect the parkway trees of
this city that are of aesthetic importance and to provide for the replacement
of trees in order to maintain the community's natural environment. Trees are an
important natural resource, and it is essential to the public peace, health,
and welfare that such trees be protected from random removal, cutting, or
damage.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined as
follows:
   (1)   "Director" means the director of environmental services of the city or
his or her designee.
   (2)   "Parkway" means either (i) the area between the curb and sidewalk
within a fully improved street right-of-way; or (ii) that area extending from
the curb towards the nearest easement line in an area with no sidewalk ; or
(iii) any area within a street right-of-way in which a parkway tree is located.
   (3)   "Parkway tree" means a tree planted or caused to be planted by the
city within a parkway strip.
   (4)   "Removal" means the uprooting, cutting or severing of the main trunk
of the tree, or any act which causes the tree to die within six months.
   (5)   "Shrub" means woody vegetation or a woody plant having multiple stems
and bearing foliage from the ground level up.
   (6)   "Tree" means any woody plant, including a palm, which has the
potential of attaining a minimum height of fifteen feet and has its canopy of
foliage borne normally on a single trunk.
   (7)   "Tree well" means a planting area found in an otherwise paved or
concrete street right-of-way.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.030 Director--Authority and responsibility.
The director is responsible for inspection, maintenance, planting, pruning,
trimming, removal, replacement and care of all parkway trees subject to the
review and supervision of the city manager. Subject to said review, the
director shall have the power to designate the kind or variety of trees and
plants to be planted within any parkway of the city. The owners of property
fronting on any street, alley or public place may petition the director to
provide that such trees or plants shall be of a certain kind or variety, but
the petition shall be advisory to the action of the director.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.040 Abatement of hazards.
The director may trim or remove any parkway tree or plant, including any part
thereof, regardless of the location, if in his or her opinion, removal is
necessary to eliminate any hazard or risk to public safety or property.
Conditions permitting removal by the director include, but are not limited to,
the following:
   (1)   Where the tree, foliage or any limb, or the shrub or plant, is
interfering with a primary structure, and there is no feasible alternative to
mitigate the interference;
   (2)   Where a written determination has been made, after a visual inspection
and evaluation, that the tree is so diseased or damaged that it is no longer
viable or it is a threat to property or to other trees;
   (3)   Where the tree is so poorly formed due to stunted growth that its
preservation would not result in any substantial benefit to the community;
   (4)   Where the tree interferes with utility services, or any street or
highway, and no reasonable alternative exists other than removal or trimming of
the tree;
   (5)   Where the tree is a potential safety hazard due to the risk of it
falling and its structural instability cannot be remedied, or where any other
risk to persons or property is presented;
   (6)   Where the tree is causing damage to improvements including, but not
limited to, any building foundation, retaining wall, roadway/driveway, patio,
and deck, or is interfering with the use and enjoyment of the property;
   (7)   Where the tree is host to an organism which is parasitic to another
species of tree thereby endangered by the parasite; or
   (8)   Where the tree belongs to a species which is known to be pyrophitic or
highly flammable and has been identified as a public safety hazard.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.050 Inspection.
The director may inspect any parkway tree or plant or any tree or plant
standing on any private property which overhangs or projects over or into any
street, park, alley or public place of the city, to determine whether it or any
part of it is in such condition as to constitute a safety hazard or an
impediment to the progress or vision of anyone traveling in the street, park,
alley or public place. However, nothing in this section shall authorize the
director to enter private property without consent of the owner or lawful
possessor of the property, unless otherwise permitted by law.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.060 Interference with work prohibited.
No person shall interfere, or cause any person to interfere with, the director
or persons acting under his or her authority while engaged in planting,
mulching, pruning, spraying, treating, trimming or removing any parkway tree,
shrub or plant or in the removal of any stone, cement or other substance or
plant material from or adjacent to the trunk of any parkway tree.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.070 Development activity--Tree plans.
All parkway trees planted in a new subdivision shall be in accordance with the
parkway tree guidelines and shall be paid for by the subdivider, unless
otherwise provided by the city council. The city council may require any
subdivider to pay all costs of proper parkway tree planting along the streets
of any new subdivision before approving any subdivision map.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.080 Injuring trees prohibited.
No person shall injure or destroy any parkway tree by any means, including, but
not limited to the following:
   (1)   Constructing a concrete, asphalt, brick or gravel sidewalk or
otherwise filling up the ground area around any tree so as to substantially
shut off air, light or water from its roots;
   (2)   Piling building equipment, material or any other substance around any
tree so as to cause injury;
   (3)   Pouring, spraying or depositing any deleterious substance on or around
any tree or on the surrounding ground, lawn or sidewalk;
   (4)   Posting any sign, poster, notice or other object on any tree, tree
stake or guard, or fastening any guy wire, cable, rope, nails, screws or other
device to any tree, tree stake or guard;
   (5)   Causing any wire charged with electricity to come in contact with any
tree; or
   (6)   Causing any fire or burning near or around any tree.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.090 Requirements for tree protection during construction.
The director shall determine during the project review process whether and to
what extent conditions or measures will be required to protect parkway trees
during construction. This decision shall be based upon the proximity of the
construction activity to parkway trees. The conditions and protective measures
include, but are not limited to, the following:
   (1)   The parkway trees shall be enclosed by chain link fencing with a
minimum height of five feet or by another protective barrier approved by the
director prior to the issuance of a grading or building permit and prior to
commencement of work.
   (2)   Barriers shall be placed at least five feet outside the drip line of
parkway trees. A lesser distance may be approved by the director if appropriate
to the species and the adjacent construction activity.
   (3)   No grade changes shall be made within the protective barriers without
prior approval by the director. Any roots greater than two inches in diameter
which are damaged or exposed shall be cleanly saw cut and covered with soil in
conformance with industry standards.
   (4)   Excavation or landscape preparation within the protective barriers
shall be limited to the use of hand tools and small hand-held power tools and
shall not be used at a depth that could cause root damage to the parkway tree.
   (5)   No attachments or wires other than those of a protective or non-
damaging nature shall be attached to a parkway tree.
   (6)   No equipment or debris of any kind shall be placed within the
protective barriers. No fuel, paint, solvent, oil, thinner, asphalt, cement,
grout or any other construction chemical shall be stored or allowed in any
manner to enter within the protective barrier.
   (7)   If access within the protective barrier around a parkway tree is
required during the construction process, the route shall be covered in a six-
inch mulch bed in the drip line area, and the area shall be aerated and
fertilized at the conclusion of the construction.
   (8)   When the existing grade around a parkway tree is to be raised, drain
tiles shall be laid over the soil to drain liquids away from the trunk, as
determined by the director. The number of drains shall depend upon the soil
material. Lighter sandy soils and porous gravelly material require fewer drains
than heavy non-porous soils like clay. Dry wells shall be large enough to allow
for maximum growth of the tree trunk. Dry well walls shall be constructed of
materials that permit passage of air and water.
   (9)   When the existing grade around a parkway tree is to be lowered, either
by terracing or a retaining wall, a combination may be used to lower grade, as
determined by the director. With either method, the area within the drip line
shall be left at the original grade. The retaining wall shall be porous to
allow for aeration.
   (10)   Parkway trees that have been destroyed or that have received major
damage during construction shall be replaced prior to final inspection and
subject to the director's approval as to size, variety and species.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.100 Removal of tree for construction or renovation.
If any private individual or entity has a need to remove a parkway tree in the
course of upgrade, renovation or new construction, they shall first obtain a
permit issued by the director and adhere to the requirements and conditions set
forth in the parkway tree guidelines and other conditions imposed by the
director.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.110 Permits required.
Except as provided herein, no person shall cut, trim, prune, plant, remove,
injure or interfere with any parkway tree or plant without a permit.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.120 Permit application requirements.
   (a)   Each application for a permit to trim, prune, or remove any parkway
tree or plant shall be filed with the director on a form provided for such
purpose. The application shall clearly show by diagram, plot plan or
photograph, the location, species and size of each parkway tree or plant sought
to be removed, the name and address of the property owner and applicant, and
such other information as indicated on the form provided or as required by the
director. The director will consider an application complete when all necessary
application forms, materials and exhibits, as established by the director, have
been provided and accepted as adequate and all necessary fees established by
resolution of the city council have been paid.
   (b)   The director may require the submittal of an arborist report before
accepting the application for filing. The arborist report shall be paid for by
the applicant and may be required to include specific information as required
by the director. This information may include but is not limited to: the impact
on existing trees, the health and structural stability of existing trees and
any remedial measures or mitigation recommended.
   (c)   Any request for the removal or relocation of a parkway tree proposed
in conjunction with an application for another discretionary permit, shall be
subject to approval by the same hearing body as the discretionary permit.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.130 Conditions of approval.
In approving an application for a parkway tree or plant removal or trimming
permit, the director may require the applicant to meet certain conditions in
order to secure the purpose of this chapter. Conditions may include, but are
not limited to, measures designed to protect and preserve parkway trees,
shrubs, and plants remaining on the site and the restoration of parkway trees
and plants removed from the site.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.140 Criteria for approving permit.
   (a)   Subject to the imposition of conditions pursuant to subsection (b) of
this section, a permit to remove, trim or prune any parkway tree or plant may
be issued where any of the conditions set forth in Section
12.08.040 are found to exist, or where, upon taking into account the size,
shape, topography and existing trees upon the lot, the denial of the permit
would create an unreasonable hardship on the property owner.
   (b)   A permit for a tree removal may be conditioned upon the replacement of
the tree(s) onsite. Such replacement shall be subject to the provisions of the
parkway tree guidelines including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Designation by the director of the size, species and location of
replacement tree(s);
      (2)   An existing tree(s) onsite may be designated to serve as a
replacement tree(s);
      (3)   Should the tree(s) designated as a replacement not survive for a
period of at least two years, further replacement shall be required.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.150 Term of permit.
Any work authorized by a permit shall be done within sixty days of issuance
thereof, under the general supervision of the director, and in accordance with
the parkway tree guidelines. A permit shall be void after the expiration of the
sixty day period.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.160 Decision on permit application.
   (a)   An application for a parkway tree removal or tree trimming permit
shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied in writing by the director
within thirty days of receipt of a complete application and additional
information as required by the director. Where the director finds that
significant policy questions are at issue, the director may refer the
application to the city manager for action. If an application is denied, the
reasons shall be provided to the applicant in writing.
   (b)   A permit application made in connection with a development proposal
shall be considered concurrently and within the time limits mandated by state
or local laws or regulations for the approval of such proposals.
   (c)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall conduct an
onsite inspection and make a determination. When the determination has been
made, the director shall notify the applicant of said determination within
thirty days in writing by first class mail. An appeal to the city manager of
the director's determination shall be filed within fifteen days following the
date of notification to applicant.
   (d)   Any person maintaining any overhead wires or pipes or underground
conduits along or across any street, park, boulevard, alley or public place of
the city or owning any property abutting upon any street, park, or public place
of the city, desiring to have any parkway tree cut, trimmed, pruned or removed
must file with the director a written request that the work be done. It shall
be within the discretion of the director to authorize said request and to
require the petitioner to meet the guidelines as set forth in the parkway tree
guidelines adhering to the requirements and conditions set forth therein before
the issuance of any permit under this chapter. Unless appealed, as provided in
subsection (c) of this section, the decision of the director shall be final.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.170 Liability insurance required for tree trimming or removal business.
Any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of trimming or removing
any parkway tree shall carry public liability and property damage insurance in
accordance with the standards established by the city, and a current
certificate of such insurance shall be on file with the city clerk prior to
performing such work. The city may require the posting of a performance bond in
the amount equal to the cost of the proposed job.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.180 Permit revocation.
A permit to trim, prune or remove any parkway tree or plant may be revoked or
modified if it is found that the removal, relocation or protection activities:
   (1)   Result from misrepresentation or fraud;
   (2)   Have not been implemented in a timely manner;
   (3)   Have not met, or have violated, any conditions of approval;
   (4)   Are in violation of any code, law, ordinance or statute;
   (5)   Are detrimental to public health, safety or welfare; or
   (6)   Constitute a nuisance.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
12.08.190 Enforcement of penalties.
   (a)   In the event more than one tree subject to the provisions of this
chapter is located on a parcel of property, each tree that is removed or
trimmed without a permit shall be considered a separate violation.
   (b)   Removal or trimming of any parkway tree or plant without a permit is a
misdemeanor and shall require replacement within sixty days of notice by the
city. Such replacement shall be in accordance with the parkway tree guidelines.
   (c)   Violation of this chapter during construction activity may result in
an immediate stop-work order issued by the city, until permits are obtained
along with proper mitigation.
(Ord. 556 § 2 (part), 2000).
Chapter 12.10
CITY WIDE REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Sections:
   
12.10.010   Applicability.
   
12.10.020   Fees.
   
12.10.030   Violations.
   
12.10.040   Conflicting provisions superseded.
12.10.010 Applicability.
Notwithstanding any provision of the La Mirada Municipal Code to the contrary,
all small wireless facilities as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002(l), as may be
amended or superseded, that are proposed to be located within the City,
including any City-owned rights of way, are subject to the requirements of the
“City Wide Policy Regarding Permitting Requirements and Development Standards
for Small Wireless Facilities”, as adopted and amended from time to time by
City Council resolution, and all such small wireless facilities must comply
with that Policy. (Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2021)
12.10.020 Fees.
Each applicant/permittee shall pay one-time and recurring fees, per each small
wireless facility, in amounts as (I) established by resolution of the City
Council that are not less than those amounts deemed presumptively reasonable
under the Report and Order or then-in effect federal law or regulations; or
that otherwise are determined to be reasonable, non- discriminatory
approximation of the City’s costs in processing applications and administering
permits for small wireless facilities; or (ii) agreed upon by the City and an
applicant or permittee in a side or master agreement. (Ord. 716 § 1 (part),
2021)
12.10.030 Violations.
Failure to comply with the City Wide Policy Regarding Permitting Requirements
and Development Standards for Small Wireless Facilities constitutes a violation
of this Chapter and this Code. (Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2021)
12.10.040 Conflicting provisions superseded.
The provisions of this Chapter shall govern and supersede any conflicting
provisions of the La Mirada Municipal Code, including those set forth in
Chapter 21.46, with respect to the permitting and regulation of small wireless
facilities within the City, including small wireless facilities in City rights
of way. (Ord. 716 § 1 (part), 2021)
Title 13
   WATER AND SEWAGE  *
Chapters:
   
13.04   Industrial Wastes
   
13.08   Water Systems
   
13.12   Urban Runoff
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions pertaining to the regulation of the construction of
  drains and sewers, see Gov. Code 38660(e). For statutory provisions
  authorizing the construction, establishment and maintenance of sewers and
  drains, see Gov. Code 38900. For statutory provisions authorizing mandatory
* sewer connection and declaring other means of sewage disposal to be a
  nuisance, see Gov. Code 54352. For statutory provisions authorizing cities to
  prescribe, revise and collect charges, see Gov. Code 54344--54348 and 54354--
  54356. For statutory provisions pertaining to the power of cities to
  establish rules and regulations, see Health & S. Code 5006.
Chapter 13.04
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
Sections:
   
13.04.010   Adopted.
   
13.04.020   Short title.
   
13.04.030   Definitions.
   
13.04.040   Fee schedule--Modification by resolution.
   
13.04.050   Penalties for violation of chapter.
   
13.04.060   Civil remedies available.
   
13.04.070   Severability.
13.04.010 Adopted.
There is adopted as the city sanitary sewer and industrial waste ordinance,
except as provided in this chapter, that certain sanitary sewer and industrial
waste ordinance known and designated as Division 2 of Title 20 of the Los
Angeles County Code including all changes made by the county of Los Angeles, by
ordinance, up to and including Ordinance No. 89-0101, adopted on or about July
17, 1989, a copy of which has been deposited with the city clerk of the city
for use and examination by the public. Said Title 20, Division 2, shall be and
become the sanitary sewer and industrial waste code of the city, regulating the
discharge, deposit or disposal of all waste, including any material which may
cause pollution of underground or surface waters, in, upon or affecting the
city; and the design, construction, alteration, use and maintenance of public
sewers and house laterals, industrial connection sewers, water pollution
control plants, sewage pumping plants, industrial liquid-waste pretreatment
plants, dairy screen-chambers, sand and grease interceptors, and appurtenances;
the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor, and fees to pay
the cost of checking plans, inspecting the construction and making record plans
of the facilities permitted hereunder.
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
13.04.020 Short title.
This chapter shall be known, and the same may be cited, as the sanitary sewer
and industrial waste ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
13.04.030 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following terms are utilized in Division 2 of Title 20 of
the Los Angeles County Code as adopted by Section
13.04.010, the terms shall have the following meanings ascribed to them except
when the circumstance requires or permits such terms to be construed with
respect to the meanings ascribed to them as contained in Chapter 20.20 of
Division 2 of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code:
   (a)   "Board" means the city council of the city.
   (b)   "County engineer" means the city engineer.
   (c)   "County health officer" means the city health officer.
   (d)   "County of Los Angeles" means the city of La Mirada.
   (e)   "County sewer maintenance district" means the county sewer maintenance
district except where the territory concerned either is not within or has been
withdrawn from a county maintenance district. In such circumstance, the term
"county sewer maintenance district" means the city.
   (f)   "Ordinance" means an ordinance of the city.
   (g)   "Public sewer" means all sanitary sewers and appurtenances thereto,
lying within streets or easements dedicated to the city, which are under the
sole jurisdiction of the city.
   (h)   "Trunk sewer" means a sewer under the jurisdiction of a public entity
other than the city.
   (i)   "Unincorporated area of the County of Los Angeles" shall be deemed to
include in its true geographical location the entirety of the corporate limits
of the city.
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
13.04.040 Fee schedule--Modification by resolution.
The fee schedules adopted by Section
13.04.010 may be amended by resolution adopted by the city council in
compliance with Chapter 13 of Part I of Division 2 of Title 5 of the California
Government Code (Sections 54990 et seq.).
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
13.04.050 Penalties for violation of chapter.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation to violate any
provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter and
the code adopted hereby. Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of their requirements shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months or
by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
13.04.060 Civil remedies available.
A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or the code adopted hereby
shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process
by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any
other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
13.04.070 Severability.
The city council declares that, should any provision, section, paragraph,
sentence or word of this chapter or of Division 2 of Title 20 of the Los
Angeles County Code as adopted by Section
13.04.010 be rendered or declared invalid by any final court action in a court
of competent jurisdiction, or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the
remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences, and words of this
chapter and Division 2 of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code as adopted by
Section
13.04.010 shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 442 § 3 (part), 1990).
Chapter 13.08
WATER SYSTEMS
Sections:
   
13.08.010   Short title.
   
13.08.020   Code adopted.
   
13.08.030   Copies filed.
   
13.08.040   Definitions.
13.08.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Water Systems Ordinance of the City of La
Mirada" and may be cited as such.
(Ord. 62 § 4 (part), 1963; prior code § 6800).
13.08.020 Code adopted.
There is hereby adopted as the water systems ordinance of the city, except as
it is hereafter amended, Ordinance No. 7834 of the county of Los Angeles, as
amended and in effect March 1, 1963.
(Ord. 62 § 4 (part), 1963; prior code § 6801).
13.08.030 Copies filed.
Three copies of Ordinance No. 7834 as adopted in Section
13.08.020 have been deposited with the city clerk and shall be at all times
maintained by the city clerk for the use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 62 § 4 (part), 1963; prior code § 6802).
13.08.040 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in Ordinance No. 7834, as
adopted in Section
13.08.020, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the
following meanings:
   (1)   "County" or "county of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the
city of La Mirada;
   (2)   "Board of supervisors" means the city council of La Mirada;
   (3)   "Water appeals board" means the city council;
   (4)   "Director of planning" means the planning director of La Mirada;
   (5)   "Engineer" means the county engineer;
   (6)   "Health officer" means county health officer;
   (7)   "Forester and fire warden" mean the county Forester and fire warden;
   (8)   "Road commissioner" means the superintendent of streets of the city of
La Mirada or such other officer or official authorized or designated to enforce
the terms and provisions of this chapter or to act in this regard as
superintendent of streets.
(Ord. 62 § 4 (part), 1963; prior code § 6803).
Chapter 13.12
URBAN RUNOFF
Sections:
   
13.12.010   Title.
   
13.12.020   Findings.
   
13.12.030   Purpose and intent.
   
13.12.040   Definitions.
   
13.12.050   Construction and application.
   
13.12.060   No taking.
   
13.12.070   Prohibited activities.
   
13.12.080   Exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges or
designated discharges.
   
13.12.090   Good housekeeping provisions.
   
13.12.100   Requirements for industrial/commercial and construction activities.
   
13.12.110   Standard urban stormwater mitigation plan (SUSMP) and low impact
development (LID) requirements for new development and redevelopment projects.
   
13.12.120   Enforcement.
13.12.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the city of La Mirada Stormwater Management and
Discharge Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014).
13.12.020 Findings.
   (a)   The federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq.,)
provides for the regulation and reduction of pollutants discharged into the
waters of the United States by extending National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System ("NPDES") requirements to stormwater and urban runoff
discharge into municipal storm drain systems;
   (b)   Stormwater and urban runoff flows from individual properties onto
streets, then through storm drains passing through the city and finally into
the waters of the United States;
   (c)   The city is a co-permittee under the "Waste Discharge Requirements for
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System ("MS4") discharges within the Coastal
Watersheds of Los Angeles County, except those discharges originating from the
city of Long Beach MS4, which also serves as a NPDES permit under the federal
Clean Water Act (NPDES No. CAS614001), as well as waste discharge requirements
under California law (the "municipal NPDES permit") and, as a co-permittee
under the municipal NPDES permit, the city is required to adopt ordinances and
implement procedures with respect to the entry of non-stormwater discharges
into the municipal stormwater system;
   (d)   Part III, Section A of the municipal NPDES permit requires the city to
effectively prohibit non-stormwater discharges from within its boundaries, into
that portion of the MS4 which it owns or operates and into watercourses, except
where such discharges are:
      (1)   In compliance with a separate individual or general NPDES permit,
or
      (2)   Identified and in compliance with Part III. A (non-stormwater
discharges) of the municipal NPDES permit, or
      (3)   Originate from federal, state or other facilities which the city is
preempted from regulating, and further provides that compliance with the terms
of the municipal NPDES permit through the development and implementation of the
programs described in the municipal NPDES permit will constitute compliance
with the discharge prohibition in the municipal NPDES permit;
   (e)   Part VI, Section A.2 of the municipal NPDES permit requires the city
to establish and maintain the legal authority necessary to control discharges
to and from those portions of the MS4 over which it has jurisdiction, so as to
comply with the municipal NPDES permit and to specifically prohibit certain
discharges identified in the municipal NPDES permit;
   (f)   The Municipal NPDES Permit contemplates the development of a Watershed
Management Program in which the city will participate, which will in turn
require the development and the implementation of programs for, among other
things, the elimination of illicit connections and illicit discharges,
development planning, development construction, and public information and
education requirements, and which may require the later adoption of additional
legal authority to implement such programs as they are developed by the
permittees and approved by the Regional Board;
   (g)   In order to control, in a cost-effective manner, the quantity and
quality of stormwater and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable, the
adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter is essential.
(Ord. 671 § 1,2014)
13.12.030 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city and the water quality of the
receiving waters of the county of Los Angeles and surrounding coastal areas by:
      (1)   Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent
practicable;
      (2)   Regulating illicit connections and illicit discharges and reducing
the level of contamination of stormwater and urban runoff in the municipal
stormwater system; and
      (3)   Regulating non-stormwater discharges to the municipal stormwater
system.
   (b)   The intent of this chapter is to protect and enhance the quality of
watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands within the city in a manner consistent
with the federal Clean Water Act, the California Porter-Cologne Water Quality
Control Act and the municipal NPDES permit.
   (c)   This chapter is also intended to provide the city with the legal
authority necessary to control discharges to and from those portions of the
municipal stormwater system over which it has jurisdiction as required by the
municipal NPDES permit, and fully and timely comply with the terms of the
municipal NPDES permit while the Watershed Management Program is being
developed by the permittees under the municipal NPDES permit, and in
contemplation of the subsequent amendment of this chapter or adoption by the
city of additional provisions of this chapter to implement the subsequently
adopted Watershed Management Program, or other programs developed under the
municipal NPDES permit.
   (d)   This chapter also sets forth requirements for the construction and
operation of certain commercial development, new development and redevelopment
and other projects (as further defined herein) which are intended to ensure
compliance with the stormwater mitigation measures prescribed in the current
MS4 permit. This chapter authorizes the director to define and adopt applicable
best management practices and other stormwater pollution control measures, as
provided herein, to carry out all inspections including entering entities
discharging to the MS4, conduct surveillance, conduct monitoring, cite
infractions and to impose fines pursuant to this chapter. Except as otherwise
provided herein, the director shall administer, implement and enforce the
provisions of this section.
   (e)   The city council shall approve and enter into interagency agreements
as deemed necessary by the city council to control the contribution of
pollutants of the shared MS4.
(Ord. 671 §1, 2014)
13.12.040 Definitions.
   Except as specifically provided herein, any term used in this chapter shall
be defined as that term is defined in the current municipal NPDES permit, or if
it is not specifically defined in the municipal NPDES permit, then as such term
is defined in the federal Clean Water Act, as amended, or the regulations
promulgated thereunder. If the definition of any term contained in this section
conflicts with the definition of the same term in the current municipal NPDES
permit, then the definition contained in the municipal NPDES permit shall
govern. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings when
used this chapter:
   "Area susceptible to runoff" means any surface directly exposed to
precipitation or in the path of runoff caused by precipitation which path leads
off the parcel on which the surface is located.
   "Automotive service facilities" means a facility that is categorized in any
one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) and North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS)codes. For inspection purposes,
permittees need not inspect facilities with SIC codes 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-
7534, and 7536-7539 provided, that these facilities have no outside activities
or materials that may be exposed to stormwater.
   "Best management practices (BMPs)" means practices or physical devices or
systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-
stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of
stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water. Examples of
BMPs may include public education and outreach, proper planning of development
projects, proper cleaning of catch basin inlets, and proper sludge- or waste-
handling and disposal, among others.
   "Biofiltration" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater pollutant discharges
by intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through incidental
infiltration and/or evapotranspiration, and filtration. Incidental infiltration
is an important factor in achieving the required pollutant load reduction.
Therefore, the term "biofiltration" as used in this chapter is defined to
include only systems designed to facilitate incidental infiltration or achieve
the equivalent pollutant reduction as biofiltration BMPs with an underdrain
(subject to approval by the Regional Board's Executive Officer). Biofiltration
BMPs include bioretention systems with an underdrain and bioswales.
   "Bioretention" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by
intercepting rainfall on vegetative canopy, and through evapotranspiration and
infiltration. The bioretention system typically includes a minimum two-foot top
layer of a specified soil and compost mixture underlain by a gravel-filled
temporary storage pit dug into the in-situ soil. As defined in this chapter, a
bioretention BMP may be designed with an overflow drain, but may not include an
underdrain. When a bioretention BMP is designed or constructed with an
underdrain it is regulated by the municipal NPDES permit as biofiltration.
   "Bioswale" means a LID BMP consisting of a shallow channel lined with grass
or other dense, low-growing vegetation. Bioswales are designed to collect
stormwater runoff and to achieve a uniform sheet flow through the dense
vegetation for a period of several minutes.
   "City" means the city of La Mirada, California.
   "Clean Water Act (CWA)" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
enacted in 1972, by Public Law 92-500, and amended by the Water Quality Act of
1987. The Clean Water Act prohibits the discharge of pollutants to waters of
the United States unless the discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit.
   "Commercial development" means any development on private land that is not
heavy industrial or residential. The category includes, but is not limited to:
hospitals, laboratories and other medical facilities, educational institutions,
recreational facilities, plant nurseries, car wash facilities, mini-malls and
other business complexes, shopping malls, hotels, office buildings, public
warehouses and other light industrial complexes.
   "Commercial malls" means any development on private land comprised of one or
more buildings forming a complex of stores which sells various merchandise,
with interconnecting walkways enabling visitors to easily walk from store to
store, along with parking area(s). A commercial mall includes, but is not
limited to: mini-malls, strip malls, other retail complexes, and enclosed
shopping malls or shopping centers
   "Construction" means any construction or demolition activity, clearing,
grading, grubbing, or excavation or any other activity that result in land
disturbance. Construction does not include emergency construction activities
required to immediately protect public health and safety or routine maintenance
activities required to maintain the integrity of structures by performing minor
repair and restoration work, maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic
capacity, or original purposes of the facility. See "Routine Maintenance"
definition for further explanation. Where clearing, grading or excavating of
underlying soil takes place during a repaving operation, state general
construction permit coverage by the State of California general permit for
storm water discharges associated with industrial activities or for stormwater
discharges associated with construction activities is required if more than one
acre is disturbed or the activities are part of a larger plan.
   "Control" means to minimize, reduce, eliminate, or prohibit by
technological, legal, contractual or other means, the discharge of pollutants
from an activity or activities.
   "Development" means any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or
reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single-
family, multi-unit development); industrial, commercial retail and other
nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for
future construction. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility,
nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately
protect public health and safety.
   "Directly adjacent" means situated within two hundred feet of the contiguous
zone required for the continued maintenance, function, and structural stability
of the environmentally sensitive area.
   "Director" means the city's director of community development or his or her
designee.
   "Discharge" means when used without qualification the discharge of a
pollutant.
   "Discharge of a pollutant" means any addition of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants to waters of the United States from any point source
or, any addition of any pollutant or combination of pollutants to the waters of
the contiguous zone or the ocean from any point source other than a vessel or
other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation. The term
discharge includes additions of pollutants into waters of the United States
from: surface runoff which is collected or channeled by a state, municipality,
or other person which do not lead to treatment works; and discharges through
pipes, sewers, or other conveyances, leading into privately owned treatment
works.
   "Discharging directly" means outflow from a drainage conveyance system that
is composed entirely or predominantly of flows from the subject, property,
development, subdivision, or industrial facility, and not commingled with the
flows from adjacent lands.
   "Discretionary project" is defined in the same manner as Section 15357 of
the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act
contained in Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations, as amended, and
means a project which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation when
the city decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as
distinguished from situations where the city merely has to determine whether
there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations.
   "Disturbed area" means an area that is altered as a result of clearing,
grading, and/or excavation.
   "Environmentally sensitive area (ESA)" means an area in which plant or
animal life or their habitats are either rare or especially valuable because of
their special nature or role in an ecosystem and which would be easily
disturbed or degraded by human activities and developments (California Public
Resources Code § 30107.5). Areas subject to stormwater mitigation requirements
are areas designated as significant ecological areas by the county of Los
Angeles (Los Angeles County Significant Areas Study, Los Angeles County
Department of Regional Planning (1976) and amendments); an area designated as a
significant natural area by the California Department of Fish and Games
Significant Natural Areas Program, provided that area has been field verified
by the Department of Fish and Game; an area listed in the Basin Plan as
supporting the rare, threatened, or endangered species (RARE) beneficial use;
and an area identified by the city as environmentally sensitive.
   "Flow-through treatment BMPs" means a modular, vault type "high flow
biotreatment" devices contained within an impervious vault with an underdrain
or designed with an impervious liner and an underdrain.
   "Full capture system" means any single device or series of devices,
certified by the executive officer, that traps all particles retained by a five
mm mesh screen and has a design treatment capacity of not less than the peak
flow rate Q resulting from a one-year, one-hour storm in the sub-drainage area.
   "Good housekeeping practices" means common practices related to the storage,
use or cleanup of materials, performed in a manner that minimizes the discharge
of pollutants. Examples include, but are not limited to, purchasing only the
quantity of materials to be used at a given time, use of alternative and less
environmentally harmful products, cleaning up spills and leaks, and storing
materials in a manner that will contain any leaks or spills.
   "General construction activities storm water permit (GCASP)" means the
general NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the discharge
of stormwater from construction activities under certain conditions.
   "General industrial activities storm water permit (GIASP)" means the general
NPDES permit adopted by the State Board which authorizes the discharge of
stormwater from certain industrial activities under certain conditions.
   "Green roof" means a LID BMP using planter boxes and vegetation to intercept
rainfall on the roof surface. Rainfall is intercepted by vegetation leaves and
through evapotranspiration. Green roofs may be designed as either a
bioretention BMP or as a biofiltration BMP. To receive credit as a bioretention
BMP, the green roof system planting medium shall be of sufficient depth to
provide capacity within the pore space volume to contain the design storm depth
and may not be designed or constructed with an underdrain.
   "Hillside" means property located in an area with known erosive soil
conditions, where the development contemplates grading on any natural slope
that is (25%) or greater and where grading contemplates cut or fill slopes.
   "Illicit connection" means any human-made conveyance that is connected to
the storm drain system without a permit, excluding gutters, roof-drains and
other similar connections. Examples include channels, pipelines, conduits,
inlets or outlets that are connected directly to the storm drain system.
   "Illicit discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is
prohibited under local, state or federal statutes, ordinances, codes or
regulations. This includes all non-stormwater discharges except discharges
pursuant to a separate NPDES permit and discharges that are exempted or
conditionally exempted in accordance with Part III the municipal NPDES permit.
   "Industrial/commercial facility" means any facility involved and/or used in
the production, manufacture, storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or
sale of goods and/or commodities, and any facility involved and/or used in
providing professional and non-professional services. This category of
facilities includes, but is not limited to, any facility defined by either the
Standard Industrial Classifications (SIC) or the North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS). Facility ownership (federal, state, municipal,
private) and profit motive of the facility are not factors in this definition.
   "Industrial park" means land development that is set aside for industrial
development. Industrial parks are usually located close to transport
facilities, especially where more than one transport modalities coincide:
highways, railroads, airports, and navigable rivers. It includes office parks,
which have offices and light industry.
   "Infiltration BMP" means a LID BMP that reduces stormwater runoff by
capturing and infiltrating the runoff into in-situ soils or amended onsite
soils. Examples of infiltration BMPs include infiltration basins, dry wells,
and pervious pavement.
   "Infiltration" means the downward entry of water into the surface of the
soil.
   "Low impact development (LID)" consists of building and landscape features
designed to retain or filter stormwater runoff.
   "Material" means any substance including, but not limited to: garbage and
debris; lawn clippings, leaves, and other vegetation; biological and fecal
waste; sediment and sludge; oil and grease; gasoline; paints, solvents,
cleaners, and any fluid or solid containing chemicals.
   "Municipal NPDES permit" means the waste discharge requirements for
municipal stormwater and urban runoff discharges within the county of Los
Angeles, and the incorporated cities therein, except the city of Long Beach,
Order No. R4-2012-0175, NPDES Permit No. CAS00401, issued by the California
Regional Water Quality Control Board-Los Angeles Region, and any successor
permit to that permit.
   "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system
of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains):
      (1)   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state
law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such
as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar
entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or a
designated and approved management agency under section 208 of the CWA that
discharges to waters of the United States;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 CFR Section 122.2.
   "New development" means land-disturbing activities; structural development,
including construction or installation of a building or structure, creation of
impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.
   "Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to a municipal stormwater
system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
   "NPDES permit" means any waste discharge requirements issued by the Regional
Board or the State Water Resources Control Board in the form of an NPDES permit
pursuant to Water Code Section 13370 (other than the municipal NPDES permit).
   "Outfall" means a point source as defined by 40 CFR 122.2 at the point where
a municipal separate storm sewer discharges to waters of the United States and
does not include open conveyances connecting two municipal separate storm
sewers, or pipes, tunnels or other conveyances with connect segments of the
same stream or other waters of the United Sates and are used to convey waters
of the United States. (40 CFR Section 122.26(b)(9))
   "Parking lot" means land area or a facility for the parking or storage of
motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry or personal use with a
lot size of five thousand square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty-
five or more parking spaces.
   "Planning priority projects" means those projects specified in Section
13.12.110(c) of this chapter that are required to incorporate appropriate storm
water mitigation measures into the design plan for their respective projects.
   "Pollutant" means those pollutants defined in Section 502(6) of the federal
Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6)), or incorporated into California
Water Code Section 13373. Examples of pollutants include, but are not limited
to the following:
      (1)   Commercial and industrial waste (such as fuels, solvents,
detergents, plastic pellets, hazardous substances, fertilizers, pesticides,
slag, ash and sludge);
      (2)   Metals such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel,
chromium, and nonmetals such as phosphorus and arsenic;
      (3)   Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants,
waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);
      (4)   Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials in
amounts which may adversely affect the beneficial use of the receiving waters,
flora or fauna of the state;
      (5)   Animal wastes (such as discharge from confinement facilities,
kennels, pens, recreational facilities, stables and show facilities);
      (6)   Substances having characteristics such as pH less than six or
greater than nine, or unusual coloration or turbidity, or excessive levels of
fecal coliform, or fecal streptococcus, or enterococcus;
   The term "pollutant" shall not include uncontaminated stormwater, potable
water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment
facility.
   "Project" means all development, redevelopment, and land disturbing
activities. The term is not limited to "Project" as defined under CEQA
(California Public Resources Code Section 21065).
   "Rainfall harvest and use" means a LID BMP system designed to capture
runoff, typically from a roof but can also include runoff capture from
elsewhere within the site, and to provide for temporary storage until the
harvested water can be used for irrigation or non-potable uses. The harvested
water may also be used for potable water uses if the system includes
disinfection treatment and is approved for such use by the local building
department (Order No. R4-2012-0175).
   "Receiving Water" means "water of the United States" into which waste and/or
pollutants are or may be discharged.
   "Redevelopment" means land-disturbing activity that result in the creation,
addition, or replacement of five thousand square feet or more of impervious
surface area on an already developed site. Redevelopment includes, but is not
limited to: the expansion of a building footprint; addition or replacement of a
structure; replacement of impervious surface area that is not part of routine
maintenance activity; and land disturbing activity related to structural or
impervious surfaces. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain
original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purpose of facility,
nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately
protect public health and safety.
   "Regional Board" means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board-
Los Angeles Region.
   "Restaurant" means a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for
consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling
prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption. (SIC Code 5812).
   "Retail gasoline outlet" means any facility engaged in selling gasoline and
lubricating oils.
   "Routine maintenance" includes, but is not limited to projects conducted to:
      (1)   Maintain the original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or
original purpose of the facility;
      (2)   Perform as needed restoration work to preserve the original design
grade, integrity and hydraulic capacity of flood control facilities;
      (3)   Includes road shoulder work, regrading dirt or gravel roadways and
shoulders and performing ditch cleanouts;
      (4)   Update existing lines and facilities, which include replacing
existing lines with new materials or pipes, to comply with applicable codes,
standards, and regulations regardless if such projects result in increased
capacity;
      (5)   Repair leaks.
   "Routine maintenance" does not include construction of new lines or
facilities resulting from compliance with applicable codes, standards and
regulations.
   "Runoff" means any runoff including storm water and dry weather flows from a
drainage area that reaches a receiving water body or subsurface. During dry
weather it is typically comprised of base flow either contaminated with
pollutants or uncontaminated, and nuisance flows.
   "Site" means the land or water area where any facility or activity is
physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection
with the facility or activity.
   "Source control BMP" means any schedule of activities, prohibition of
practices, maintenance procedures, managerial practices or operational
practices that aim to prevent stormwater pollution by reducing the potential
for contamination at the source of pollution.
   "Standard urban stormwater mitigation plan" or "SUSMP" means a report
submitted by an applicant for approval by the director prior to issuance of a
building, grading, planning or similar permit outlining the necessary LID
requirements and BMPs which must be incorporated into design plans for
development or redevelopment projects.
   "Storm drain system" means any facility or any parts of the facility,
including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels
and watercourse that are used for the purpose of collecting, storing,
transporting or disposing of stormwater and are located within the city.
   "Stormwater runoff" means that part of precipitation (rainfall) which
travels via flow across a surface to the MS4 or receiving waters from
impervious, semi-pervious or pervious surfaces. When all other factors are
equal, runoff increases as the perviousness of a surface decreases.
   "Structural BMP" means any structural facility designed and constructed to
mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater and urban runoff pollution (e.g.
canopy, structural enclosure). Structural BMPs may include both treatment
control BMPs and source control BMPs.
   "Treatment" means the application of engineered systems that use physical,
chemical or biological processes to remove pollutants. Such processes include,
but are not limited to, filtration, gravity settling, media adsorption,
biodegradation, biological uptake, chemical oxidation and UV radiation.
   "Treatment control BMP" means any engineered system designed to remove
pollutants by simple gravity settling of particulate pollutants, filtration,
biological uptake, media adsorption or any other physical, biological or
chemical process.
   "Urban runoff" means surface water flow produced by non-stormwater resulting
from residential, commercial and industrial activities involving the use of
potable and nonpotable water.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.050 Construction and application.
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of
the federal Clean Water Act and acts amendatory or supplementary to the Federal
Clean Water Act, applicable implementing regulations, and the municipal NPDES
permit, and any amendment, revision or reissuance of the municipal NPDES
permit.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.060 No taking.
The provisions of this chapter shall not operate to deprive any property owner
of substantially all of the market value of such owner's property or otherwise
constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.070 Prohibited activities.
   (a)   Illicit discharges and connections. It is prohibited to commence,
establish, use, maintain or continue any illicit connections to the MS4 or any
illicit discharges to the MS4. This prohibition against illicit connections
applies to the use, maintenance or continuation of any illicit connection,
whether that connection was established prior to or after the effective date of
this chapter.
   (b)   Littering. No person shall throw, deposit, place, leave, maintain,
keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, placed, left or maintained or kept, any
refuse, rubbish, garbage, or any other discarded or abandoned objects, articles
or accumulations, in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, storm drain, inlet,
catch basin conduit or drainage structure, business place, or upon any or
private plot of land in the city, so that the same might be or become a
pollutant. No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake,
stream, or other body of water within the city. This section shall not apply to
refuse, rubbish or garbage deposited in containers, bags or other appropriate
receptacles which are placed in designated locations for regular solid waste
pick-up and disposal.
   (c)   Disposal of landscape debris. No person shall dispose of leaves, dirt,
or other landscape debris into the municipal separate stormwater system.
   (d)   Non-stormwater discharges. The following non-stormwater discharges
into the MS4 are prohibited unless in compliance with a separate NPDES permit
or pursuant to a discharge exemption by the Regional Board, the Regional
Board's executive officer, or the State Water Resources Control Board:
      (1)   The discharge of untreated wash waters to the MS4 when gas
stations, auto repair garages, or other type of automotive service facilities
are cleaned;
      (2)   The discharge of untreated wastewater to the MS4 from mobile auto
washing, steam cleaning, mobile carpet cleaning, and other such mobile
commercial and industrial operations;
      (3)   To the maximum extent practicable, discharges to the MS4 from areas
where repair of machinery and equipment, including motor vehicles, which are
visibly leaking oil, fluid or antifreeze, is undertaken;
      (4)   Discharges of untreated runoff to the MS4 from storage areas of
materials containing grease, oil, or other hazardous substances, and uncovered
receptacles containing hazardous materials;
      (5)   Discharges of commercial/municipal swimming pool filter backwash to
the MS4;
      (6)   Discharges of untreated runoff from the washing of toxic materials
from paved or unpaved areas to the MS4; provided, however, that nonindustrial
and noncommercial activities which incidentally generate urban runoff, such as
the hosing of sidewalks, shall be excluded from this prohibition;
      (7)   To the maximum extent practicable, discharges to the MS4 from
washing impervious surfaces in industrial/commercial areas which results in a
discharge of untreated runoff to the MS4, unless specifically required by state
law, or the city's municipal code, or Los Angeles County's Health and Safety
Codes, or permitted under a separate NPDES permit;
      (8)   Discharges from the washing out of concrete trucks into the MS4;
      (9)   Discharges to the MS4 of any pesticide, fungicide or herbicide,
banned by the USEPA or the California Department of Pesticide Regulation; or
      (10)   The disposal of hazardous wastes into trash containers used for
municipal trash disposal where such disposal causes or threatens to cause a
direct or indirect discharge to the MS4.
   (e)   Car washing. No motor vehicle, boat, trailer, or other type of mobile
transportation may be washed, other than at a commercial carwash, unless such
vehicle is being washed by:
      (1)   A resident at their residence using a hand-held bucket or a water
hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle as long as water does not flow
onto streets; or
      (2)   A business that has an approved car wash facility for its fleet
vehicles, provided that water does not flow onto streets.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.080 Exempted discharges, conditionally exempted discharges or designated
discharges.
   (a)   Discharges from those activities specifically identified in, or
pursuant to, Part III.A.1-3 of the municipal NPDES permit as being exempted
discharges, conditionally exempted discharges or designated discharges shall
not be considered a violation of this chapter; provided that, consistent with
Part III.A.1-3 of the municipal NPDES permit:
      (1)   Any applicable BMPs developed pursuant to the Municipal NPDES
Permit are implemented to minimize any adverse impacts from such identified
sources;
      (2)   The discharger meets all notification, reporting and recordkeeping
requirements; and
      (3)   The discharge has conducted all applicable monitoring requirements.
   (b)   Discharges in violation of the municipal NPDES permit. Any discharge
that would result in or contribute to a violation of the municipal NPDES
permit, either separately or in with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability
for any such discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) causing or
responsible for the discharge, and such person(s) shall defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the City from all losses, liabilities, claims or causes of
actions in any administrative or judicial action relating to such discharge.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.090 Good housekeeping provisions.
Owners and occupants of property within the city shall comply with the
following requirements:
   (a)   Septic waste. No person shall leave, deposit, discharge, dump, or
otherwise expose any chemical or septic waste to precipitation in an area where
a discharge to City streets or MS4 may or does occur.
   (b)   Use of water. Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be
minimized to the maximum extent practicable. Runoff of water from the permitted
washing down of paved areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent
practicable.
   (c)   Storage of materials, machinery and equipment. Machinery or equipment
that is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to or exposed to
stormwater, shall be placed in a manner so that leaks, spills and other
maintenance-related pollutants are not discharged to the MS4.
   (d)   Removal and disposal of debris from industrial/commercial motor
vehicle parking lots. Industrial/commercial motor vehicle parking lots with
more than twenty-five parking spaces that are located in areas potentially
exposed to stormwater shall be swept regularly or other equally effective
measures shall be utilized to remove debris from such parking lots.
   (e)   Food wastes. Food wastes generated by nonresidential food service and
food distribution sources shall be properly disposed of and in a manner so such
wastes are not discharged to the MS4.
   (f)   Best management practices. Best management practices shall be used in
areas exposed to stormwater for the removal and lawful disposal of all fuels,
chemicals, fuel and chemical wastes, animal wastes, garbage, batteries, or
other materials which have potential adverse impacts on water quality.
   (g)   Maintenance of structural BMPs. Structural BMPs shall be properly
operated and maintained, consistent with the approved SUSMP. Records and
documentation of such maintenance shall be provided to the director upon
request.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.100 Requirements for industrial/commercial and construction activities.
   (a)   Industrial/commercial and construction related dischargers generally.
Each discharger associated with industrial/commercial activity or construction
activity, or other discharger described in any general NPDES permit addressing
such discharges, as may be issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the State Water Resources Control Board, or the Regional Board shall comply
with all requirements of such NPDES permit and the city's development
construction program. Each discharger identified in an individual NPDES permit
shall comply with and undertake all activities required by such permit. Proof
of compliance with any such NPDES permit and the city's development
construction program may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior
to the issuance of any grading, building or occupancy permits, or any other
type of permit or license issued by the city.
   (b)   Industrial/commercial and construction related non-storm water
discharges. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from industrial, commercial or
construction activities in violation of any applicable NPDES permit or the
city's development construction program are prohibited.
   (c)   Source control bmps for industrial/commercial facilities. Industrial/
commercial facilities shall implement the effective source control BMPs listed
in Table 10 of Part VI.D.6.f. of the municipal NPDES permit, unless a
particular pollutant generating activity does not occur on a facility's site.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.110 Standard urban stormwater mitigation plan (SUSMP) and low impact
development (LID) requirements for new development and redevelopment projects.
   (a)   Objective. Pursuant to Part VI.D.7.b of the municipal NPDES permit,
the provisions of this section establish requirements for construction
activities and facility operations of development and redevelopment projects to
comply with the current municipal NPDES permit to lessen the water quality
impacts of development by using smart growth practices and integrate LID
practices and standards for stormwater pollution mitigation through means of
infiltration, evapotranspiration, biofiltration, and rainfall harvest and use.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the city shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Scope. This section contains requirements for stormwater pollution
control measures in development and redevelopment projects and authorizes the
city to further define and adopt stormwater pollution control measures, and to
develop LID principles and requirements, including but not limited to the
objectives and specifications for integration of LID strategies. As specified
in this section, certain planning priority projects shall meet the requirements
of this section through the preparation and submittal of a standard urban
stormwater mitigation plan (SUSMP), which shall include the applicable LID
requirements set forth in this section as an element of the SUSMP.
   (c)   Applicability - planning priority projects. The following development
and redevelopment projects shall be designated as planning priority projects,
which are subject to City conditioning and approval for the design and
implementation of post-construction controls to mitigate storm water pollution
prior to completion of the projects, and shall meet the requirements of this
section:
      (1)   New development projects.
         a.   All development projects equal to one acre or greater of
disturbed area that adds more than 10,000 square feet of impervious surface
area.
         b.   Industrial parks 10,000 square feet or more of surface area.
         c.   Commercial malls 10,000 square feet or more of surface area.
         d.   Retail gasoline outlets with 5,000 square feet or more of surface
area.
         e.   Restaurants (Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of 5812)
with 5,000 square feet or more of surface area.
         f.   Parking lots with 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface
area, or with twenty-five or more parking spaces.
         g.   Streets and roads construction of 10,000 square feet or more of
impervious surface area. Street and road construction applies to standalone
streets, roads, highways, and freeway projects, and also applies to streets
within larger projects.
         h.   Automotive service facilities (Standard Industrial Classification
(SIC) of 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534 and 7536-7539) 5,000 square feet or
more of surface area.
         i.   Projects located in or directly adjacent to, or discharging
directly to an environmentally sensitive area (ESA), where the development
will:
            (i)   Discharge stormwater runoff that is likely to impact a
sensitive biological species or habitat; and
            (ii)   Create 2,500 square feet or more of impervious surface area.
         j.   Single-family hillside homes.
      (2)   Redevelopment projects
         a.   Land disturbing activity that results in the creation or addition
or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious surface area on an
already developed site on planning priority project categories.
         b.   Where redevelopment results in an alteration to more than 50% of
impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing
development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control
requirements, the entire project must be mitigated.
         c.   Where redevelopment results in an alteration of less than 50% of
impervious surfaces of a previously existing development, and the existing
development was not subject to post-construction stormwater quality control
requirements, only the alteration must be mitigated, and not the entire
development.
         d.   Redevelopment does not include routine maintenance activities
that are conducted to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity,
original purpose of facility or emergency redevelopment activity required to
protect public health and safety. Impervious surface replacement, such as the
reconstruction of parking lots and roadways which does not disturb additional
area and maintains the original grade and alignment, is considered a routine
maintenance activity. Redevelopment does not include the repaving of existing
roads to maintain original line and grade.
         e.   Existing single-family dwelling and accessory structures are
exempt from the redevelopment requirements unless such projects create, add, or
replace 10,000 square feet of impervious surface area.
   (d)   Specific requirements. The site for every planning priority project
shall be designed to control pollutants, pollutant loads, and runoff volume to
the maximum extent feasible by minimizing impervious surface area and
controlling runoff from impervious surfaces through infiltration,
evapotranspiration, bioretention and/or rainfall harvest and use. In addition,
the following specific requirements apply:
      (1)   New single-family hillside homes. A new single-family hillside home
development project shall include mitigation measures to:
         a.   Conserve natural areas;
         b.   Protect slopes and channels;
         c.   Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage;
         d.   Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the
diversion would result in slope instability; and
         e.   Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless
the diversion would result in slope instability.
      (2)   Street and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more. Street
and road construction of 10,000 square feet or more of impervious surface shall
follow the city's Green Street Manual developed by the director and approved by
city council resolution. The city's Green Street Manual shall be based on the
USEPA guidance regarding Managing Wet Weather with Green Infrastructure: Green
Streets (December 2008 EPA-833-F-08-009).
      (3)   Remainder of planning priority projects require a susmp. Except for
the projects listed in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (d) of this
section, all other planning priority projects shall prepare and submit to the
director for review and approval a SUSMP which shall also contain LID
requirements consistent with Parts VI.D.7.c and VI.D.7.d(iii) of the municipal
NPDES permit. In addition, planning priority projects subject to this paragraph
(3) shall do the following:
         a.   Incorporate the SUSMP into project plans. An applicant for a
planning priority project identified in paragraph (3) of subsection (d) of this
section shall incorporate into the applicant's project plans a stormwater
mitigation plan (SWMP), which includes those BMPs necessary to control
stormwater pollution from construction activities and facility operations, as
set forth in the SUSMP applicable to the applicant's project. Structural or
treatment control BMPs (including, as applicable, post-construction treatment
control BMPs) set forth in project plans shall meet the design standards set
forth in the SUSMP and the current municipal NPDES permit.
         b.   Verify maintenance of BMPs. If a project applicant has included
or is required to include structural or treatment control BMPs in project
plans, the applicant shall provide verification of maintenance provisions. The
verification shall include the applicant's signed statement, as part of its
project application, accepting responsibility for all structural and treatment
control BMP maintenance until such time, if any, the property is transferred.
   (e)   Issuance of discretionary permits. No discretionary permit may be
issued for any planning priority project identified in this section until the
director confirms the project plans comply with the applicable requirements of
this section.
   (f)   Issuance of certificates of occupancy. As a condition for issuing a
certificate of occupancy for a planning priority project identified in this
section, the director shall require facility operators and/or owners to build
all the stormwater pollution control BMPs and structural or treatment control
BMPs that are shown on the approved project plans and to submit a signed
certification statement stating that the site and all structural or treatment
control BMPs will be maintained in compliance with the SUSMP and other
applicable regulatory requirements.
   (g)   Transfer of properties subject to requirement for maintenance of
structural and treatment control BMPs.
      (1)   The transfer or lease of a property subject to a requirement for
maintenance of structural and treatment control BMPs shall include conditions
requiring the transferee and its successors and assigns to either (a) assume
responsibility for maintenance of any existing structural or treatment control
BMP or (b) to replace an existing structural or treatment control BMP with new
control measures or BMPs meeting the then current standards of the city and the
SUSMP. Such requirement shall be included in any sale or lease agreement or
deed for such property. The condition of transfer shall include a provision
that the successor property owner or lessee conduct maintenance inspections of
all structural or treatment control BMPs at least once a year and retain proof
of inspection.
      (2)   For residential properties where the structural or treatment
control BMPs are located within a common area which will be maintained by a
homeowners association, language regarding the responsibility for maintenance
shall be included in the projects conditions, covenants and restrictions
(CC&Rs). Printed educational materials will be required to accompany the first
deed transfer to highlight the existence of the requirement and to provide
information on what stormwater management facilities are present, signs that
maintenance is needed, and how the necessary maintenance can be performed. The
transfer of this information shall also be required with any subsequent sale of
the property.
      (3)   If structural or treatment control BMPs are located within an area
proposed for dedication to a public agency, said BMPs shall be the
responsibility of the developer until the dedication is accepted by the public
agency.
   (h)   CEQA. Provisions of this section shall be complementary to, and shall
not replace, any applicable requirements for stormwater mitigation required
under the California Environmental Quality Act.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
13.12.120 Enforcement.
   (a)   Violations deemed a public nuisance.
      (1)   The following violations shall be deemed a public nuisance:
         a.   Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter; or
         b.   Any failure to comply with any applicable requirement of either
the SUSMP or an approved stormwater mitigation plan with respect to a property;
or
         c.   Any false certification or verification, or any failure to comply
with a certification or verification provided by a project applicant or the
applicant's successor in interest; or
         d.   Any failure to properly operate and maintain any structural or
treatment control BMP on a property in accordance with an approved stormwater
mitigation plan or the SUSMP, is determined to be a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, is declared and deemed a public nuisance, and may
be abated or restored by any director, and a civil or criminal action to abate,
enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be brought by the
city attorney.
      (2)   The cost of such abatement and restoration shall be borne by the
owner of the property and the cost shall be billed to the owner of the
property, as provided by law or ordinance for the recovery of nuisance
abatement costs.
      (3)   If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and
recurrent nuisance, the director shall so declare. The failure of any person to
take appropriate annual precautions to prevent stormwater pollution after
written notice of a determination under this section shall constitute a public
nuisance and a violation of this chapter.
   (b)   Concealment. Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of such
provision.
   (c)   Civil actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this
chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought
by the city. In any such action, the City may seek any or all of the following
remedies:
      (1)   A temporary and/or permanent injunction;
      (2)   Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation,
inspection or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the
violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action
under this section;
      (3)   Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse
effects resulting from the violation;
      (4)   Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality,
wildlife, fish and aquatic life.
   (d)   Administrative enforcement powers. In addition to the other
enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, the director has
the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:
      (1)   Cease and desist orders. When a discharge has taken place or is
likely to take place in violation of this chapter, the director may issue an
order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice or operation likely to
cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall:
         a.   Comply with the requirement;
         b.   Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and
         c.   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the
violation from recurring.
      (2)   Notice to clean. Whenever the Director finds any oil, earth,
debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other
material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel
of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants
entering the MS4 or a non-stormwater discharge to the MS4, he or she may give
notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such oil
earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or
other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The
recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the
notice.
   (e)   Penalties. Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in
Chapter 1.08 of this code. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute
a separate offense.
   (f)   Permit revocation. To the extent the city makes a provision of this
chapter or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a
permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the
permit revocation procedures set forth in this code.
   (g)   Burden of proof. In an enforcement action, the burden of proof shall
be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that the
reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable has
been accomplished through compliance with the best management practices
available, including applicable monitoring, notifications and reporting
requirements.
   (h)   Remedies. Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not
supersede or limit any and all other available remedies, civil or criminal. The
remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
(Ord. 671 § 1, 2014)
Title 14
   UTILITIES
Chapters:
   
14.04   Underground Utility Districts
Chapter 14.04
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
14.04.010   Definitions.
   
14.04.020   Public hearing by city council.
   
14.04.030   Designation by resolution.
   
14.04.040   Unlawful acts.
   
14.04.050   Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
   
14.04.060   Other exceptions.
   
14.04.070   Notice to property owners and utility companies.
   
14.04.080   Responsibility of utility companies.
   
14.04.090   Responsibility of property owners.
   
14.04.095   Subdivisions.
   
14.04.100   Responsibility of city.
   
14.04.110   Extension of time.
   
14.04.120   Penalty for violation.
14.04.010 Definitions.
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section
defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in
the following definitions:
   (1)   "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of
California;
   (2)   "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the
city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are
prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the
provisions of Section 14.04.030;
   (3)   "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations,
partnerships, and their agents and employees;
   (4)   "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means
poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district
and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or
associated service;
   (5)   "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric,
communication or similar associated service by means of electrical materials or
devices.
(Ord. 137 § 1, 1968).
14.04.020 Public hearing by city council.
The city council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain
whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated
areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for
supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city
clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized
assessment roll and utilities concerned, by mail, of the time and place of such
hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing
shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each
such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard.
The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. Prior to
holding such public hearing, the city planning director shall consult with all
affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing.
(Ord. 491 § 16, 1995; Ord. 137 § 2, 1968).
14.04.030 Designation by resolution.
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity,
health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground
installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution,
declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such
removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a
description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within
which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within
which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A
reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground installation,
having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment
necessary for the removal and for the installation of such underground
facilities as may be occasioned thereby.
(Ord. 137 § 3, 1968).
14.04.040 Unlawful acts.
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the
removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as
provided in Section
14.04.030 hereof, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect,
construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when
said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except
as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or
occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the
underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive
utility service as provided in Section
14.04.090 hereof, and for such reasonable time required to remove the
facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
(Ord. 137 § 4, 1968).
14.04.050 Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be
installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed thirty days, without
authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may
grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in
cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or
utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures.
(Ord. 137 § 5, 1968).
14.04.060 Other exceptions.
Any resolution adopted pursuant to Section
14.04.030 hereof shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply
to the following types of facilities:
   (1)   Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision
and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;
   (2)   Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;
   (3)   Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any
portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or
connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires
originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited;
   (4)   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the
transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four
thousand five hundred volts;
   (5)   Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means
of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building
to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without
crossing any public street;
   (6)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a
utility for furnishing communication services;
   (7)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts;
   (8)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.
(Ord. 137 § 6, 1968).
14.04.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
   Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to
Section
14.04.030 hereof, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all
persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of
the adopting thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected
property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such
property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or
associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility
changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the
supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable
rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file
with the commission.
   Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the
resolution adopted pursuant to Section
14.04.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified herein, to affected
property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to
the affected utilities.
(Ord. 137 § 7, 1968).
14.04.080 Responsibility of utility companies.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a
District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section
14.04.030 hereof, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the
conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it
under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the
commission.
(Ord. 137 § 8, 1968).
14.04.090 Responsibility of property owners.
   (a)   Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a
building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that
portion of the service connection of his property between the facilities
referred to in Section
14.04.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure
being served.
   (b)   In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or
renting said property does not comply with the provisions of subparagraph (a)
of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant
to Section
14.04.030 hereof, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property
being served and thirty days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and
removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities
supplying utility service to the property.
(Ord. 137 § 9, 1968).
14.04.095 Subdivisions.
In the case of a new subdivision, each cable television system operator granted
a franchise by the city to service such area shall be given reasonable access
and opportunity to place its transmission and distribution facilities in
utility trenches opened by such subdivider. Further in such case, in the event
more than one cable television system operator is so franchised, each such
operator shall be given equal access and opportunity to place its underground
facilities in such trenches. The cost for opening such trenches and providing
access thereto to such cable television system operators shall be borne by the
subdivider.
(Ord. 404 § 15 (part), 1987).
14.04.100 Responsibility of city.
The city shall remove at its own expense all city- owned equipment from all
poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or
user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the
resolution enacted pursuant to Section
14.04.030 hereof.
(Ord. 137 § 10, 1968).
14.04.110 Extension of time.
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted
pursuant to Section
14.04.030 hereof cannot be performed within the time provided on account of
shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor
disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control
of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be
extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.
(Ord. 137 § 11, 1968).
14.04.120 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any
provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements is
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine
not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person is deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such
person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 137 § 12, 1968).
Title 16
   FIRE PREVENTION
Chapters:
   
16.04   Fire Code
   
16.08   Explosives
   
16.12   Fireworks
Chapter 16.04
FIRE CODE
Sections:
   
16.04.010   Short title.
   
16.04.020   Code adopted.
   
16.04.030   Copy filed.
   
16.04.040   Terms explained.
   
16.04.050   Existing permits valid.
   
16.04.060   Fireworks.
   
16.04.070   Conflicts.
   
16.04.080   Fire hazard severity zones.
16.04.010 Short title.
This Chapter shall be known as the “Fire Code of the City of La Mirada,” and
shall be cited as such.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.020 Code adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the City, Title 32 of
the Code of the County of Los Angeles, known as “Los Angeles County Fire Code,”
as the same is in effect on March 1, 2017.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.030 Copy filed.
One copy of the Los Angeles County Fire Code, referred to in Section
16.04.020  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk
for use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.040 Terms explained.
Whenever the following terms are utilized in the Los Angeles County Fire Code,
as adopted by this Chapter, to the extent permitted or regulated to ensure the
fullest enforcement of said Code within the City, such terms shall have the
meanings as set forth below:
   (1)   “Building Department” shall refer to that department of the City
having as its primary responsibility, enforcement of the Building Code of the
City.
   (2)   “Board of Appeals” shall refer to such board as may be established by
the Board of Supervisors for the purposes set forth in Title 32 of the County
Code, adopted by this Chapter.
   (3)   “Chief” means the Fire Chief of the county or his or her designee.
   (4)   “Executive body” means the Board of Supervisors for the County.
   (5)   “Fire Department” means the County of Los Angeles Fire Department.
   (6)   “County,” “County of Los Angeles,” or “unincorporated territory of the
County of Los Angeles” means the city of La Mirada, except as otherwise
required.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.050 Existing permits valid.
Any permit heretofore issued by the County pursuant to the Fire Code of the
County for work within the territorial limits of the City, shall remain in full
force and effect according to, and to the extent authorized by, the terms of
the permit.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.060 Fireworks.
Notwithstanding any provision in Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code to the
contrary, the use, display and sale of “safe and sane” fireworks shall be
governed by the provisions of
Chapter 16.12  of Title 16 of the La Mirada Municipal Code, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.070 Conflicts.
In the event of any conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of Title
32 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted in Section
16.04.020 , and any provision of the La Mirada Municipal Code, the provisions
of the La Mirada Municipal Code shall govern.
(Ord. 694 § 3, 2017)
16.04.080 Fire hazard severity zones.
   (1)   The City Council hereby designates the moderate, high, and very high
fire hazard severity zones as those areas identified in attached Exhibit “A,”
which is incorporated herein by reference.
   (2)   The adoption of the FHSZ map ensures the city’s compliance with state
regulations. The FHSZ map supports wildfire mitigation efforts, including
enforcement of California Building Code, Chapter 7A, local defensible space
standards, hazard disclosure requirements for real estate transactions, and
insurance risk assessment practices.
   (3)   Any and all provisions in any previously adopted city ordinances
designating fire severity zones within the city’s jurisdiction are superseded
by the provisions of this section.
   (4)   The City Clerk shall certify to the passage and adoption of this
section and shall forward a certified copy, along with all required supporting
documentation, to the Board of Forestry and Fire Protection within thirty days
of final adoption. Furthermore, as required by Government Code Section 51179
(g), the City Clerk shall cause the posting of a notice at the office of the
County Recorder, County Assessor, and County Planning Agency identifying the
location of the FHSZ map, Exhibit “A” hereto. (Ord. 743 § B, 2025)
Chapter 16.08
EXPLOSIVES
Sections:
   
16.08.010   Enforcement.
   
16.08.020   Defined.
   
16.08.030   Storing prohibited.
   
16.08.040   Selling, giving away prohibited.
16.08.010 Enforcement.
All provisions of this chapter shall be carried out and enforced by the law
enforcement agency of the city, and by the Los Angeles County fire department
and the consolidated fire protection district. The general supervision of
conditions and equipment which aid in control of fire, conditions constituting
fire hazards or danger to life or property, and the abatement or minimizing of
such fire hazards or dangerous conditions shall be the responsibility of the
Los Angeles County fire department and the consolidated fire protection
district.
(Prior code § 3100).
16.08.020 Defined.
"Explosive" and "explosives" whenever used in this code include blasting caps
or other detonating or fulminating caps or detonator or electric caps, gun
powder, blasting powder, dynamite, and every other explosive substance having a
power equal to or greater than that of ordinary black powder, but do not
include the substances in the form of fixed ammunition for small arms.
(Prior code § 3102).
16.08.030 Storing prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall have, possess, keep or store or permit the
keeping or storing, in any place, house or building in the city, any explosive
or explosives.
(Prior code § 3103).
16.08.040 Selling, giving away prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to give away, sell or deliver any explosive or
explosives within the city.
(Prior code § 3104).
Chapter 16.12
FIREWORKS
Sections:
   
16.12.010   Short title.
   
16.12.020   Fireworks defined.
   
16.12.030   Dangerous fireworks defined.
   
16.12.040   Safe and sane fireworks defined.
   
16.12.045   Use of safe and sane fireworks restricted.
   
16.12.050   Dangerous fireworks prohibited--Exceptions.
   
16.12.060   Permit--When required.
   
16.12.065   Issuance of retail stand permits.
   
16.12.068   Master permittee.
   
16.12.070   Retail and wholesale permit requirements.
   
16.12.080   Application for permit.
   
16.12.090   Contents of application.
   
16.12.110   Power to grant or deny application.
   
16.12.120   Term of permit--Transferability.
   
16.12.130   Safe and sane fireworks permit--Term.
   
16.12.140   Only designated location authorized.
   
16.12.150   Sales stand locational requirements.
   
16.12.160   Fireworks sales--Permitted days.
   
16.12.165   Fireworks sales--Sales of certain safe and sane fireworks
prohibited.
   
16.12.170   Temporary fireworks stands.
   
16.12.180   Sale to minors prohibited.
   
16.12.190   Compliance with state law required.
   
16.12.200   Chapter compliance required.
   
16.12.210   Penalty.
   
16.12.220   Administrative Penalties--Dangerous fireworks.
16.12.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Fireworks Ordinance of the City of La
Mirada" and may be cited as such.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.020 Fireworks defined.
"Fireworks" means blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy
guns in which explosives are used, fire balloons (balloons of a type which have
burning material of any kind attached thereto or which require fire underneath
to propel them), firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, Daygo
bombs, sparklers, or other fireworks of like construction, and any fireworks
containing any combustible or explosive substance for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or
detonation, but does not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other
similar devices in which paper caps containing not more than twenty-five
hundredths grain of explosive compound per cap are used.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.030 Dangerous fireworks defined.
Every fireworks article or item which does not bear the “safe and sane”
classification label of the state fire marshal or that is defined by the
California Health and Safety Code, Title 19, Chapter 6 of the California Code
of Regulations, or any successor provision thereto, as a "dangerous firework"
shall be considered to be dangerous fireworks.
(Ord. 630, § 1, 2009; Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 §2 (part), 2003).
16.12.040 Safe and sane fireworks defined.
"Safe and Sane" fireworks shall include only those fireworks articles that have
been classified and registered as "safe and sane" by the state fire marshal.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.045 Use of safe and sane fireworks restricted.
   (a)   Except as permitted by subsection (c), below, no “safe and sane”
fireworks may be discharged within the city except between 3:00 p.m. and 10:00
p.m. on July 4, within residential zones. Thereafter, the discharge of “safe
and sane” fireworks within the city is prohibited unless this prohibition is
repealed by ordinance of the City Council. The City Council shall review the
events of July 4, by July 31.
   (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a), it is unlawful for
any person to discharge at any time on any day, any firework that has been
physically altered from its original, manufactured state following its
provision to a retail permittee, or sale to the public.
   (c)   Except as otherwise provided herein, it is unlawful for any person to
discharge at any time any “safe and sane” fireworks in or upon any city-owned
or City Redevelopment Agency-owned property, including, but not limited to
sidewalks, streets, parking facilities and/or parks, or in or upon any property
not zoned for residential uses. This prohibition shall not apply to any city-
permitted, sponsored, or conducted fireworks show that is reviewed and approved
by the city’s permit review board.
(Ord. 663 § 1, 2013; Ord. 644, § 1, 2011; Ord. 638, § 1, 2010; Ord. 632, § 1,
2009; Ord. 630, § 2, 2009; Ord. 625 § 1, 2008; Ord. 615 § 1, 2008; Ord. 607 §
1, 2007; Ord. 593 § 1, 2006; Ord. 588 § 1, 2004; Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003;
Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 665 § 1, 2013).
16.12.050 Dangerous fireworks prohibited - exceptions.
Except as otherwise provided by law, this chapter, or as part of a fireworks
show permitted by the city under this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to
sell, possess, keep, store, use, or discharge or permit another to sell,
possess, keep, store, use or discharge, any dangerous fireworks in the city. It
is unlawful for any person to implicitly or expressly, directly or indirectly,
permit, allow, or consent to the use or discharge of dangerous fireworks on
property within the city that is owned, leased, rented, or otherwise lawfully
possessed by such person.
(Ord. 706 § 1, 2019; Ord. 630, § 3, 2009; Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 §
2 (part), 2003).
16.12.060 Permit-When required.
No person, without having a valid fireworks permit issued pursuant to this
chapter, shall do any of the following:
   (a)   Import, export, possess for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, or
sell any fireworks for any use or purpose, including agricultural purposes or
wild life control;
   (b)   Make a public display of fireworks in any place;
   (c)   Transport fireworks, except as provided for in the State Fireworks
Law.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.065 Issuance of retail stand permits.
   (a)   Each retail stand permit shall be issued to a group or entity, or
combination thereof, that meets the retail stand permit requirements provided,
however, that no more than eight retail fireworks stand permits shall be issued
in any calendar year. In the event more applications than available retail
stands have been received by the deadline for submission thereof, each retail
stand permit shall be issued to groups approved by the Master Permittee.
   (b)   The City Manager shall be authorized to establish rules and procedures
to implement the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 663 § 2, 2013; Ord. 644, § 2, 2011; Ord. 638, § 2, 2010; Ord. 632, § 2,
2009; Ord. 625 § 2, 2008; Ord. 615 § 2, 2008; Ord. 607 § 2, 2007; Ord. 593 § 2,
2006; Ord. 588 § 2, 2004; Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003;
Ord. 665 §§ 2, 3, 2013).
16.12.068 Master permittee.
   For the purpose of this section there is hereby established the position of
master permittee. The master permittee shall be the La Mirada Community
Foundation.
   The master permittee shall be the administrative head of the groups or
entities or combination thereof that desire to participate in the retail sales
of fireworks in the City of La Mirada and shall have the following duties:
      (a)   Establish requirements for retail and wholesale applicants.
      (b)   Establish the pairing of groups and entities or combination thereof
in firework stands.
      (c)   Establish agreements between wholesalers and groups and entities or
combination thereof for the retail sales of fireworks.
      (d)   Provide the city with timely updates on matters relating to the
retail sales of fireworks within La Mirada. (Ord. 663 § 3, 2013).
16.12.070 Retail and wholesale permittee requirements.
   A separate fireworks permit shall be issued to a retail applicant and
wholesale applicant.
   (a)   Applicants for retail permits shall be approved by the master
permittee.
   (b)   Applicants for wholesale permits must meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Be authorized by law to sell and/or distribute safe and sane
fireworks to retail permittees in the city;
      (2)   Have a valid and current fire marshal's license number at the time
of application and at all times when distributing or selling fireworks to
retail permittees;
      (3)   Have and maintain commercial, general and automobile liability/
umbrella insurance and workers' compensation insurance with such limits and
subject to such terms and conditions as established by resolution of the city
council;
      (4)   Execute an indemnity insuring to the benefit of the city and the La
Mirada Community Foundation, and their elected and appointed officials,
officers, employees and volunteers, in such form as established by policy of
the city and in effect at the time application is made;
      (5)   Have a current city business license;
      (6)   Deal with the master permittee and each retail sub-permittee in a
fair and equitable way and without providing financial benefits to any one or
more sub-permittee that are not provided to all sub-permittees;
      (7)   Have local capacity and ability to stock at least double the amount
of displayable merchandise in each retail stand in the city selling its
fireworks, and to restock each such retail stand within two hours of being
requested by a retail stand permittee, by telephone call to a telephone number
manned by the wholesale permit applicant;
      (8)   Submit wholesale sales information by stand location to the city
manager by August 31 of each year. Any additional information requested by the
city manager shall be provided within five business days of such request; and
      (9)   The city reserves the right to evaluate the wholesaler and its
ability to fulfill the city's requirements. The city council shall have the
power in its discretion to grant or deny any application in each subsequent
year based on the wholesale permittee's prior year's performance. (Ord. 663 §
4, 2013; Ord. 625 § 3, 2008; Ord. 615 § 3, 2008; Ord. 593 § 3, 2006; Ord. 588 §
3, 2004; Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.080 Application for permit.
Any person desiring to obtain a wholesale fireworks permit and any corporation
or association desiring to obtain a retail fireworks stand permit shall file an
application by January 15 with the finance director, together with an
application fee. The amount of the fee for a wholesale or retail fireworks
permit shall be such amount as may be established by resolution of the city
council. In the event a permit is not issued after application, the application
fee shall be refunded.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.090 Contents of application.
   (a)   Retail Permit Applications. Each applicant desiring a retail fireworks
permit shall file an application, signed under penalty of perjury, with the
city's finance director. Each application shall provide the information set
forth below. Note, however, that each applicant for an external retail permit
must provide the required information with respect to both the applicant and
any La Mirada-based corporation or association, which shall receive funds from
the applicant from the proceeds of firework sales:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
      (2)   Facts sufficient and satisfactory to the city to establish the
applicant's status as a La Mirada-based nonprofit, charitable, religious, or
eleemosynary corporation, civic, recreational, cultural or educational or
association;
      (3)   The purpose for which the applicant was organized and primarily
exists;
      (4)   The names and addresses of any and all officers and members of the
applicant;
      (5)   The date the applicant was organized and established;
      (6)   The location of the applicant's principal and permanent meeting
place;
      (7)   The applicant's state board of equalization sales tax permit
number;
      (8)   The manner, method and times the applicant proposes to sell "safe
and sane" fireworks;
      (9)   A detailed description of how funds derived from the sale of
fireworks will be used or donated and a pro forma or other form of financial
document satisfactory to the city's finance director or designee showing the
expenditure of the funds generated from the sale of fireworks during the prior
year, or during the most recent year the applicant sold fireworks;
      (10)   A pro forma or other form of financial document acceptable to the
city's finance director or designee establishing that funds contributed by an
external retail applicant to a La Mirada-based corporation or association
during the most recent two years of operation as a permittee under this chapter
were used for direct advancement of veteran, charitable, patriotic, religious,
or civic purposes that benefitted La Mirada residents;
      (11)   Such other information as the city manager may require to fully
investigate the facts set forth in each application.
      (12)   Within five days of being granted a permit, the permittee shall
provide the following:
         (A)   The name, address, and state fire marshal's license number of
the wholesaler to supply the fireworks to the retail applicant;
         (B)   Evidence establishing that the applicant has obtained insurance
required by this chapter.
   (b)   Wholesale Permit Applications. Each applicant desiring a wholesale
fireworks permit shall file an application, signed under penalty of perjury,
with the city's finance director. Each application shall provide the
information set forth below:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, including
the name and address of all owners and managing officers;
      (2)   The applicant's valid and current state fire marshal's license
number;
      (3)   Evidence establishing that the applicant has obtained insurance
required by this chapter and has executed the required indemnity;
      (4)   Evidence that the applicant has obtained any and all other required
permits or licenses necessary to distribute or sell fireworks to retail
permittees for sale in the city.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.110 Power to grant or deny application.
The city council shall have the power in its discretion to grant or deny any
application, subject to such reasonable conditions, if any, as it shall
prescribe.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.120 Term of permit-Transferability.
A fireworks permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid only within
the calendar year in which issued. Only one permit shall be issued to any
applicant except for La Mirada High School organizations, and the permit shall
be valid only for the premises or location for which issued. No permit shall be
renewable or transferable or assignable either directly or indirectly.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.130 Safe and sane fireworks permit-Term.
Each application for a permit to sell safe and sane fireworks at retail stands
shall be filed with the city clerk on or before January 15 of the calendar year
for which the permit is sought.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.140 Only designated location authorized.
A retail sales permit issued pursuant to this chapter authorizes only the
retail sale of safe and sane fireworks by the permittee at the location or
premises designated in the permit.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.150 Sales stand locational requirements.
No retail permit shall be issued unless the proposed location of the fireworks
stand complies with each of the following requirements:
   (a)   The proposed location is within a commercial zone or a planned unit
development with and underlying commercial zoning designation.
   (b)   The proposed location is no less than one hundred feet from any
structure and no less than three hundred feet from any other fireworks stand.
   (c)   The stand will be located upon asphalt, concrete, or another surface
expressly approved in writing by the city manager or designee;
   (d)   The proposed location contains a number of parking spaces for use of
operators and patrons of the fireworks stand, which under all of the
circumstances, is deemed to be sufficient by the city manager or his or her
designee;
   (e)   The proposed location provides for safe and sufficient ingress and
egress by members of the public and would otherwise be situated so as to not
present any apparent risk to the public health, safety or welfare;
   (f)   The proposed location has sufficient area so that in the opinion of
the city manager or his or her designee, the proposed location will not
adversely affect the normal business activity of the commercial center and is
compatible with the existing commercial use;
   (g)   The stand, in the location proposed, would not violate any applicable
local, state or federal rule, statute or regulation. (Ord. 663 § 6, 2013; Ord.
584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.160 Fireworks sales--Permitted days.
   No “safe and sane” fireworks shall be sold, given away, or offered for sale
except between 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., from July 1 through July 3, and
between 9:00 a.m. and 8:30 p.m. on July 4. Thereafter, selling, giving away,
offering for sale, or otherwise providing fireworks of any nature including,
but not limited to, “safe and sane” fireworks, within the City of La Mirada, is
prohibited unless this prohibition is repealed by ordinance of the City
Council.
(Ord. 663 § 8, 2013; Ord. 644, § 3, 2011; Ord. 632 § 3, 2009; Ord. 625 § 4,
2008; Ord. 615 § 4, 2008; Ord. 607 § 3, 2007; Ord. 593 § 4, 2006; Ord. 588 § 4,
2004; Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003; Ord. 665 § 4,
2013).
16.12.165 Fireworks sales--Sales of certain safe and sane fireworks prohibited.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it is unlawful for any
person or permittee to sell, give away, or otherwise provide any fireworks
within the city, except those authorized for sale by resolution of the city
council. For the purposes of this section, the resolution governing the sale
refers to that resolution in effect on June 24 of each year authorizing the
sale of specified types of fireworks.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.170 Temporary fireworks stands.
All retail sales of safe and sane fireworks shall be permitted only from within
a temporary fireworks stand, and the same from any other building or structure
is prohibited. To the extent not governed by state law or the fire code of the
city, temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:
   (a)    All stands shall meet the structural stability requirements of the
building ordinance of the city and all lighting circuits and other electrical
equipment shall meet the requirements of the electrical ordinance of the city;
   (b)   No stand shall have a floor area in excess of seven hundred fifty
square feet;
   (c)    Stands shall have exit doors at least thirty inches in width at both
ends of the structure and one additional door for each twenty feet or fraction
thereof or rear wall in excess of thirty-six feet. All doors shall open outward
from the stand all doorways shall be kept free and clear from all supplies and
materials at all times;
   (d)   Each stand shall be provided with two and one-half gallon soda-and-
acid-type fire extinguishers, as may be expressly approved in writing by the
Los Angeles County fire department, which shall be maintained in good working
order and easily accessible for use in case of fire;
   (e)   There shall be at least one supervisor, twenty-one years of age or
older, on duty at all times. No person under eighteen years of age shall be
allowed inside the stand at any time;
   (f)   No person employed as a watchman shall be permitted to remain inside
any stand when it is not open for business;
   (g)   "NO SMOKING" signs shall be prominently displayed, both inside and
outside the stand. The signs shall be not less than six square feet in size
with bold face letters not less than four inches high. No smoking shall be
permitted within the stand, or within fifteen feet of the stand;
   (h)   No fireworks stand shall be erected before June 24 of any year. The
premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and
debris related to the operation of the fireworks stand, not later than noon of
July 10th of any year;
   (i)   No fireworks shall be discharged in or within seventy-five feet of any
fireworks stand;
   (j)   No person shall allow any rubbish to accumulate in or around any
fireworks stand or permit a fire nuisance to exist;
   (k)   No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time regardless of whether
the fireworks stand is open for business or not. If any fireworks are stored
they shall only be stored at such places as are approved for storage of
fireworks by the state fire marshal; and
   (l)   "NO FIREWORKS SOLD TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE" signs shall be
prominently displayed, both inside and outside the stands. The signs shall be
not less than six square feet in size with bold face letters not less than four
inches high.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.180 Sale to minors prohibited.
   It is unlawful for any person or permittee to sell or offer for sale safe
and sane fireworks to any person under eighteen years of age.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.190 Compliance with state law required.
   It shall be the duty of every person issued a fireworks permit to comply
with all the provisions of the State Fireworks Law and the rules and
regulations of the state fire marshal. The violation of the aforesaid State
Fireworks Law or rules and regulations or any of the provisions of this chapter
by any permittee, or by any of its agents, employees, or officers shall
constitute cause, in and of itself, to deny any subsequent application for a
permit.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.200 Chapter compliance required.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of every person who receives a
fireworks permit, either as a wholesaler or retailer, to comply with all the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 584 § 1 (part), 2003; Ord. 577 § 2 (part), 2003).
16.12.210 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization, partnership
or corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter. Any person, firm, organization, partnership or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter, or failing to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each such person, firm, organization, partnership or corporation
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any
portion thereof during which any violation of this chapter is committed,
continued, or permitted by such person, firm, organization, partnership or
corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this
chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. The violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through
civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent
injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of
nuisances.
(Ord. 625 § 5, 2008; Ord. 607 § 4, 2007; Ord. 593 § 5, 2006; Ord. 584 §§ 2, 3,
2003; Ord. 577 §§ 3, 4, 2003).
16.12.220 Administrative Penalties--Dangerous fireworks.
   (a)   This section authorizes and governs the imposition, enforcement,
collection and administrative review of administrative fines and penalties for
violations of Section
16.12.050 of this Chapter, pertaining to dangerous fireworks, as defined in
this Chapter. Said administrative fines and penalties are imposed under the
authority of California Government Code Section 53069.4, California Health and
Safety Code Section 12557 and
Chapter 1.08 of this Code.
   (b)   The authority of the City to cause the issuance of an administrative
citation to any person pursuant to this Section, is in addition to the City’s
authority to utilize any and all other civil or criminal remedies in connection
with any violation of this Chapter.
   (c)   The imposition of administrative fines and penalties under this
Section is limited to persons who possess, use, sell and/or display, and/or the
seizure of, twenty-five (25) pounds or less of dangerous fireworks.
   (d)   Administrative fines and penalties collected pursuant to this Section
shall not be subject to the provisions of California Health and Safety Code
Section 12706, and shall be allocated in compliance with California Health and
Safety Code Section 12557, which requires the City to reimburse the State Fire
Marshal for costs associated with the disposal of seized fireworks. Unless and
until regulations governing such reimbursement have been adopted by the State
Fire Marshal and are effective in the State of California, the City shall hold
in trust for up to one year following receipt of the fine amount, Two Hundred
Fifty Dollars ($250.00) from each One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) in
administrative fines and penalties collected pursuant to this Section, for
purposes of reimbursing the State Fire Marshal for costs associated with the
disposal of seized dangerous fireworks.
(Ord. 637 § 1, 2010)
Title 17
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  *
*   For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate the construction
and removal of buildings, see Gov. Code 38601 and 38660.
Chapters:
   
17.04   Building Code
   
17.06   Residential Code
   
17.08   Electrical Code
   
17.12   Plumbing Code
   
17.16   Mechanical Code
   
17.18   Green Building Standards Code
   
17.19   Existing Building Code
   
17.20   Moving Buildings--Excavations
   
17.24   Civil Defense Structures
   
17.26   Expedited Permitting for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems
 
Notes
* For statutory provisions authorizing cities to regulate the construction and
  removal of buildings, see Gov. Code 38601 and 38660.
Chapter 17.04
BUILDING CODE
Sections:
   
17.04.010   Adopted.
   
17.04.020   Copy filed.
   
17.04.030   Terms defined.
   
17.04.040   Fee schedule; modification by resolution.
   
17.04.050   Lock boxes required at specified locations.
   
17.04.060   Amendments to Section 106.3 of Chapter 1 Administration.
   
17.04.070   Amendments to Section 106.5.4 of Chapter 1 Administration.
   
17.04.080   Amendments to Chapters 94, 95 and 96-Special seismic requirements.
   
17.04.090   Penalties.
17.04.010 Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter, that
certain Building Code known and designated as the Los Angeles County Building
Code, Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code, including all appendices, as
adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect on January 1, 2023,
incorporating the 2022 California Building Code, including all changes made by
the County of Los Angeles; and such Code shall be and become the Building Code
of the City of La Mirada, regulating and controlling the design, construction,
quality of materials, grading, use, occupancy, location and maintenance of all
buildings or structures and prescribing conditions under which such work may be
carried on within the City and providing for the issuance of permits and the
collection of fees therefor.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.020 Copy filed.
One copy of the Los Angeles County Building Code, referred to in Section
17.04.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the Office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by said Clerk for
use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.030 Terms defined.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Building Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the
meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Board of Appeals" means the Board of Appeals established by Section
105 of the Los Angeles County Building Code.
   (2)   "Board of Supervisors" means the City Council.
   (3)   "Building Code" means Chapter
17.04  of this municipal code.
   (4)   "Building Department" means the "Building and Safety Division" of the
Department of County Engineer, acting for the City.
   (5)   "Building official" means the County Engineer.
   (6)   "City" means the City of La Mirada, except in Section 101.3 of the
Building Code.
   (7)   "County," "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated territory of the
County of Los Angeles" means the City.
   (8)   "County Engineer" means the County Engineer of the County of Los
Angeles.
   (9)   "Electrical Code" means Chapter
17.08  of this Municipal Code.
   (10)   "Existing Building Code" means Chapter
17.19  of this municipal code.
   (11)   "Fire Code" or "Los Angeles County Fire Code" means the Fire Code of
the City of La Mirada.
   (12)   "Fire zone" means the fire zone adopted by an ordinance creating and
establishing fire zones or where no such fire zones have been adopted, the City
shall be considered to be in Fire Zone No. 3, or any designated Fire Zone.
   (13)   "General fund" means the City Treasury.
   (14)   "Green Building Standards Code" means Chapter
17.18  of this municipal code.
   (15)   "Health Code" or "Los Angeles County Health Code" means Chapter
6.04  of this Municipal Code.
   (16)   "Health Officer" means the Health Officer of the City.
   (17)   "Mechanical Code" means Chapter
17.16  of this Municipal Code.
   (18)   "Plumbing Code" means Chapter
17.12  of this municipal code.
   (19)   "Residential Code" means Chapter
17.06  of this municipal code.
   (20)   "Zoning Ordinance" means the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.040 Fee schedule; modification by resolution.
The fees referenced in Section
17.04.010  shall be as adopted by separate resolution of the City Council of
the City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.050 Lock boxes required at specified locations.
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in the Los Angeles
County Building Code, as adopted herein or hereinafter, a lock box for use by
the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Department may be required to be installed at
each vehicular entrance to each residential tract, and commercial development
or industrial facility, where entry is restricted by means of a gate, moveable
barricade or similar device. The lock box shall be located in an accessible
location, near the entrance and clearly marked as a Los Angeles County
Sheriff's Department lock box and shall contain a key, key card or other device
necessary to allow access by the Sheriff's Department in an emergency
situation. The form and design of the lock box shall be as prescribed by the
Community Development Director or designee. The existence of a lock box for use
by the Los Angeles County Fire Department shall not satisfy the requirements of
this section.
   Upon written request to the Community Development Director or designee, a
determination will be made as to the applicability of this section to any
tract, development or premises within the city. No civil or criminal action
related to noncompliance with this section shall be taken unless the owner of
affected property has first been given no less than thirty days prior written
notice by first class mail, at the address of record as shown on the latest tax
rolls of the County of Los Angeles, of the applicability of this section to
such property.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.060 Amendments to Section 106.3 of Chapter 1 Administration.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
17.04.010  of this Chapter, subsection '2' of Section 106.3 (Work Exempted) of
Chapter 1 of the Los Angeles County Building Code is hereby amended to read as
follows:
   2.   Fences which are not used as a barrier to private swimming pools, spas
or hot tubs, and ground signs, provided that:
      2.1   Masonry or concrete fences do not exceed 36 inches (914.4 mm) in
height.
      2.2   Fences constructed of other materials do not exceed 36 inches
(914.4 mm) in height.
      2.3   Ground signs do not exceed 36 inches (914.4 mm) in height.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.070 Amendments to Section 106.5.4 of Chapter 1 Administration.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
17.04.010  of this Chapter, Section 106.5.4 (Expiration) of Chapter 1 of the
Los Angeles County Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows:
   106.5.4   Expiration.
      Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this
Code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized
by such permit is not commenced within 12 months from the date such permit is
issued, or the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a
period of 180 days, or the permittee fails to obtain inspection as required by
the provisions of Section 108 of this Code for a period of 180 days.
         Exception: Permits issued to abate violation(s) in conjunction with a
code enforcement action shall expire and become null and void at a date not to
exceed 12 months from the issuance date or at a date determined by the City
Code Enforcement Division.
         The Building Official may grant one or more extensions of the time for
action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days from the date of
expiration upon written request from the permittee and payment of a fee in an
amount equal to 25 percent of the permit fee. No permit shall be extended more
than twice.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.080 Amendments to Chapters 94, 95 and 96-Special seismic requirements.
    (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
17.04.010  of this Chapter, Section 9404 of Chapter 94 of the Los Angeles
County Building Code is hereby deleted, and Section 9401 thereof is hereby
amended to read as follows:
   SECTION 9401-PURPOSE. This chapter provides systematic procedures and
standards for the voluntary identification and possible retrofitting of welded
steel moment frame buildings. This chapter sets forth minimum standards for
structural seismic resistance to reduce risk of loss of life and injury by the
inspection and repair of lateral load resisting welded steel moment frame
connections. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily prevent loss
of life, or injury, or prevent earthquake damage to repaired buildings.
   Notwithstanding any other provision herein, compliance with this chapter is
voluntary. However, owners and occupiers of buildings or structures that
otherwise fall within the scope of this chapter are encouraged to upgrade and
retrofit such buildings and structures to the standards set forth in this
chapter and Chapters 95 and 96 of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code, as
in effect on January 1, 2023.
   (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
17.04.010  of this Chapter, Section 9502 of Chapter 95 of Title 26 of the Los
Angeles County Code, as in effect on January 1, 2023, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
   SECTION 9502-SCOPE. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to
buildings and structures existing, or for which building plans have been
approved by the City of La Mirada, as of the effective date of the City of La
Mirada ordinance adopting this chapter by reference. This exception shall apply
unless and until:
      (a)   Any application for a conditional use permit, site plan review,
variance, building permit or other approval that would have the effect of
enlarging the floor area or increasing the height of such building or
structure, is received by the City or on the City's behalf; or
      (b)   The occurrence of any event that would trigger or be grounds for
the loss of legal, non-conforming status of such building or structure.
   (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Section
17.04.010  of this Chapter, Section 9602 of Chapter 96 of Title 26 of the Los
Angeles County Code, as in effect on January 1, 2023, is hereby amended to read
as follows:
   SECTION 9602-SCOPE. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to (i)
dwellings and lodging houses defined as Group R, Division 3 Occupancies or
accessory buildings defined as Group U, Division 1 Occupancies; or to (ii)
buildings and structures existing, or for which building plans have been
approved by the City of La Mirada, as of the effective date of the City of La
Mirada ordinance adopting this chapter by reference. This exception set forth
in subsection (ii) above shall apply unless and until:
      (a)   Any application for a conditional use permit, certificate of
compatibility, site plan review, variance, building permit or other approval
that would have the effect of enlarging the floor area or increasing the height
of such building or structure, is received by the City or on the City's behalf;
or
      (b)   The occurrence of any event that would trigger or be grounds for
the loss of legal, non-conforming status of such building or structure.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to
buildings which, prior to March 20, 1933, had been issued a building permit, or
were constructed or were under construction, and which have un-reinforced
masonry bearing walls as defined herein.
   (4)   Owners and occupiers of un-reinforced buildings or structures exempt
from this Chapter
17.04  are highly encouraged to upgrade and retrofit such buildings and
structures to the standards set forth in Chapters 95 and 96 of Title 26 of the
Los Angeles County Code, as in effect on January 1, 2023.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
17.04.090 Penalties.
    (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or
corporation to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the
requirements of this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is
specifically designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or
corporation violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby
or failing to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm,
partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for
each and every day or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed,
continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and
shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 3 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 3 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.06
RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sections:
   
17.06.010   Adopted.
   
17.06.020   Copy filed.
   
17.06.030   Terms defined.
   
17.06.040   Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
   
17.06.050   Penalties.
17.06.010 Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter, that
certain Residential Code known and designated as the Los Angeles County
Residential Code, Title 30 of the Los Angeles County Code, including all
appendices, as adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect on January 1,
2023, incorporating the 2022 California Residential Code, including all changes
made by the County of Los Angeles, and such Code shall be and become the
Residential Code of the City of La Mirada, regulating and controlling the
design, construction, installation, quality of materials, operation and
maintenance. (Ord. 727-U, § 5 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 5 (part), 2020)
17.06.020 Copy filed.
One copy of the Los Angeles County Residential Code, referred to in Section
17.06.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for
use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 727-U, § 5 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 5 (part), 2020)
17.06.030 Terms defined.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Residential Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have
the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Board of Supervisors" means the City Council of La Mirada.
   (2)   "County" or "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the
City of La Mirada.
   (3)   "Board of Appeals" or "Board of Examiners of Plumbers" means the Board
of Examiners of Plumbers, Gas Fitters, and Sewerage Contractors of the County
of Los Angeles established by the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code.
   (4)   "Building Department" means the "Building and Safety Division" of the
Department of the County Engineer.
   (5)   "Building Code," "uniform building code" or "Los Angeles County
Building Code" means the Building Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (6)   "Building Official" means County Engineer of the County of Los
Angeles.
   (7)   "City" means the City of La Mirada.
   (8)   "Electrical Code" means the Electrical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (9)   "Existing Building Code" means the Existing Building Code of the City
of La Mirada.
   (10)   "Fire Code" or "Los Angeles County Fire Code" means the Fire Code of
the City of La Mirada.
   (11)   "Green Building Standards Code" means the Green Building Standards
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (12)   "Health Code," or "Los Angeles County Health Code" means the Health
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (13)   "Mechanical Code" means the Mechanical Code of this Municipal Code.
   (14)   "Plumbing Code" means the Plumbing Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (15)   "Residential Code" means the Residential Code of the City of La
Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 5 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 5 (part), 2020)
17.06.040 Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
Applicable fees shall be as adopted by separate resolution of the City Council
of the City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 5 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 5 (part), 2020)
17.06.050 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is specifically
designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 5 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 5 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.08
ELECTRICAL CODE
Sections:
   
17.08.010   Adopted.
   
17.08.020   Copies filed.
   
17.08.030   Terms defined.
   
17.08.040   Fee schedule - Modification by resolution.
   
17.08.050   Penalties.
17.08.010 Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter, that
certain Electrical Code known and designated as the Los Angeles County
Electrical Code, Title 27 of the Los Angeles County Code, including all
appendices, as adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect on January 1,
2023, incorporating the 2022 California Electrical Code, including all changes
made by the County of Los Angeles, and such code shall be and become the
Electrical Code of the City, regulating the installation, arrangement,
alteration, repair, use and operation of electrical wiring, connections,
fixtures and other appliances on premises within the City; the issuance of
permits and the collection of fees therefor, and fees to pay the costs of
checking plans, inspecting the work and making record plans of the installation
permitted hereunder.
(Ord. 727-U, § 7 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 7 (part), 2020)
17.08.020 Copies filed.
One copy of said Los Angeles County Electrical Code, referred to in Section
17.08.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the Office of the City Clerk
and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for use and examination by
the public.
(Ord. 727-U, § 7 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 7 (part), 2020)
17.08.030 Terms defined.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Electrical Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have
the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Chief Electrical Inspector" means the County Engineer, except in
Section 80-4 of said Los Angeles County Electrical Code, or any successor
provision thereto.
   (2)   "County," "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated areas of the
County of Los Angeles" means the City of La Mirada.
   (3)   "Maintenance electrician" means a person holding a valid certificate
of registration as maintenance electrician issued by the County as set forth in
said Los Angeles County Electrical Code.
   (4)   "Special Inspector" means a person holding a valid certificate of
registration as special inspector issued by the County as set forth in said Los
Angeles County Electrical Code.
(Ord. 727-U, § 7 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 7 (part), 2020)
17.08.040 Fee schedule - Modification by resolution.
The fees referenced in Section
17.08.010  shall be adopted by separate resolution of the City Council of the
City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 7 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 7 (part), 2020)
17.08.050 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is specifically
designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 7 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 7 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.12
PLUMBING CODE
Sections:
   
17.12.010   Adopted.
   
17.12.020   Copy filed.
   
17.12.030   Terms defined.
   
17.12.040   Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
   
17.12.050   Penalties.
17.12.010 Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter,
that certain Plumbing Code known and designated as the Los Angeles County
Plumbing Code, Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code, including all
appendices, as adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect on January 1,
2023, incorporating the 2022 California Plumbing Code, including all changes
made by the County of Los Angeles, and such Code shall be and become the
Plumbing Code of the City of La Mirada, regulating plumbing and drainage
systems, house sewers, private sewage disposal systems and prescribing
conditions under which such work may be carried on within the City and
providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor.
(Ord. 727-U, § 9 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 9 (part), 2020)
17.12.020 Copy filed.
   One copy of the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code, referred to in Section
17.12.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for
use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 727-U, § 9 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 9 (part), 2020)
17.12.030 Terms defined.  
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Plumbing Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the
meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Administrative authority," "Chief Plumbing Inspector" or "Plumbing
Inspector" means the County Engineer, except in Section 101.4 of the Los
Angeles County Plumbing Code.
   (2)   "Board of Examiners of Plumbers, Gas Fitters, and Sewerage
Contractors" or "Board of Examiners" means the Board of Examiners of Plumbers,
Gas Fitters, and Sewerage Contractors of the county established by the Los
Angeles County Plumbing Code.
   (3)   "City" means the City of La Mirada except in Section 101.3 of the
Plumbing Code.
   (4)   "County," or "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated territory" of
the County of Los Angeles" means the City of La Mirada.
   (5)   "Gas fitting contractor," "journeyman gas fitter," "journeyman
plumber," "plumbing contractor," or "sewage contractor" means a person holding
a valid certificate of registration issued by the County as set forth in the
Los Angeles County Plumbing Code.
(Ord. 727-U, § 9 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 9 (part), 2020)
17.12.040 Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
The fees referenced in Section
17.12.010  shall be as adopted by separate resolution of the City Council of
the City of La Mirada. (Ord. 727-U, § 9 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 9 (part),
2020)
17.12.050 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is specifically
designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 9 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 9 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.16
MECHANICAL CODE
Sections:
   
17.16.010   Adopted.
   
17.16.020   Copy filed.
   
17.16.030   Terms defined.
   
17.16.040   Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
   
17.16.050   Penalties.
17.16.010 Adopted.
   There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter,
that certain Mechanical Code known and designated as the Los Angeles County
Mechanical Code, Title 29 of the Los Angeles County Code, including all
appendices, as adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect on January 1,
2023, incorporating the 2022 California Mechanical Code, including all changes
made by the County of Los Angeles, and such Code shall be and become the
Mechanical Code of the City of La Mirada, regulating and controlling the
design, construction, installation, quality of materials, operation and
maintenance of heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems,
incinerators and other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances and providing
for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor.
(Ord. 727-U, § 11 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 11 (part), 2020)
17.16.020 Copy filed.
One copy of the Los Angeles County Mechanical Code, referred to in Section
17.16.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for
use and examination by the public. (Ord. 727-U, § 11 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U,
§ 11 (part), 2020)
17.16.030 Terms defined.  
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Mechanical Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have
the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Board of Supervisors" means the City Council of La Mirada.
   (2)   "County" or "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the
City of La Mirada.
   (3)   "Board of Appeals" or "Board of Examiners of Plumbers" means the Board
of Examiners of Plumbers, Gas Fitters, and Sewerage Contractors of the County
of Los Angeles established by the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code.
   (4)   "Building Department" means the "Building and Safety Division" of the
Department of the County Engineer.
   (5)   "Building Code," "uniform building code" or "Los Angeles County
Building Code" means the Building Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (6)   "Building official" means County Engineer of the County of Los
Angeles.
   (7)   "City" means the City of La Mirada.
   (8)   "Electrical Code" means the Electrical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (9)   "Existing Building Code" means the Existing Building Code of the City
of La Mirada.
   (10)   "Fire Code" or "Los Angeles County Fire Code" means the Fire Code of
the City of La Mirada.
   (11)   "Green Building Standards Code" means the Green Building Standards
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (12)   "Health Code," or "Los Angeles County Health Code" means the Health
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (13)   "Mechanical Code" means the Mechanical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (14)   "Plumbing Code" means the Plumbing Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (15)   "Residential Code" means the Residential Code of the City of La
Mirada. (Ord. 727-U, § 11 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 11 (part), 2020)
17.16.040 Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
The fees referenced in Section
17.16.010  shall be as adopted by separate resolution of the City Council of
the City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 11 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 11 (part), 2020)
17.16.050 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is specifically
designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 11 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 11 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.18
GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Sections:
   
17.18.010   Adopted.
   
17.18.020   Copy filed.
   
17.18.030   Terms defined.
   
17.18.040   Fee schedule; modification by resolution.
   
17.18.050   Penalties.
17.18.010 Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter, that
certain Green Building Standards Code known and designated as the Los Angeles
County Green Building Standards Code, Title 31 of the Los Angeles County Code,
including all appendices, as adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect
on January 1, 2023, incorporating the 2022 California Green Building Standards
Code, including all changes made by the County of Los Angeles, and such Code
shall be and become the Green Building Standards Code of the City of La Mirada,
regulating and controlling the design and construction of buildings through the
use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact, or positive
environmental impact, and encouraging sustainable construction practices.
(Ord. 727-U, § 13 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 13 (part), 2020)
17.18.020 Copy filed.
One copy of the Los Angeles County Green Building Standards Code, referred to
in Section
17.18.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for
use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 727-U, § 13 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 13 (part), 2020)
17.18.030 Terms defined.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Green Building Standards Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and
construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Board of Supervisors" means the City Council of La Mirada.
   (2)   "County" or "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the
City of La Mirada.
   (3)   "Board of Appeals" or "Board of Examiners of Plumbers" means the Board
of Examiners of Plumbers, Gas Fitters, and Sewerage Contractors of the County
of Los Angeles established by the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code.
   (4)   "Building Department" means the "Building and Safety Division" of the
Department of the County Engineer.
   (5)   "Building Code," "uniform building code" or "Los Angeles County
Building Code" means the Building Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (6)   "Building Official" means County Engineer of the County of Los
Angeles.
   (7)   "City" means the City of La Mirada.
   (8)   "Electrical Code" means the Electrical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (9)   "Existing Building Code" means the Existing Building Code of the City
of La Mirada.
   (10)   "Fire Code" or "Los Angeles County Fire Code" means the Fire Code of
the City of La Mirada.
   (11)   "Green Building Standards Code" means the Green Building Standards
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (12)   "Health Code," or "Los Angeles County Health Code" means the Health
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (13)   "Mechanical Code" means the Mechanical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (14)   "Plumbing Code" means the Plumbing Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (15)   "Residential Code" means the Residential Code of the City of La
Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 13 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 13 (part), 2020)
17.18.040 Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
Applicable fees shall be as adopted by separate resolution of the City Council
of the City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 13 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 13 (part), 2020)
17.18.050 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is specifically
designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 13 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 13 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.19
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sections:
   
17.19.010   Adopted.
   
17.19.020   Copy filed.
   
17.19.030   Terms defined.
   
17.19.040   Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
   
17.19.050   Penalties.
17.19.010 Adopted.
There is hereby adopted by reference, except as provided in this Chapter, that
certain Existing Building Code known and designated as the Los Angeles County
Existing Building Code, Title 33 of the Los Angeles County Code, including all
appendices, as adopted by the County of Los Angeles and in effect on January 1,
2023, incorporating the 2022 California Existing Building Code, including all
changes made by the County of Los Angeles, and such Code shall be and become
the Existing Building Code of the City of La Mirada, to provide flexibility to
permit the use of alternative approaches to achieve compliance with minimum
requirements to safeguard the public health, safety, and welfare insofar as
they are affected by the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition, and
relocation of existing buildings.
(Ord. 727-U, § 15 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 15 (part), 2020)
17.19.020 Copy filed.
One copy of the Los Angeles County Existing Building Code, referred to in
Section
17.19.010  of this Chapter, shall be deposited in the office of the City Clerk
of the City of La Mirada and shall be at all times maintained by said clerk for
use and examination by the public.
(Ord. 727-U, § 15 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 15 (part), 2020)
17.19.030 Terms defined.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Los Angeles County
Existing Building Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to
have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:
   (1)   "Board of Supervisors" means the City Council of La Mirada.
   (2)   "County" or "County of Los Angeles" or "unincorporated area" means the
City of La Mirada.
   (3)   "Board of Appeals" or "Board of Examiners of Plumbers" means the Board
of Examiners of Plumbers, Gas Fitters, and Sewerage Contractors of the County
of Los Angeles established by the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code.
   (4)   "Building Department" means the "Building and Safety Division" of the
Department of the County Engineer.
   (5)   "Building Code," "uniform building code" or "Los Angeles County
Building Code" means the Building Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (6)   "Building Official" means County Engineer of the County of Los
Angeles.
   (7)   "City" means the City of La Mirada.
   (8)   "Electrical Code" means the Electrical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (9)   "Existing Building Code" means the Existing Building Code of the City
of La Mirada.
   (10)   "Fire Code" or "Los Angeles County Fire Code" means the Fire Code of
the City of La Mirada.
   (11)   "Green Building Standards Code" means the Green Building Standards
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (12)   "Health Code," or "Los Angeles County Health Code" means the Health
Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (13)   "Mechanical Code" means the Mechanical Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (14)   "Plumbing Code" means the Plumbing Code of the City of La Mirada.
   (15)   "Residential Code" means the Residential Code of the City of La
Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 15 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 15 (part), 2020)
17.19.040 Fee schedule; Modification by resolution.
Applicable fees shall be as adopted by separate resolution of the City Council
of the City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 727-U, § 15 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 15 (part), 2020)
17.19.050 Penalties.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby. Unless a violation is specifically
designated as an infraction, any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
violating any provision of this chapter or the code adopted hereby or failing
to comply with any of the requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one
thousand dollars or by imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership, or
corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day
or any portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter or the code adopted hereby is committed, continued or permitted by
such person, firm, partnership, or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable
therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (b)   Civil Remedies Available. A violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the code adopted hereby shall constitute a nuisance and may be
abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order,
preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for
the abatement of such nuisance.
(Ord. 727-U, § 15 (part), 2022; Ord. 713-U, § 15 (part), 2020)
Chapter 17.20
MOVING BUILDINGS--EXCAVATIONS
Sections:
   
17.20.010   Short title.
   
17.20.020   Amendment adopted.
   
17.20.030   Copies filed.
   
17.20.040   References explained.
   
17.20.045   Amendments to county ordinance.
   
17.20.050   Moving buildings--Permits required.
   
17.20.060   Authorization for moving buildings.
   
17.20.070   Purposes of relocation procedure.
   
17.20.080   Application and fee for relocation permit.
   
17.20.090   Accompanying maps and data.
   
17.20.100   Relocation--Posting of notices.
   
17.20.110   Commission consideration of relocation.
   
17.20.120   Conditions for relocation.
   
17.20.130   Commission's action--Notice of decision.
   
17.20.140   Appeals and notification.
   
17.20.150   Expiration of moving permit.
   
17.20.160   Required alterations and improvements.
   
17.20.170   Vacated site.
   
17.20.180   Obtaining permit from city required.
17.20.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Permits for Moving Buildings and Making
Excavations Ordinance of the City of La Mirada" and may be cited as such.
(Prior code § 6400).
17.20.020 Amendment adopted.
There is adopted as an amendment to the highway permit ordinance of the city,
except as hereafter amended, Ordinance 9879 of the county of Los Angeles, which
adds Sections 143 and 316 to the existing highway permit Ordinance 3597, as
amended and in effect October 31, 1969.
(Ord. 164 § 1, 1970; Ord. 120 § 1, 1967; Ord. 20 § 1, 1961; Ord. 15 § 1, 1960;
prior code § 6401).
17.20.030 Copies filed.
Three copies of Ordinance No. 3597 as adopted in Section
17.20.020 have been deposited with the city clerk and shall be at all times
maintained by the city clerk for the use and examination by the public.
(Prior code § 6402).
17.20.040 References explained.
Ordinance No. 3597 as specified in Section
17.20.020 is amended as follows:
   (1)   Whenever in the ordinance reference is made to the "commissioner" it
shall be deemed to refer to the superintendent of streets of the city, or to
such other public body, officer, or official employee, authorized or designated
to enforce this chapter, or to act as superintendent of streets;
   (2)   Any and all fees shall be payable to the city, except that any and all
fees may be collected on behalf of the city by any county official or officer
designated or authorized to collect the fees as set forth in the ordinance;
   (3)   Whenever in the ordinance reference is made to the county of Los
Angeles or to the unincorporated area of the county, such area shall be deemed
to include in its true geographical location the area of the city.
(Prior code § 6403).
17.20.045 Amendments to county ordinance.
   (a)   Section 127.2 of Ordinance No. 3597 is amended to read:
Section 127.2 "Facilities" or "Pipelines", as used in Sections 100(c), 139,
801, 801.1, 802, 802.1, 802.2, 802.3, 802.4, 802.5, 803, 805, 806, 807, and 810
of this Ordinance, means pipes, pipelines, valves, tanks, mains, service lines,
conduits, duct banks, cables, wires, poles, tunnels, obstructions and other
apparatus both aerial and underground.
   (b)   Section 127.4 is added to Ordinance No. 3597 to read:
Section 127.4 "One Call Notification System" or "Systems" means an association
providing for mutual receipt of notification of construction activities in the
unincorporated territory of Los Angeles County.
   (c)   Subsection D of Section 139 of Ordinance No. 3597 is amended to read:
   D.   Except in emergency work to protect the public and property, any
permittee proposing to excavate in any highway shall make a search of available
record of underground facilities and shall notify owners or operators known to
have such facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation by telephone or
other acceptable means of communications at least forty-eight hours prior to
time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays. At such
time as a "One Call Notification System" is operational in the unincorporated
territory of Los Angeles County, Permittee shall notify those owners or
operators who are members of the System by notifying the System by telephone at
least forty-eight hours prior to time of proposed excavation, exclusive of
weekends or legal holidays. The permit shall not be valid until permittee
receives a "ticket" number from the System acknowledging the notification,
which number permittee shall enter upon the face of the permit. Said
notification is an additional method to be used in determining underground
facilities and does not relieve permittee from the responsibility to assure
that owners or operators of such facilities are notified. Any permittee shall
likewise notify nonmembers of the System who are owners or operators of
facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation. Any person receiving
notice pursuant to this ordinance shall, not less than one working day in
advance of proposed construction unless otherwise agreed between said person
and permittee, inform the permittee of or field mark the location of any
underground facility in the proposed area of excavation.
   (d)   City Council Waivers, Section 711.5 is added to Ordinance 3597 to read
as follows:
Section 711.5 The provisions of Section 706(b) and 706(c) may be notified or
varied by the City Council upon application of the property owner if all the
following conditions are satisfied:
   (1)   The driveway or driveways will not open out into any street or highway
which is part of the Select System of Streets of this City;
   (2)   The driveway or driveways serve in whole or in part an existing
substantial commercial development which was established prior to September 3,
1957;
   (3)   The City Council finds that such variance or modification is necessary
and reasonable;
   (4)   The City Council finds that such variance or modification is necessary
in order that the property and business of the applicant will not suffer undue
hardship and severe difficulties.
   In case in granting a variance or modification under this section, the City
Council may impose such conditions and limitations on the property and business
of the applicant as it deems necessary or convenient. (Added by Ordinance 292 -
March 15, 1977).
   (e)   Driveway Widths. Section 706 of ordinance No. 3597 is amended to read
as follows:
Section 706. The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being
the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the
line of the curb or center line of the highway. The width of an individual
driveway shall not be less than ten feet and shall not exceed in width:
   (a)   Except as provided for in subsection (d), twenty feet if the driveway
serves only residences or apartments.
   (b)   Twenty feet or twenty percent of the front footage of the lots or
parcels of land less than one hundred feet wide.
   (c)   Thirty feet or twenty percent of the front footage of the lot or
parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed sixty feet, when the
driveway serves other than residences or apartments on a lot or parcel of land
not less than one hundred feet wide.
   (d)   Thirty feet or twenty percent of the front footage of the lot or
parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed sixty feet, when the
driveway serves 30 or more apartments on a lot or parcel of land not less than
one hundred feet wide.
   (e)   Thirty feet of the street frontage of a lot or parcel of land provided
said street frontage is not less than 100 feet wide and the driveway serves
apartments or a residence on such lot or parcel of land. (Added by Ordinance
319 - May 9, 1973. Subsection (e) added by Ordinance 389 - January 12, 1977).
   (f)   Section 801 of Ordinance No. 3597 is amended to read:
Section 801. The provisions of this Chapter apply to permits for the making, or
causing to be made, in any highway, of excavations, and for the placing,
constructing, testing, repairing, changing, monitoring, removing or abandoning
of facilities or encroachments. The provisions of this chapter also apply to
written emergency plans for owners or operators of pipelines used to convey
toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids and mandatory membership in a "One Call
Notification System".
   (g)   Section 801.1 is added to Ordinance No. 3597 to read:
Section 801.1 When a "One Call Notification System" is operational in the
unincorporated territory of Los Angeles County, no person shall maintain and
operate a pipeline designed to carry hazardous substances below the surface of
a highway unless said person is a member of the System. Said person shall
provide to the Commissioner such proof as required that said person is a member
of the System in Los Angeles County. For the purpose of this section,
electrical facilities shall not be considered hazardous.
   (h)   Section 802.2 is added to Ordinance No. 3597 to read:
Section 802.2. After initial installation under this Ordinance of any pipeline
used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, such
pipeline shall be subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein
before it is placed in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this
purpose shall not be less than twenty-four (24) hours.
   After repair or replacement of any pipeline used or to be used to carry
toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, made necessary to repair leaks or
breaks, or replacements made necessary for changes required by improvements
within the roadway, the affected portion of the pipeline shall be subjected to
a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before placing in operation. The
duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall be not less than
twenty-four (24) hours. However, no such test is required for a minor repair
which does not require removal of the pipeline from operation. If the affected
section is isolated and tested hydrostatically, pressure test of the tie-in
welds is not required; however, tie-in welds shall be examined by radiographic
means.
   No pipeline subject to this Ordinance used or to be used to carry toxic,
corrosive or flammable liquids and over ten (10) years of age, shall be
operated beyond the successive ensuing 12-month period of time unless retested
annually by a hydrostatic pressure test or other test means acceptable to the
Commissioner. The duration of the periodic test for this purpose shall be less
than four (4) hours.
   Each pressure test, either initial or retest shall be in accordance with the
American National Standard Institute's Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid
Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision.
The Commissioner may authorize the use of a liquid petroleum that does not
vaporize rapidly (i.e., flash point over 150°F or 66°C) as a test medium.
Pressure tests after initial installation of pipelines and before they are
placed in operation shall show no unexplained loss. Annual or retest pressure
tests shall not show an hourly loss, for each section of the pipeline under
test at the time, in excess of either ten (10) gallons, or the sum of one (1)
gallon and an amount computed at a rate in gallons per mile equivalent to one-
tenth (1/10) of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe.
   The Commissioner may grant administrative waiver or other relief to an owner
or operator under this Ordinance as to the periodic pressure testing of any
pipelines as herein provided if owner or operator can demonstrate that such
testing will cause the unreasonable unscheduled shutdown of plants, terminals,
refineries, or other facilities of which such pipelines constitute an integral
part.
   In addition to the foregoing requirements, any pipeline authorized by this
Ordinance and subject to pressure testing shall be subjected to a pressure test
by the owner or operator at any time as may be required by the Commissioner in
the interest of public safety.
   Within thirty days after completion of any test made pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, the owner or operator shall submit a certified
report of such test for the Commissioner's review. The report shall show the
date of test, description or portion of pipeline tested identified with respect
to County highways, and the test data. The report shall be sufficient in detail
to permit analysis of test results and determination of compliance with the
applicable provisions of this Ordinance or any other applicable Ordinance, rule
or regulation. The report shall also contain any other test information as may
be specifically requested by the Commissioner.
   (i)   Section 802.3 is added to Ordinance No. 3597 to read:
Section 802.3 Block valves shall be installed on each new main line at
locations along the pipelines system that will minimize damage from accidental
product discharge. Said location shall be appropriate for the terrain and the
population density of the area.
   (j)   Section 802.4 is added to Ordinance No. 3597 to read:
Section 802.4. As provided in the American National Standard Institute's Code
for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B
31.4) in its latest revision, a cathodic protection system shall be installed
for all new ferrous pipelines used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable
substances other than utility gases in order to mitigate corrosion
deterioration that might result in structural failure. The cathodic protection
system for all new ferrous pipelines carrying utility gases shall be installed
in accordance with General Order No. 112-C of the Public Utilities Commission
of the State of California. A test procedure shall be developed by the owner or
operator to determine whether adequate cathodic protection has been achieved
and submitted to the Commissioner for approval. Reports of cathodic protection
evaluation in accordance with said approval procedure shall be made available
annually for review by the Commissioner.
   (k)   Section 802.5 is added to Ordinance No. 3597 to read:
Section 802.5. Each owner or operator of a pipeline used or to be used to
convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids shall have a written emergency
plan approved and on file with the County Forester and Fire Warden. The plan
shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute's Code for
Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4)
in its latest revision.
   The plan shall include but not be limited to the following elements: (1) A
"liaison" element for intercommunications between public agencies and pipeline
owners or operators to provide for prompt coordinated remedial action, and the
dissemination of information as to the location and ownership identification of
pipelines based on the best available records and plans. (2) A "spill
contingency" element to limit the extent of accidental product discharge by
which pipeline owners or operators shall involve themselves in a cooperative
pipeline leak notification emergency action system. (3) A "leak detection"
element by which the pipeline owners or operators can monitor the flow of their
product and can divert, reduce or stop the flow of said product at the first
indication of a product leak. (4) A "first on the scene emergency containment"
element in cooperation with other pipeline owners or operators to be utilized
until arrival of the affected pipeline owners' or operators' personnel. "First
on the scene" costs shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility and
shall be reimbursed to the organization effecting the emergency containment.
   (l)   Section 810 of Ordinance No. 3597 is amended to read:
   Section 810. Each applicant for a permit to abandon in place or remove any
facility or encroachment in the highway shall do so under terms and conditions
prescribed by the Commissioner. The permit application shall include a plat or
other suitable means describing the facility or encroachment to be abandoned or
removed and indicated its exact location. Permission to abandon a facility or
encroachment without removing shall be subject to removal within one year after
the effective date of the abandonment if the facility or encroachment may
interfere with a present or future public improvement. If it is determined that
the facility or encroachment should be removed, the permittee or its successor
in interest shall remove it at its expense or pay County for the cost of such
removal. Permittee shall leave any abandoned facility or encroachment in a safe
condition.
   In addition to the foregoing, abandonment in place of a pipeline used to
convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids will be subject to the following
requirements. The pipeline shall be thoroughly purged of liquids and vapors and
filled with an inert material that will remain in a solid or semi-solid state
if any portion of the pipeline is cut or removed in the future. The permittee
shall file a certificate with the Commissioner that said requirements have been
complied with and the abandoned pipeline has been left in a safe condition.
(Ord. 290 § 1, 1980).
17.20.050 Moving buildings--Permit required.
No building or structure shall be moved within the city, whether transported as
a unit or in sections, or completely dismantled, from one lot or premises to
another, or for a distance exceeding twenty feet within a single lot or
premises, unless a valid permit for the relocation has first been approved.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9500).
17.20.060 Authorization for moving buildings.
The planning commission shall have the authority, subject to the procedures set
forth in this chapter, to permit the relocation of buildings whenever it finds
the relocations meet the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9501).
17.20.070 Purposes of relocation procedure.
The purpose of relocation building procedure is to provide adequate safeguards
to insure that buildings moved from one location to another do not have an
adverse effect on their new location and that they harmonize and fit in with
existing and future development of the area.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9502).
17.20.080 Application and fee for relocation permit.
Application for relocation of a structure shall be made by the property owner
or his authorized agent on a form prescribed for this purpose by the city, and
shall be accompanied by a filing fee of ten dollars if the structure is within
the city limits of La Mirada, and a filing fee of seventy-five dollars if
located outside the city limits, no part of which is refundable. In the case of
involuntary moving within a single lot or premises within the city caused by
the action of a governmental agency, the filing fee may be, but need not be,
waived by action of the planning commission.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9503).
17.20.090 Accompanying maps and data.
An application for the relocation of a building shall be accompanied by
accurately drawn plot plans showing all existing and proposed buildings,
structures and uses on the premises, as well as the adjoining lots within a
radius of at least three hundred feet, photographs of the structures to be
relocated, and such other data as may be required by the city administrator to
submit the application to the commission.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9504).
17.20.100 Relocation--Posting of notices.
It shall be the duty of the city administrator to post on the property where
the relocated structure is to be located a notice stating "Structure to be
relocated on these premises," letters to be not less than one inch in height.
The notice posted shall give the date notice is posted and the last date at
which adjoining neighbors and property owners may view the pictures and
proposed plot plan in the planning department office prior to the application
being transmitted to the planning commission. The notices are to be posted on
the property at least ten days prior to planning commission hearing. Further,
five or more other notices shall be posted within a radius of three hundred
feet of the premises giving notice generally of the proposed relocation. Such
notices shall be in the form and manner and shall be posted as designated by
the city administrator.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9505).
17.20.110 Commission consideration of relocation.
Before granting approval of a proposed relocation, the applicant therefore
shall affirmatively show or prove, and the commission shall be satisfied by
such affirmative showing or proof, that all the following conditions are met:
   (1)   That the structure is in conformity with the type and quality of
buildings existing in the surrounding area of the proposed site;
   (2)   That the structure will constitute a beneficial addition to and
contribute to the general development of the area;
   (3)   That if there is vacant property in such surrounding area, or if the
surrounding area is in transition, the commission may take into consideration
the type of structure and uses that could be located there in the future;
   (4)   That the proposed relocation will not conflict with any of the
property development standards of this code;
   (5)   That the structure proposed to be relocated shall be completely free
of pest infestation, and that a qualified pest extermination firm shall have so
certified;
   (6)   That the proposed relocation will in no way be detrimental to persons
to properties, or to the living environment of the area;
   (7)   That the proposed relocation will not adversely affect any proposed
streets or other improvements in the area, nor be in conflict with any master
plan of the city;
   (8)   That the proposed relocation will not result in the violation of any
law, ordinance or regulation.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9506).
17.20.120 Conditions for relocation.
The commission may approve a proposed relocation subject to such conditions as
the commission may deem warranted by the circumstances involved. Such
conditions may include, but are not limited to, any or all of the following:
   (1)   Dedication and improvements of streets, which may include curb,
gutter, sidewalk and paving;
   (2)   A performance or cash bond guaranteeing that all conditions will be
fully met prior to occupancy. Before a building permit may be issued, the
applicant or his authorized agent shall post a cash deposit or surety bond in a
firm satisfactory to the city and sufficient in amount to cover the cost of the
required improvements. The deposit or bond shall also be sufficient to cover
the costs of all matters involving the city, such as inspection, engineering,
street and other improvements, and restoration of the vacated site;
   (3)   That all work will be completed within one hundred eighty days after
approval is granted. One extension only of ninety days may be granted by the
commission if proof is given to the commission that circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant caused the delay;
   (4)   That relocated structures will conform to all setback requirements and
provisions of streets and highways as indicated on the master plan of highways.
   All such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant, their successors
and assigns, shall run with the land, shall limit and control issuance and
validity of certificates of occupancy and shall restrict and limit the
construction and location, use and maintenance of all land and structures on
the subject property.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9507).
17.20.130 Commission's action--Notice of decision.
   Not later than ten days following the planning commission's action in
granting or denying permission to relocate a building or other structure, a
letter setting forth the commission's action shall be mailed to the applicant
at the address shown on the application form and to any other person requesting
a copy. A copy of the letter shall also be sent to the building department.
   Before the applicant may proceed with the relocation, the applicant shall
sign and file an affidavit with the planning commission within twenty days
after receiving the notification. The affidavit shall state that the applicant
accepts and is aware of all the conditions imposed by the commission.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9509).
17.20.140 Appeals and notification.
The provisions of
Chapter 21.46 regarding appeals of the commission's actions and the effective
date of the approval shall apply. Unless otherwise specified, the commission's
actions of approval are considered conclusive.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9510).
17.20.150 Expiration of moving permit.
Unless otherwise specified in the action to permit a structure to be relocated,
the applicant's right to exercise such permission shall become null and void
ninety days from the effective date of such action if applicant has failed to
commence work as to the relocation. However, one extension of time only to
commence work may be granted by action of the planning commission if so
requested and if the commission feels such extension is justified. Such
extension of time to commence work shall not be for any period of time in
excess of sixty days.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9511).
17.20.160 Required alterations and improvements.
Prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit, relocated buildings or structures
shall be brought up to the standards of the building code and shall be painted
and reconditioned and brought into compliance with all of the conditions of
approval of the planning commission's action.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9512).
17.20.170 Vacated site.
If the site from which the structure is moved is within the city the vacated
site shall be cleaned up and put in a neat and orderly condition prior to the
issuance of the occupancy permit for the relocated structure.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9513).
17.20.180 Obtaining permit from city required.
The applicant or his authorized agent shall also obtain a permit from the city
to move the structure over city streets.
(Ord. 28 § 1 (part), 1961; prior code § 9514).
Chapter 17.24
CIVIL DEFENSE STRUCTURES
Sections:
   
17.24.010   Fee exemption.
17.24.010 Fee exemption.
Notwithstanding any provision of this code or other ordinances of this city to
the contrary, no fees shall be charged or demanded as to any permit, zone
exception, or as to any other requirement of any nature whatsoever where an
application is made to this city for an approval or inspection relating to any
shelter proposed to be erected as a civil defense measure, whether private or
public.
(Ord. 39 § 1, 1961).
Chapter 17.26
EXPEDITED PERMITTING FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Sections:
   
17.26.010   Scope.
   
17.26.020   Definitions.
   
17.26.030   Application for permits.
   
17.26.040   Permits.
   
17.26.050   Fees.
   
17.26.060   Inspections.
   
17.26.070   Small residential rooftop solar energy system requirements.
17.26.010 Scope.
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to help the State of California
reach its economic, energy and environmental goals by providing a standardized
and streamlined permitting process to encourage the use of small residential
rooftop solar energy systems. This Chapter shall apply to the permitting of
small residential rooftop solar energy systems that meet the requirements of
Section
17.26.070  of this Chapter, which are installed on a one- or two-family
dwelling and involve either a photovoltaic system that is no larger than 10
kilowatts alternating current, or a solar thermal system for residential
service water heating and/or solar pool heating that is no larger than 30
kilowatts thermal.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
17.26.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, words and terms used in this Chapter shall
have the meanings set forth in this Section. Where terms are not defined in
this Section and are defined elsewhere in this Code, the Plumbing Code or the
Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in such
codes. Where terms are not defined through the methods authorized by this
Section, such terms shall have their ordinary accepted meanings such as the
context implies.
   “Kilowatt thermal” means a unit of measurement to approximate the amount of
energy produced by a solar thermal collector. Each square meter of collector
space equals 0.7 kilowatts thermal.
   “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means a rooftop solar energy
system that meets the requirements of Section
17.26.070 of this Chapter, which is installed on a one- or two-family dwelling
and which does not exceed 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating, or
a solar thermal system for residential service water heating and solar pool
heating that is no larger than 30 kilowatts thermal, or otherwise as defined in
California Government Code Section 65850.5(j)(3).
   “Solar energy system” means either of the following:
      (1)   Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary
purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar
energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water
heating.
      (2)   Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose
is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
17.26.030 Application for permits.
The application for a permit shall meet the requirements of Title 26, Chapter
1, Section 106.4 of the Los Angeles County Code, or any successor provision
thereto, and may be submitted in person or electronically through the online
submittal system maintained by the Building Official. Prior to submitting the
application for an expedited permit, the applicant shall verify that the
installation meets all criteria in Section
17.26.070  to qualify for expedited permit issuance. Upon receipt of a complete
small residential rooftop solar energy system application, plan check review
will be completed within one to three business days.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
17.26.040 Permits.
Upon approval of a permit application by the Building Official, a building,
electrical or plumbing permit, as applicable, will be issued for the work
described in the application. A combined solar energy permit may be issued for
photovoltaic systems, which will include all building and electrical work,
however a separate plumbing permit, if needed, will be required for thermal
systems. The combined solar energy permit is subject to the requirements of the
Building Code and the Electrical Code.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
17.26.050 Fees.
Permit fees for the installation of small residential rooftop solar energy
systems shall be as adopted by resolution of the City Council of the City of La
Mirada. The combined permit fee for small residential rooftop photovoltaic
systems shall not exceed $500 unless a greater amount is established in
accordance with Government Code Section 66015 or other applicable law.
When an incomplete application is submitted, a written correction notice
detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information
required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance will be issued.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
17.26.060 Inspections.
   (a)   General. All construction or work for small residential rooftop solar
energy systems for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by
the Building Official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and
exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the Building Official as
specified in Title 26, Chapter 1, Section 108 of the Los Angeles County Code,
or any successor provision thereto.
   (b)   Required inspections. A combination inspection shall be conducted to
inspect the structural, electrical, and plumbing components of the installation
of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. One inspection shall be
required for the system. Evidence satisfactory to the Building Official as
identified in Los Angeles County Building Code Manual Section 6807, Article 1,
must be provided at the inspection to verify that the installation and labeling
of components meet all applicable requirements of the Building Code, the
Plumbing Code, and the Electrical Code. The Building Official may require
exposure of the following components if sufficient evidence regarding
installation and labeling is not provided:
      1.   Fastening of roof mounting system to structural framing members.
      2.   Grounding and bonding of panels.
      3.   Nameplates of modules and inverters.
   If the small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection,
subsequent inspections are authorized until the work is approved by the
Building Official.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
17.26.070 Small residential rooftop solar energy system requirements.
   (a)    General. The design of small residential rooftop solar energy systems
shall comply with this Section to qualify for expedited permit issuance.
   (b)   Height limit. The solar panel or module array shall not exceed the
maximum legal building height applicable in the City of La Mirada, as
established in the City of La Mirada Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, and
Residential Code, or other applicable legal authority, based on the most
restrictive provision.
   (c)   Solar Permitting Guidebook. The submitted plans must comply with Los
Angeles County Building Code Manual Section 6807, Article 1, including its
checklist and standard plans as developed in substantial conformance with the
California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of
Planning and Research and as adopted by the Building Official.
   (d)   Minimum photovoltaic system standards. The photovoltaic system shall
be identified and listed in the application as referenced in the Electrical
Code.
   (e)   Minimum solar thermal system standards. The solar thermal systems
shall be certified by Solar Rating and Certification Corporation or other
approved listing agencies as specified in the Plumbing Code.
   (f)   Compliance with laws. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter,
small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall also comply with all other
applicable City, County, and State Codes, statutes, laws and regulations in
order to be eligible for expedited permit processing.
(Ord. 675 § 2 (part), 2015).
Title 20
SUBDIVISIONS  1
Chapters:
   
20.04   General Provisions
   
20.08   Definitions
   
20.12   Tentative Map
   
20.16   Design Standards
   
20.20   Improvements
   
20.24   Final Map
   
20.28   Parcel Maps
   
20.30   Urban Lot Splits
   
20.32   Lot Line Adjustment
   
20.34   Fees
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions pertaining to subdivided lands and subdivisions,
  including provisions directing cities to adopt an ordinance regulating and
  controlling the design and improvement of subdivisions, provisions providing
1 for reasonable fees for the examination of tentative and final maps, and for
  provisions authorizing cities to regulate a division of land which is not a
  subdivision, see the California Subdivision Map Act, California Government
  Code §§ 66410 through 66499.58.
Chapter 20.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
20.04.010   Title.
   
20.04.020   Purpose.
   
20.04.030   Authority.
   
20.04.040   Sale, lease or financing--Compliance required.
   
20.04.050   Enforcement--Penalty for violation.
   
20.04.060   Transaction voidable.
   
20.04.070   Exemptions.
   
20.04.080   Variance.
   
20.04.090   Appeals.
   
20.04.100   Falsification.
20.04.010 Title.
This title shall be known and cited and referred to as the "La Mirada
Subdivision Ordinance."
(Ord. 121 § 100, 1967).
20.04.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this title and any rules, regulations and specifications adopted
pursuant thereto, is to control and regulate the division of land within the
city in order to assure compliance with the various elements of the general
plan and to accomplish the following:
   (1)   To promote and protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort,
convenience, and the general welfare of the people;
   (2)   To govern the subdivision of land into lots and blocks for such uses
as are indicated in the general plan;
   (3)   To ensure sound community growth and safeguard the interest of the
subdivider, the homeowner and the city;
   (4)   To prevent excessive government operating and maintenance costs in
connection with the installation of improvements;
   (5)   To develop land for its highest possible use consistent with the
general plan and with all necessary protection against deterioration and
obsolescence;
   (6)   To employ standards that are reasonable and equitable to all parties
including the developer, investor, home owner and the city;
   (7)   To ensure that community facilities will be provided in accordance
with the general plan including police and fire protection, adequate provisions
of water supply, sanitary and storm sewers, and schools, parks and recreation
areas;
   (8)   To encourage the safe, convenient and expeditious movement of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
   (9)   And to define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies in connection with the preparation and filing of maps and
plans as provided herein.
(Ord. 121 § 101, 1967).
20.04.030 Authority.
This title is enacted pursuant to Section II of Article XI of the General Laws
of the state of California, including the Subdivision Map Act and Chapter II,
Part II, Division 4 of the Business and Professions Code. The provisions of
this title are in addition to the regulations of the Subdivision Map Act and
are supplemental thereto.
(Ord. 121 § 102, 1967).
20.04.040 Sale, lease or financing--Compliance required.
A person shall not sell, place a mortgage, deed of trust, or other lien upon,
or lease any subdivision or any part thereof, or offer to do so, or contract to
do so, until a final map thereof, or parcel map thereof, in full compliance
with the provisions of this title has been duly recorded or filed in the office
of the recorder of this county. Neither this section nor any other portion of
this title applies to the leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar
space within an apartment building, industrial building, or commercial
building, or trailer park, or to mineral, oil, or gas leases.
(Ord. 121 § 106, 1967).
20.04.050 Enforcement--Penalty for violation.
It shall be the duty of the city engineer to enforce this title. All
departments, officials and public employees of the city vested with duty or
authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this title and
shall issue no permits or licenses for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict
with the provision of this title and any plan adopted hereinunder; and any such
permits or business licenses issued in conflict with the provisions of this
title or any plan adopted hereinunder shall be null and void. Any person who
violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with or resist the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Each day such a violation or failure to comply is permitted to exist after
notification thereof shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 121 § 107, 1967).
20.04.060 Transaction voidable.
Any deed of conveyance, mortgage, deed of trust, or other lien or lease or sale
or contract to sell, mortgage, lien or lease made contrary to the provisions of
this title is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, tenant,
mortgagee, beneficiary, or person contracting to purchase or to accept a lien
or mortgage or to lease as a tenant, his heirs, personal representatives or
trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of the
execution of the deed of conveyance, mortgage, deed of trust, other lien, lease
or sale, or contract agreeing thereto, but such deed of conveyance, sale,
mortgage, deed of trust, lien, lease, or contract, is binding upon any assignee
or transferee of the grantee, mortgagee, beneficiary, tenant, buyer, or person
contracting therefor, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor,
vendor, mortgagor, trustor, landlord, or person so contracting, his assignee,
heir, or devisee.
(Ord. 121 § 108, 1967).
20.04.070 Exemptions.
The adjustment of a property line between adjacent parcels where no new parcels
are created and where approved by the city engineer and director of planning
and the dedication of public streets or accessway are specifically excluded
from the scope of this title.
(Ord. 121 § 109, 1967).
20.04.080 Variance.
Whenever, in the opinion of the city planning commission for the reasons stated
below, the commission may approve such exceptions from the requirements and
regulations of this title as in its opinion are reasonable, necessary and in
conformity with the spirit and purpose of the Subdivision Map Act and of this
title, when:
   (1)   The subdivision is of such size or shape;
   (2)   Is subject to such title limitations of record;
   (3)   Is affected by such topographic conditions; or
   (4)   Is to be devoted to such use that it is physically impossible or
impractical.
(Ord. 121 § 110, 1967).
20.04.090 Appeals.
If any person affected is dissatisfied by any action of the city planning
commission, or by the type, nature or extent of the improvements recommended to
be required by the commission, such person may, within ten days after such
action, appeal in writing to the city council for a public hearing thereon. The
city council shall hear the appeal, after notice to the subdivider and the city
planning commission. Upon hearing the appeal, the city council shall consider
the record or such additional evidence as may be offered and may affirm,
reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the order, requirement, decision,
determination, interpretation or ruling appealed from, or make any other
additional decision or determination as it may find warranted under the
provisions of this title, and shall declare its finding within seven days.
(Ord. 491 § 18, 1995; Ord. 121 § 111, 1967).
20.04.100 Falsification.
Approvals of land divisions obtained as a consequence of fraudulent action or
misrepresentation of pertinent information are invalid.
(Ord. 121 § 112, 1967).
Chapter 20.08
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
20.08.010   Generally.
   
20.08.020   Access required.
   
20.08.030   Access rights.
   
20.08.040   Access rights waived.
   
20.08.050   Advisory agency.
   
20.08.060   Block.
   
20.08.070   Centerline.
   
20.08.080   City.
   
20.08.090   Commercial subdivision.
   
20.08.100   Condominium.
   
20.08.110   Corner lot.
   
20.08.120   County.
   
20.08.130   Dedication.
   
20.08.140   Design.
   
20.08.150   Development plan.
   
20.08.160   Division of land.
   
20.08.170   Driveway.
   
20.08.180   Director.
   
20.08.190   Drainage facility.
   
20.08.200   Easement.
   
20.08.210   Effective lot width.
   
20.08.220   Engineer.
   
20.08.230   Final map.
   
20.08.240   Flood hazard.
   
20.08.250   Frontage.
   
20.08.260   Future dedication.
   
20.08.270   Geological hazard.
   
20.08.280   General plan.
   
20.08.290   Improvements.
   
20.08.300   Improvement plan.
   
20.08.310   Industrial subdivision.
   
20.08.320   Interior lot.
   
20.08.330   Key lot.
   
20.08.340   Lease.
   
20.08.350   Lot.
   
20.08.360   Lot area.
   
20.08.370   Lot depth.
   
20.08.380   Lot lines.
   
20.08.390   Lot split.
   
20.08.400   Lot width.
   
20.08.410   Median of a lot.
   
20.08.420   Minor land division.
   
20.08.430   Nonaccess strip.
   
20.08.440   Owner.
   
20.08.450   Parcel.
   
20.08.460   Parcel map.
   
20.08.470   Parkway.
   
20.08.480   Person.
   
20.08.490   Public way.
   
20.08.500   Residential subdivision.
   
20.08.510   Reversed corner lot.
   
20.08.520   Right-of-way.
   
20.08.530   Roadway.
   
20.08.540   Section.
   
20.08.550   Service road island.
   
20.08.560   Shall and may.
   
20.08.570   Specifications.
   
20.08.580   Street.
   
20.08.590   Streets and highways.
   
20.08.600   Subdivider.
   
20.08.610   Subdivision.
   
20.08.620   Subdivision Map Act.
   
20.08.630   Subdivision review committee.
   
20.08.640   Tentative map.
   
20.08.650   Through lot.
20.08.010 Generally.
In the construction of this title, certain words and terms are hereby defined
as set out herein.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.020 Access required.
"Access required" means that lots or parcels shall have approved access to a
dedicated street.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.030 Access rights.
"Access rights" mean the right of owners or occupants of land abutting an
alley, street or highway to gain direct access to such alley, street or
highway.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.040 Access rights waived.
"Access rights waived" means a waiver of direct access rights to any alley,
street or highway.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.050 Advisory agency.
The planning commission is hereby designated the advisory agency to the city
council on all matters related to the division of land.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.060 Block.
"Block" means a tract of land bounded by streets, or a combination of streets,
public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, or flood control channels.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.070 Centerline.
"Centerline" means a line established by the engineer and designated as
"centerline," "proposed centerline," "adopted centerline," or "construction
centerline" on a series of maps filed in the office of the engineer. Where two
or more such designations are shown on any map in the series, the line labeled
"adopted centerline" is deemed to be the official centerline.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.080 City.
"City" unless otherwise noted, refers to the city of La Mirada.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.090 Commercial subdivision.
"Commercial subdivision" means a subdivision in which the primary use of the
land is commercial as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, and in which
such other uses may be permitted as are clearly incidental to the commercial
development.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.100 Condominium.
"Condominium" is a term to describe the dividing of real property into lots or
parcels, including parcels of air space, whereby a divided separate fee is
conveyed for such parcels, including an undivided proportionate share in the
common areas and facilities.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.110 Corner lot.
"Corner lot" means a lot situated at the intersection of two streets, the
interior angle of such intersection not exceeding one hundred twenty degrees.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.120 County.
"County" means the county of Los Angeles.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.130 Dedication.
"Dedication" means the grant by an owner of any real property to the city for
use as a public alley, street, highway or easement.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.140 Design.
"Design" means minimum area, width, grading and general layout of lots and the
alignment, grades, and widths of alleys, streets, highways, easements and
rights-of-way for drainage facilities, water mains, sanitary sewers, utilities
and other public purposes.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.150 Development plan.
"Development plan" means a site plan showing the design, location and all
proposed improvements of streets, lots and other proposed site improvements,
with particular reference to the location of buildings in relation to lot lines
and to finish grade elevations.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.160 Division of land.
"Division of land" means an action whereby land is divided in accordance with
the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.170 Driveway.
"Driveway" means a private vehicular right-of-way which primarily functions to
provide access to lots or parcels from an alley, street or highway.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.180 Director.
"Director" means the director of planning of the city.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.190 Drainage facility.
"Drainage facility" means any drainage device or structure which may be used to
control the flow of water and/or alleviate flood hazard, including but not
limited to berms, channels, culverts, curbs, ditches, gutters, pavement, pipes,
walls, and safety devices appurtenant to drainage or water reclamation
structures.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.200 Easement.
"Easement" means the right of passage or use, or the right to prevent the use,
of land by a person other than the owner of the land.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.210 Effective lot width.
"Effective lot width" means the distance between side lot lines, or side lot
lines extended, measured perpendicular to the median at the point of
intersection of the median and the front lot lines.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.220 Engineer.
"Engineer" means the city engineer of La Mirada.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.230 Final map.
"Final map" means a map of a proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with
the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act which is prepared in a
manner to be filed in the office of the county recorder.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.240 Flood hazard.
"Flood hazard" means a potential danger to life, land or improvements due to
inundation or to storm water runoff having sufficient velocity to transport or
deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode
the banks of water courses.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.250 Frontage.
"Frontage" means that portion of a lot or parcel which abuts a public or
private alley, street or highway.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.260 Future dedication.
"Future dedication" means any real property which the owner thereof has offered
to dedicate as a public alley, street, highway or easement which offer is
subject to the right of the city council to accept the dedication at any later
date.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.270 Geological hazard.
"Geological hazard" means a hazard inherent in the earth, or artificially
created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property or
improvements due to the movement, failure or shifting of earth.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.280 General plan.
"General plan" means a comprehensive long term plan, including the elements
thereof, adopted by the city.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.290 Improvements.
"Improvements" mean such structures or facilities to be installed or agreed to
be installed by a person on land to be used for public or private alleys,
streets, highways or other easements as a condition precedent to the approval
and acceptance of a final map or parcel map, including but not limited to
street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street trees, lights, street
signs, sanitary sewers, utilities, water mains and drainage facilities.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.300 Improvement plan.
"Improvement plan" means a plan showing the location and construction detail of
streets, roads, drainage facilities, sanitary sewers and structures, and other
on-and-off tract improvements for a subdivision.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.310 Industrial subdivision.
"Industrial subdivision" means a subdivision in which the primary use of the
land is industrial as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city, and in which
such other uses may be permitted as are clearly incidental to the industrial
development.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.320 Interior lot.
"Interior lot" means a lot other than a corner lot or reversed corner lot.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.330 Key lot.
"Key lot" means a lot the sides of which adjoin the rear line of one or more
adjoining lots.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.340 Lease.
"Lease" means an oral or written agreement or contract, tenancy at will, month-
to-month, or other similar tenancy.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.350 Lot.
"Lot" means that portion of land in a subdivision to be occupied by a building
or group of buildings and accessory buildings, together with such yards and lot
area as are required by this title and by the zoning ordinance of the city, and
having its principal frontage on a street.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.360 Lot area.
"Lot area" means the number of square feet of land area contained within the
property lines of the lot.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.370 Lot depth.
"Lot depth" means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the two side lot lines.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.380 Lot lines.
"Lot lines" mean the lines bounding a lot.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.390 Lot split.
"Lot split" means the division of any real property into two to four parcels
for the purpose of transfer of ownership, sale, or lease, whether immediate or
future.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.400 Lot width.
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured
at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between front and rear lot
lines.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.410 Median of a lot.
"Median of a lot" means a line any point on which is equidistant from the side
lot lines measured along lines drawn perpendicular to the side lot lines from
the median.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.420 Minor land division.
"Minor land division" refers to a division of real property, improved or
unimproved, or portion thereof, within the city, shown on the last equalized
assessment tax roll as a unit or contiguous units, which is divided into two,
three, or four parcels, except that minor land division does not include:
   (1)   Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code
of the state of California;
   (2)   The leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within an
apartment, industrial or commercial building, or within a trailer park;
   (3)   Division by mineral, oil or gas leases;
   (4)   Divisions made solely to dedicate streets, pedestrian ways, utility or
for other public use purposes.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.430 Nonaccess strip.
"Nonaccess strip" means a strip of land not less than one foot in width deeded
to the city for the purpose of regulating access to a partially dedicated or
deadend alley, street or highway.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.440 Owner.
"Owner" means any person having title to the land proposed to be divided under
the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.450 Parcel.
"Parcel" means a contiguous quantity of land other than a lot.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.460 Parcel map.
"Parcel map" means a map showing the division of land prepared in accordance
with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act which is prepared
in a manner to be filed in the office of the county recorder.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.470 Parkway.
"Parkway" means that portion of a street or highway which lies between the
roadway and the right-of-way line.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.480 Person.
"Person" means any individual, corporation, company, firm, association,
partnership, copartnership, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver,
syndicate, club, estate, business trust, organization or any other legal
entity, or the authorized representative thereof.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.490 Public way.
"Public way" means any street, alley, or path as herein before defined, which
is dedicated to public use or owned by the city.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.500 Residential subdivision.
"Residential subdivision" means a subdivision in which the primary use of the
land is residential as defined by the zoning ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.510 Reversed corner lot.
"Reversed corner lot" means a corner lot the side street line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front line of the lot to its rear.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.520 Right-of-way.
"Right-of-way" means an area of land reserved for public or private easements.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.530 Roadway.
"Roadway" means that portion of a street or highway intended to accommodate the
movement of vehicular traffic.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.540 Section.
"Section" means a section of this title unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.550 Service road island.
"Service road island" means that portion of the right-of-way which separates
the roadways of a highway and a service road.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.560 Shall and may.
"Shall" is mandatory, "may" is permissive.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.570 Specifications.
"Specifications" mean specifications and supplemental design standards for
subdivisions, sanitary sewers, storm drains, streets, and highways in the city.
These are specifications adopted by the city council prescribing the materials
and workmanship to be used in the construction of improvements made pursuant to
this title.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.580 Street.
"Street" means a way for vehicular traffic whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parking, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, court,
circle, drive or way. It does not include a path or alley.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.590 Streets and highways.
   (a)   "Freeway" means a divided highway for through traffic with full
control of access and with grade separations at intersections.
   (b)   "Expressway" means a highway for through traffic which may have
partial control of access, but which may or may not be divided or have grade
separation at intersections.
   (c)   "Parkway" means a highway designed for pleasure travel, together with
appropriate roadside complementary facilities, which is shown as a "parkway" on
the general plan.
   (d)   "Scenic highway" means a thoroughfare of scenic importance in the
city, county or state highway system and shown as a "scenic highway" on the
general plan.
   (e)   "Major highway" means a thoroughfare of major importance in the city,
county or state highway system and shown as a "major highway" on the general
plan.
   (f)   "Secondary highway" means a thoroughfare of secondary importance in
the city, county or state highway system and shown as a "secondary highway" on
the general plan.
   (g)   "Collector street" means a street designed to convey vehicular traffic
from interior local streets to a highway.
   (h)   "Local street" means a street designed to provide access to abutting
property and serving local as distinct from through traffic.
   (i)   "Frontage or service road" means that portion of a major or secondary
highway lying outside the principal roadway thereof, separated therefrom, and
providing access to abutting property.
   (j)   "Cul-de-sac street" means a street which by design is not intended to
be a through street and at the termination of which there is provided a turning
area for the convenient reversing of vehicular traffic.
   (k)   "Dead-end street" means a street which terminates at a property line
and which is designed to provide access to other properties.
   (l)   "Industrial street" means a street designed to service industrial
traffic and trucks for interior street in an industrial area.
   (m)   "Private road easement" means a parcel of land not dedicated as a
public street over which a private easement for street purposes has been
granted to the owners of property receiving access therefrom, and for which the
instrument creating same has been duly filed in the office of the county
recorder.
   (n)   "Private street" means a private road easement as defined herein above
which has been determined by the advisory agency or the director to be adequate
for access to adjacent or contiguous property.
   (o)   "Alley" means a public right-of-way other than a street or highway
which affords a means of vehicular access to lots or parcels.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.600 Subdivider.
"Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who
causes land to be divided.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.610 Subdivision.
"Subdivision" means any real property, improved or unimproved, or a portion
thereof, shown on the last preceding tax roll as a unit or as continuous units,
which is divided for the purpose of transfer of ownership, sale, lease, or
financing whether immediate or future by any subdivider into five or more
parcels.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.620 Subdivision Map Act.
"Subdivision Map Act" means California Government Code Sections 66410 through
66499.58.
(Ord. 491 § 19, 1995; Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.630 Subdivision review committee.
"Subdivision review committee" means the city planning commission or a
committee made up of city staff members and/or a combination of commissioners
and city staff to review subdivisions.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.640 Tentative map.
"Tentative map" means a preliminary map or plan of a proposed division of land
prepared in accordance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision
Map Act.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
20.08.650 Through lot.
"Through lot" means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets.
(Ord. 121 Art. II (part), 1967).
Chapter 20.12
TENTATIVE MAP
Sections:
   
20.12.010   Prefiling review--Optional.
   
20.12.020   Tentative plan or map processing.
   
20.12.030   Tract number.
   
20.12.040   Filing.
   
20.12.050   Distribution.
   
20.12.060   Form--Contents.
   
20.12.070   Development plan or map.
20.12.010 Prefiling review--Optional.
   (a)   Prior to the filing of an application for a subdivision, the applicant
is encouraged to submit a preliminary plan or map with such supplementary data
as may be available in order to determine the practical feasibility of the
proposed subdivision in relationship to the elements of the general plan and
the installation of improvements as required in this title.
   (b)   This requirement shall not require formal application, fee, or filing
of the map with the city planning commission.
   (c)   After a prearranged conference with the subdivider, the city planning
staff may inform the subdivider that the plans and data as submitted and as
modified do or do not meet the objectives of the general plan and this title.
   (d)   The preliminary plan or map and the conference in connection with its
review is optional with the subdivider and is not required by this title.
Experience indicates that by following this procedure, the subdivider will save
time and expense and he is, therefore, encouraged to follow it.
(Ord. 121 § 300, 1967).
20.12.020 Tentative plan or map processing.
   (a)   On the basis of the recommendations arising out of the preliminary
conference regarding the general program and objectives contemplated in the
proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall prepare a tentative plan or map,
together with supplementary material.
   (b)   Thirty-five copies of the tentative plan or map shall be submitted to
the city planning commission with written application for approval of the
tentative plan or map at least twenty-eight days prior to the meeting at which
it is to be considered.
   (c)   Following the review of the tentative plan or map and other materials
submitted for conformity to these regulations, and consultation with the
subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements
to be made by the subdivider, the city planning commission shall, within fifty
days, act thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved, the city planning
commission and city council shall express its approval and state the conditions
of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and
reasons therefor.
   (d)   The action of the city council shall be noted on two copies of the
tentative plan or map, referred and attached to any conditions determined. One
copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the city
clerk.
   (e)   Approval of the tentative plan or map shall not constitute approval of
the final plan or map. Rather it shall be deemed an expression of approval of
the layout submitted on the tentative plan or map as a guide for the
preparation of the final plan or map which will be submitted for the approval
of the city council and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of
these regulations and the conditions of the tentative plan or map, if any.
(Ord. 491 § 20, 1995; Ord. 121 § 301, 1967).
20.12.030 Tract number.
Before filing a tentative map the subdivider shall obtain from the county
surveyor the assignment of a number for the tract to be subdivided. When a
number shall have been assigned for a subdivision, the subdivider shall place
the number upon each tentative or final map of the subdivision and the number
shall not thereafter be changed nor altered in any manner upon any tentative or
final map of the subdivision unless and until a new number shall have been
assigned.
(Ord. 121 § 302, 1967).
20.12.040 Filing.
Each subdivider shall file with the city planning commission thirty-five
reproduced copies and one duplicate transparency of the tentative map of each
subdivision and thirty-five copies of the owner's statement and accompanying
data, made in accordance with the requirements of this title together with the
filing fee. The time of filing a tentative map shall be construed to be the
time at which the same, together with required data, is submitted in the office
of the city planning department.
(Ord. 121 § 303, 1967).
20.12.050 Distribution.
The planning director shall indicate the date of filing upon all copies of the
tentative map and accompanying data, and shall within two regular working days,
transmit at least one copy of the map to each of the following who shall report
back thereon within twenty days:
   (1)   The city engineer;
   (2)   Each county and city entitled by law to review and recommend thereon;
   (3)   The Real Estate Commissioner of the state of California;
   (4)   The affected school district;
   (5)   The public utilities serving the area;
   (6)   The sanitation district;
   (7)   The county health officer;
   (8)   The District Engineer of the State Division of Highways;
   (9)   Special districts or other public agencies concerned (county engineer,
county road department, flood control district).
(Ord. 121 § 304, 1967).
20.12.060 Form--Contents.
   (a)   The subdivision shall be clearly and legibly drawn. The dimension of
this map shall be nine inches by thirteen inches or any multiple thereof.
   (b)   The scale of the map shall be large enough to show clearly all details
thereof, and in no case shall the scale be less than one inch equals one
hundred feet. When the area to be subdivided is not shown on one sheet, the
city planning commission may require the submission of a map showing the entire
area indicating streets, keyed to each sheet of the tentative map.
   (c)   The tentative map shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tract number;
      (2)   Sufficient data to define the location and boundaries of the
proposed subdivision;
      (3)   Name, telephone number and address of owner or owners of record;
      (4)   Name, telephone number and address of subdivider;
      (5)   Name, telephone number and business address of person who prepared
the plan or map;
      (6)   The location, names and existing widths of adjacent streets,
highways, and other dedicated and nondedicated access ways;
      (7)   The location, names and widths of all existing or proposed streets,
ways or pedestrian paths in the subdivision and their approximate grades,
including typical sections and grades thereof;
      (8)   The location of existing utilities, sewers, drainage ditches, and
other drainage facilities located in, or adjacent to, the proposed subdivision;
      (9)   The location and dimensions of all known existing easements and
reservations;
      (10)   Approximate radius of each curve;
      (11)   Approximate lot layout and approximate dimensions of each lot
including square footage;
      (12)   Size of smallest lot in tract and average size of all lots;
      (13)   Approximate boundaries of areas subject to inundation or storm
water overflow and the location, width and direction of flow of all water
courses;
      (14)   Plan and easements for drainage and for handling storm water;
      (15)   Existing use or uses of the property and to scale the outline of
any existing buildings and their locations in relation to existing or proposed
street and lot lines;
      (16)   Statement of use zone and proposed use of the property;
      (17)   Source of water supply;
      (18)   Provision for sewerage and sewage disposal;
      (19)   Areas to be reserved for public or semi-public use, if any;
      (20)   Topography with contours such that:
         (A)   Contour intervals of one foot or less used where ground slope is
three percent or less;
         (B)   Contour intervals of five feet or less shall be used where
ground slopes exceed three percent;
      (21)   A statement of the improvements proposed to be made or installed;
      (22)   Approximate location of all tree and tree masses, twelve feet or
more in height, standing within boundaries of the subdivision, also the
approximate diameter of such trees at a height of thirty inches above grade;
      (23)   Railroad rights-of-way and grade crossing;
      (24)   Date, north point arrow, scale;
      (25)   Key map locating the proposed subdivision in relation to
surrounding areas;
      (26)   Identify all adjacent divisions of land;
      (27)   If a geological report is necessary to determine whether the
property to be subdivided is subject to an existing or potential geological
hazard, a written report stating how the geological conditions will affect the
proposed development will be required. The report shall be prepared by a
geologist experienced in engineering matters and qualified by the county
geological qualifications board;
      (28)   Name all existing streets and extensions thereof, and letter for
all other proposed streets;
      (29)   In a division of land consisting of a condominium project as
defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code or a community apartment project as
defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code the tentative map
shall show the general location of all buildings and other structures to be
erected including means of access thereto;
      (30)   Owner's statement. Such of the foregoing information as may not
practicably be shown on the plan shall be contained in a written owner's
statement accompanying the map.
(Ord. 121 § 305, 1967).
20.12.070 Development plan or map.
   (a)   Filing. When the building of houses for sale by the subdivider or his
agent or others is a part of the subdivision operation, the subdivider shall
submit a development plan to the city planning commission for approval.
   The subdivider shall submit ten white prints of the development plan and
accompanying data which shall be reviewed by the city engineer, the city
planning director, and such other city departments as may be concerned with the
development plan. Recommendations of the technical staff shall be considered by
the city planning commission in acting on the development plan.
   (b)   Form. The development plan shall be legibly drawn at a scale large
enough to show clearly all details thereof, and the map of the plan shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Finished grading;
      (2)   The circulation system within the subdivision and its connection
with the system outside of the subdivision, incorporating any pedestrian paths;
      (3)   Relationship to the subdivision to the prevailing winds;
      (4)   Relationship of shape and size of each house to shape, size and
finished contours of its lot;
      (5)   Relationship of one house to another and to any living areas,
planting areas or screening between houses;
      (6)   Planting to serve as screens, buffers, shade control or decoration
to enhance neighborhood design or outdoor and indoor living areas;
      (7)   A complete unit of the subdivision with houses correctly located
and any main planting areas shown, to indicate that houses are located on their
lots to obtain the best possible utilization of their lots considering grade,
views, wind and relationship of adjacent or neighboring houses or structures;
      (8)   Detailed drawings of typical dwellings, including floor plan, site
plan and exterior elevations indicating application to the typical dwelling of
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 121 § 306, 1967).
Chapter 20.16
DESIGN STANDARDS
Sections:
   
20.16.010   Conformance required.
   
20.16.020   Streets.
   
20.16.030   Lots and blocks.
   
20.16.040   Planting.
   
20.16.050   Monuments, bench marks and lot stakes.
   
20.16.060   Drainage.
   
20.16.070   Street signs.
   
20.16.080   Street lighting.
   
20.16.090   Minimum residential requirements.
   
20.16.100   Minimum industrial and commercial requirements.
20.16.010 Conformance required.
To ensure that a proposed subdivision shall reflect the best interests of the
city, all subdivisions under the provisions of this title shall conform to the
standards of subdivision design of this title and the Standard Details. In the
event of conflict between this title and the Standard Details, this title shall
govern.
(Ord. 121 Art. 4 (part), 1967).
20.16.020 Streets.
The street pattern of each proposed subdivision shall reflect the general plan
of the city and shall be designed in accordance with the following design
standards:
   (1)   Street design shall be in accordance with the provisions of Sections
20.16.090 and
20.16.100, "Minimum Requirements;"
   (2)   Reserve strips controlling the access to streets or other public
right-of-way shall not be approved unless such strips are deemed necessary by
the city planning commission for the protection of the public welfare of
substantial property rights, and in no case unless the control and disposal of
the land comprising such strips are placed in the control of the city;
   (3)   Where the subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land, streets in the
subdivision shall ordinarily be extended to the adjacent unsubdivided land as
prescribed by the city planning commission to provide access to said
unsubdivided land in the event of its future subdivision;
   (4)   No street name shall be used which duplicates or may be confused with
the name of any street existing in the city or any other Los Angeles County
city or county street name and all street names shall be approved by the
planning commission;
   (5)   Streets and alleys at their present intersections shall be provided
with twenty foot radius turns at property lines in all subdivisions;
   (6)   The length of cul-de-sac streets in a residential subdivision shall
not exceed five hundred feet except that a cul-de-sac of up to six hundred feet
in length may be permitted provided that it has frontage of no more than
sixteen lots excluding corner lots except in undue hardships where minor
variances may be granted;
   (7)   All streets shall normally intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles, and the centerlines of intersecting streets shall be tangents or have a
radius greater than six hundred feet for a distance of one hundred feet from
their intersection. Streets entering upon opposite sides of any given street
shall have their centerlines directly opposite each other or the centerlines
shall be offset by at least one hundred fifty feet for all minor residential
streets and two hundred feet for all other streets, except in undue hardship
where minor variances may be granted;
   (8)   Entrance from a frontage road to a major thoroughfare shall be
designed to assure satisfactory traffic flow and safety;
   (9)   Curbs shall be concrete vertical type, Standard Detail No. A-1;
   (10)   Sidewalks shall be unobstructed by utility installations wherever
reasonably possible, or by planting, and shall be made of concrete and shall be
at least four feet wide, Standard Detail No. A-2;
   (11)   Grade of streets normally shall not be less than one- half percent
and shall not be greater than ten percent for minor streets and seven percent
for collector streets;
   (12)   Excessive fill and cut slopes when necessary in the opinion of the
city engineer shall have an easement equal to the cut or fill distance plus ten
feet;
   (13)   Whenever a street shall intersect another street, the maximum grade
of either street within an intersection shall be four percent except in undue
hardships where minor variances may be granted;
   (14)   The minimum distance between points of access to a major thoroughfare
shall be fifteen hundred feet;
   (15)   The structural design of the roadbed shall include determination of
the thickness of subbases, bases and surfacings to be placed over subsoils,
based on standards of the superintendent of streets. In no case shall the
thickness of base material be less than six inches nor shall the thickness of
asphaltic concrete surfacing be less than two inches.
(Ord. 121 § 400, 1967).
20.16.030 Lots and blocks.
   (a)   The width of blocks shall ordinarily be sufficient to allow for two
tiers of lots with rear easements as required.
   (b)   Depth and width of properties reserved for commercial or industrial
purposes shall be adequate to provide for development which includes off-street
parking and loading areas.
   (c)   Block lengths in residential subdivision shall not exceed fifteen
hundred feet.
   (d)   Pedestrian paths at least twelve feet in width shall be provided
across blocks when required for public convenience or access to school
playgrounds, shopping centers or to other community facilities. All paths shall
be improved according to Section
20.16.090 and shall be delineated in a manner approved by the city planning
commission, provided, that where the average grade of the path right-of-way
within a block prior to improvement exceeds fifteen percent, groups of steps of
concrete or other approved material shall be placed at appropriate locations in
the path. In all paths within which steps are provided, the portion of the path
above such steps shall slope away from the steps for a minimum distance of ten
feet.
   (e)   Residential lots shall have an area of at least six thousand square
feet and a minimum average width of sixty feet and lots that fan out from a
cul-de-sac must have a minimum frontage of forty feet. Lot arrangement and
design shall be such that lots will provide satisfactory sites for buildings
and shall be properly related to topography and to existing and probably future
requirements. To this end all lots shall normally be of a proportion to provide
a minimum average width in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Lot Area         Minimum
Square Feet      Average Width
6,000 - 7,499    60 feet
7,500 - 9,999    75 feet
10,000 - 14,999  90 feet
15,000 - 19,999  100 feet
20,000 - 39,999  125 feet
40,000 - or more 150 feet
 
   (f)   In residential subdivisions corner lots and reversed corner lots shall
have an area of at least ten percent greater than that of the minimum lot area
required.
   (g)   Through lots, reverse frontage lots and reverse corner lots shall be
avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development
from traffic arteries or otherwise required by topography and/or orientation.
   (h)   Side lot lines shall be substantially perpendicular or radial to
street lines.
   (i)   No subdivision shall be accepted which leaves unsubdivided islands,
strips, or parcels of property unsuited for subdividing and not accepted by the
city for appropriate use, and all lots must be buildable except those dedicated
to public use.
   (j)   Residential lots abutting a major thoroughfare shall not front on such
major thoroughfare, but shall front on a minor or collector street.
   (k)   Commercial lots shall have an area of at least ten thousand square
feet and a minimum frontage of seventy feet.
   (l)   Industrial lots shall have an area of at least twenty thousand square
feet and a minimum frontage of one hundred feet.
(Ord. 121 § 401, 1967).
20.16.040 Planting.
   (a)   Planting shall be provided in, or bordering all public ways, with
trees of an approved type which shall be provided in amounts of two trees for
each sixty feet of lot line bordered by the public way or as directed by the
superintendent of streets.
   (b)   Existing trees shall be preserved within any public way whenever such
trees are suitably located, healthy or of a desirable variety and when approved
grading shall so permit. When such trees exist the city staff shall make an
inspection to determine the health and desirability of species and make its
recommendations to the city planning commission.
(Ord. 121 § 402, 1967).
20.16.050 Monuments, bench marks and lot stakes.
   (a)   Monuments shall be set at or near all angle points of tangency in the
boundary of the subdivision, at intervals not to exceed five hundred feet along
the subdivision boundary or at such lesser distances as required by the city
engineer, at the intersections of all street lines with the subdivision
boundaries at all street intersections at the beginning and ending of curves of
the center lines and at other locations that may be specified by the city
engineer. In no case shall there be less than two monuments on any exterior
subdivision. boundary line or less than two street monuments in any street.
Street monuments shall be set on centerlines or offset as directed by the city
engineer. All monuments set shall be of a type and standard as established by
the Los Angeles County engineer.
   (b)   Corners and curve points of all lots in a subdivision shall be marked
by hubs all of which shall be identified by the number of the registered
engineer or land surveyor surveying the subdivision which shall be legibly
stamped on the tack or attached noncorrosive tag. When the lot corner hubs are
within the area affected by street improvement work, they may be temporarily
marked by offset hubs.
(Ord. 121 § 403, 1967).
20.16.060 Drainage.
   (a)   The following definition of terms apply to the minimum drainage
requirements contained in this title:
      (1)   "Primary drainage channels or conduits" mean those channels or
conduits which have a drainage area of more than 1.0 square miles;
      (2)   "Minor drainage channels or conduits" mean those channels or
conduits having a drainage area of 1.0 square miles or less;
      (3)   "Inundation" is used to indicate ponded water or water in motion of
sufficient depth to damage property due to the mere presence of the water or
deposition of silt;
      (4)   "Flood hazard" means overflow of water having sufficient velocity
to transport or deposit debris, to scour the surface soil, or to dislodge or
damage buildings, or to cause erosion of the banks of channels;
      (5)   "Possible flood hazard" means possible extension of areas denoted
as subject to "flood hazard" and shall reflect the uncertainty of degree or
extent of bank erosion;
      (6)   "Sheet overflow" means water of minor depth either quiescent or
flowing at velocities less than those necessary to produce serious scour;
      (7)   "Ponding of local storm water" means the standing of water in local
depressions. As distinguished from "sheet overflow" this water originates on or
in the vicinity of the property and due to the condition of the ground surface
is unable to reach a drainage channel or conduit.
   (b)   Runoff design shall be made for the frequency of occurrence
hereinafter stipulated in these standards of modified rational method using
basic data in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Standard
Specifications. Runoff design shall accommodate the full and future
developments within the drainage area. In cases where such drainage areas are
underdeveloped fully improved conditions shall be determined for future by
conditions as indicated in the general plan of the city for future development
and by the zoning ordinance of the jurisdiction within which such areas are
located. Any outlet channel required to carry storm water from the proposed
subdivision to a defined drainage channel or conduit shall be in accordance
with these standards for the ultimate state of development in the drainage area
resulting from the particular subdivision.
   (c)   Drainage channels and conduits directly affecting the proposed
subdivision shall have the following minimum capacities:
      (1)   Primary drainage channels and conduits shall have sufficient
capacity to contain a twenty-five-year frequency of occurrence runoff;
      (2)   Minor drainage channels or conduits shall have sufficient capacity
to contain a ten-year frequency of occurrence runoff, including undefined
overflow originating within the tract or adjacent thereto.
   (d)   Storm waters within street areas shall be placed in closed conduits
when the maximum depth of in-gutter runoff computed in accordance with the
provisions of the supplemental design standards in the specifications exceeds
desirable depths in relationship to the velocity, as determined by the city
engineer.
   (e)   Proposed subdivision shall not cause inundation or flood hazard
conditions of existing inhabited areas.
   (f)   Drainage shall be accomplished by gravity without surcharge into catch
basins or manholes except by design.
   (g)   Catch basins shall have inlets of varying lengths so designed that the
water is diverted into the catch basin without a reversed direction of the flow
of the water. The inlets shall be designed in accordance with Standard Detail
No. A-3.
   (h)   Drainage channels, conduits and appurtenances shall conform in all
respects to good engineering practice.
(Ord. 121 § 404, 1967).
20.16.070 Street signs.
Street name signs shall be installed by the subdivider at all intersections of
name streets and paths and shall be conspicuous to pedestrian and vehicular
traffic in all directions. The installation at the intersections of two such
ways shall consist of at least one four-way street name sign and post; provided
that where the pavement width of one or both of the streets exceeds forty feet,
two signs shall be installed at such intersection; provided that at least one
such sign shall be installed wherever there shall occur an angular change of
direction of a street centerline of sixty degrees or more. In all cases,
installation shall be made as close as practicable to the curb. All street name
signs shall be of a type specified and shall be installed in accordance with
the specifications as prepared by the superintendent of streets. If more than
two streets intersect, sufficient signs shall be installed clearly to identify
all such streets.
(Ord. 121 § 405, 1967).
20.16.080 Street lighting.
   (a)   Adequate lighting shall be provided in all subdivisions along streets,
paths or other pedestrian or vehicular ways. An agreement to so provide by the
subdivider shall be accomplished prior to acceptance of a final plan.
   (b)   Street lighting shall be accomplished by installation of standards
carrying luminaries mounted over the roadway of size, height and type in
accordance with the specifications, as established by the superintendent of
streets.
   (c)   Spacing of street lighting standards, and type and size of luminaries
on all streets which primarily serve residential dwellings shall be such as to
furnish not less than 0.075 foot candle or more than 0.6 foot candle over any
portion of the street right-of-way. The average illumination as determined by
the superintendent of streets shall be approximately 0.2 foot candle.
   (d)   Wherever existing trees or other plants are to be preserved within the
street right-of-way, street lighting standards shall be carefully located in
such a manner as to receive minimum interference from such trees or plants.
(Ord. 121 § 406, 1967).
20.16.090 Minimum residential requirements.
   (a)   Curbs, gutters and sidewalks shall be required in all residential
subdivisions in accordance with Standard Detail No. A-1 and A-2.
   (b)   Minor and collector streets shall be required in all residential
subdivisions in accordance with Standard Detail No. A-4.
(Ord. 121 § 407, 1967).
20.16.100 Minimum industrial and commercial requirements   
   (a)   Curbs and gutters shall be required in all commercial and industrial
subdivisions in accordance with Standard Detail No. A-1 and A-2.
   (b)   Commercial type sidewalk with tree wells shall be required in all
commercial subdivisions in accordance with Standard Detail No. A-2.
   (c)   Streets shall be required in all commercial subdivisions in accordance
with Standard Detail No. A-3.
(Ord. 121 § 408, 1967).
Chapter 20.20
IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:
   
20.20.010   General requirements.
   
20.20.020   Improvement plan and profiles.
   
20.20.030   Completion of improvements--Bonds.
   
20.20.040   Improvements of general benefit.
   
20.20.050   Disposition of reserved areas.
20.20.010 General requirements.
   (a)   The subdivider shall agree to make improvements installed to permanent
line and grade and to the satisfaction of the city engineer in accordance with
the provisions of this title and with the specifications of the city and such
improvements shall be made at the expense of the subdivider. The improvements
which the subdivider shall agree to make prior to acceptance and approval of
the final subdivision map by the city council shall include the following:
      (1)   Street grading, installation of curbs, gutters and sidewalks,
provisions for drainage and construction of drainage structures necessary to
the proper use and drainage of the streets and/or to the public safety and
convenience;
      (2)   Paving of streets, paths, and alleys required;
      (3)   Provision for a water system with mains of sufficient size and
having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate water supply for each
lot of the subdivision in accordance with the standards of utility serving the
area and with sufficient fire hydrants, fire flow, gated connections and
appurtenances to provide adequate fire protection in accordance with the
standards of the fire department of the city;
      (4)   Sanitary sewer facilities and connections for each lot to a
sewerage system approved by the city engineer and the southeast sanitation
district;
      (5)   An approved type of street lighting system;
      (6)   Planting of trees as required;
      (7)   Installation of street signs as required;
      (8)   Installation of a system of monuments and benchmarks approved by
the city engineer;
      (9)   Installation of underground facilities for the provision of cable
television service.
   (b)   Services from public utilities where provided and from sanitary sewers
shall be made available for each lot in such manner as will obviate, wherever
possible, the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutter and curb
when installed or when service connections are made.
   (c)   Utility lines including but not limited to electric, communications,
street lighting and cable television shall be placed underground either in
easements at the rear of lots or the front of the lots, or along lot lines in
all subdivisions, or in the street right-of-way. The subdivider shall pay for
the underground installations and shall make the necessary arrangements with
the utility companies. For the purposes of this section, appurtenances and
associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers,
pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets and concealed ducts in an
underground system may be placed above ground. Electrical transmission lines in
excess of twenty thousand volts shall be exempt from the above provisions.
(Ord. 195 § 1, 1973; Ord. 121 § 500, 1967).
20.20.020 Improvement plan and profiles.
   Improvement plans, proposed under the direction of a registered civil
engineer licensed by the state, shall be submitted to the city engineer. The
approval of the improvement plans by the city engineer shall be a condition of
approval of the final map. The following shall be submitted to the city
engineer:
   (1)   The plans and profiles of all improvements required by the provisions
of this title, as well as of other improvements proposed to be installed by the
subdivider in, over or under any street or right-of-way, easement or parcel of
land where improvements are required or proposed;
   (2)   A map and report showing all earth fills of twelve inches or more;
   (3)   Any data, including profiles, contours, design calculations and other
information, which the city engineer shall require for the preparation of a
report stating that the drainage facilities to be installed to serve the
proposed subdivision are in full compliance with the requirements of Section
20.16.060 and will accomplish drainage in the manner stated in that section.
   In preparing the report, the city engineer shall consider the
recommendations of any agencies concerned to whom he may have submitted such
plans for review. The report shall be delivered by the city engineer to the
city planning commission prior to approval of the final map. One copy of the
report shall be retained by the city planning commission in its files and one
copy shall be forwarded to the subdivider;
   (4)   A certificate of approval of any of the proposed improvements of
concern to the southeast sanitation district.
(Ord. 121 § 501, 1967).
20.20.030 Completion of improvements--Bonds.
   The owner or owners of the subdivision concurrently with the acceptance of
the final map shall enter into an agreement with the city council, agreeing to
have the work completed within the time specified in the agreement.
   To assure that work specified in the aforementioned agreement shall be
completed and that a system of monuments, stakes and bench marks shall be
installed as required, a corporate surety fund shall be furnished by the
subdivider guaranteeing the faithful performance of the work and payment of the
improvements according to the plans and specifications in a sum equal to the
cost as approved by the city engineer.
   In lieu of the faithful performance bond, a deposit may be made either with
the city or such responsible escrow agents or trust company as shall be
approved by the city council and in such manner as shall be approved by the
city council, or the deposit may be comprised of money or negotiable bonds in
the same amount and manner as approved for securing deposits of public money in
banks in which Federal funds may be deposited.
(Ord. 121 § 502, 1967).
20.20.040 Improvements of general benefit.
Whenever the Subdivision Map Act, this title, a resolution of the city council
or the city planning commission requires the installation of sewer or drainage
improvements by a subdivider and such improvements are of benefit and if the
city planning commission finds such improvements of value to land other than
that located within the subdivision, the city planning commission shall
recommend to the city council an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse him
for the use of such improvements by other lands than those developed by the
subdivider, and may recommend to the city council the imposition and collection
of a charge for the use of such facilities.
(Ord. 121 § 503, 1967).
20.20.050 Disposition of reserved areas.
   (a)   Public sites. Areas reserved for parks, playgrounds, school sites or
other public uses shall be reserved by separate agreement and as such for a
period of thirty days after recording the final map, whichever is less, during
which time the public agency involved shall have the option of acquiring the
same. Each such area shall be designated as a single lot on the final map.
Provided, however, that the city planning commission may, upon the request of
the subdivider and after a public hearing to consider the request when it shall
find that to do otherwise would impose an undue hardship on the subdivision or
the subdivider.
   (b)   Semi-public sites. Areas reserved for church or other semi-public uses
shall upon completion of development of the entire subdivision, be offered for
sale by the subdivider for a period up to one year after such completion of
development during which time appropriate uses of such sites shall have the
opportunity to purchase or to obtain option on the sites at a price which shall
reflect their fair market value; provided, however, that the city planning
commission may, upon request of the subdivider after a public hearing to
consider the request, release the subdivider from the obligation of such
reservation when it shall find that to do otherwise would impose an undue
hardship upon the subdivision or subdivider.
(Ord. 121 § 504, 1967).
Chapter 20.24
FINAL MAP
Sections:
   
20.24.010   Generally.
   
20.24.020   Form and data required.
20.24.010 Generally.
The subdivider may cause the proposed subdivision to be accurately surveyed and
a final map thereof to be prepared in accordance with the tentative map and the
conditions of approval, and conforming in all particulars to the provisions of
the Subdivision Map Act and of this title. Twelve copies of the final plan or
map and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared in accordance
with Article 4 of the Subdivision Map Act and shall be submitted to the city
council.
(Ord. 491 § 21, 1995; Ord. 121 § 600, 1967).
20.24.020 Form and data required.
   (a)   Size, material and scale. Size, material, and scale requirements of
the final map are as follows:
      (1)   The size of each sheet of the map shall be eighteen by twenty-six
inches. Marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an
entirely blank margin of one inch;
      (2)   The final map shall be prepared in accordance with Article 4 of the
Subdivision Map Act. Affidavits, certificates and acknowledgments may be
legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. Signatures shall be in
opaque black ink;
      (3)   The scale of the map shall be drawn to a scale that is clearly
legible and from which legible copies through normal methods of reproduction
can show all details clearly, with enough sheets used to accomplish this end.
The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising
the map shall be stated on each of the sheets and the relation of each
adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown.
   (b)   Title of map. The title of each such final map shall consist of a
tract number conspicuously placed at the top of the sheet followed by the words
"in the city of La Mirada." If three or more map sheets are used a key diagram
shall be included on the final sheet. The height of lettering in the tract
number shall not be less than one-half inch.
   (c)   Description. Below the title shall appear a subtitle consisting of a
description of all the property subdivided by reference to such map or maps of
the property shown thereon as last previously recorded or filed in the county
recording office, or as previously filed with the county clerk pursuant to a
final judgment in any action in partition, or as last previously filed in the
office of the county recorder as permitted by the Subdivision Map Act, or by
reference to the plot of any United States Survey. Each reference to any tract
or subdivision shall be spelled and worded identically with the record thereof,
and must show a complete reference to the book and pages of records of the
county.
   (d)   Reversion to acreage. Maps filed for the purpose of showing as acreage
land previously subdivided into parcels or lots or blocks shall be
conspicuously designated under the title by the words "reversion to acreage of
                                                             inserting a legal
description as required in subsection (c) hereof.
   (e)   Name of surveyor, date of survey, scale, north arrow, basis of
bearings. Upon such title sheet, below the title, the name of the registered
civil engineer, or licensed surveyor, together with the date of the survey and
the scale of the map shall be set forth. The basis of bearings shall be shown
on each final map and approved by the city engineer.
   Every sheet of the map proper shall bear title (but not subtitle), scale,
north arrow, sheet number and the number of each adjoining sheet in its proper
location.
   (f)   Certificates and acknowledgments. The following certificates and
acknowledgments must appear on the title sheet of the final map:
      (1)   Owner's certificate and acknowledgment and offer of dedication if
any;
      (2)   Certificate of the city clerk approval by the city council and
action on offer of dedication;
      (3)   Certificate of approval of the city engineer;
      (4)   Certificate of engineer with his registered engineer's number or of
surveyor with his licensed land surveyor's number;
      (5)   Certificate of county engineer indicating compliance with the State
Map Act;
      (6)   Record of recording, data by county recorder;
      (7)   Certificate of county clerk as to tax bond.
   (g)   Other forms required. The title sheet shall also contain such other
affidavits, acknowledgments, endorsements and notarial seals as are required by
law and by this title. A blank space six inches by eight inches shall be
provided for other forms of approval, if any by city officials.
   (h)   Dimensions, bearings, curve data. The final map shall show all survey
and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments, the
procedures and practice of which shall conform to the standards and details set
forth in Chapter XV Division III of the Business and Professions Code of the
Land Surveyor's Act and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior
boundary lines appearing thereon, including bearings and distance of straight
lines and terminal radii or delta, arc length and radius for all curves and
such information as may be necessary to determine the location of the centers
of curves.
   The final map shall particularly define, delineate and designate all lots
and parcels offered for dedication for any purpose and any private streets with
all dimensions, boundaries and courses clearly shown and defined in every case.
   Parcels offered for dedication other than for streets or easements shall be
designated by letter.
   Private streets shall be designated by name and shall have inserted within
the limits thereof the words, "private street."
   Sufficient linear, angular and curve data shall be shown to determine
readily the bearing and length of the boundary lines of every block, lot and
parcel which is a part thereof. A lot shall not be divided onto two sheets and
wherever practicable all blocks shall be shown in their entirety on one sheet.
Arc length, radii, and total central angle, or radial bearings of each curve
shall be shown. Where lot corners are rounded at street intersection the
tangent distances shall be shown.
   (i)   Existing monuments. The final map shall show fully and clearly what
stakes, monuments or other evidence to determine the boundaries of the
subdivision were found on the ground, and each adjacent corner of each
adjoining subdivision or portion thereof, by lot and block numbers, tract name
and place of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper
designation and identified on the map.
   (j)   Monuments. The location of monuments to be installed in accordance
with requirements of the city engineer as set forth under the specifications
shall be shown on the final map.
   (k)   Subdivision boundary. The boundary of the subdivision shall be
designated by an opaque blue line applied on the reverse side of the map
designating the boundary line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or
other data. All lines shown on the map which do not constitute a part of the
subdivision itself shall be clearly distinguishable from those lines which are
a part of the subdivision, and any area enclosed by such lines shall be labeled
"not a part of this subdivision."
   (l)   City boundary. City boundaries which cross or adjoin the subdivision
shall be clearly designated and located in relation to adjacent lot or block
lines.
   (m)   Inundation. The final map shall identify the area subject to flood
hazard in case the subdivision is adjacent to a stream, channel or any body of
water.
(Ord. 491 § 22, 1995; Ord. 121 § 601, 1967).
Chapter 20.28
PARCEL MAPS
Sections:
   
20.28.010 Generally.
   
20.28.020 Processing.
20.28.010 Generally.
A parcel map in compliance with Article 6, of the State Subdivision Map Act,
shall be filed prior to division, selling, leasing, or liening of one or more
parcels of land so as to create not more than four new lots by an owner or
subdivider who does not wish to record a subdivision map. A tentative map
thereof, in full compliance with provisions of this title shall be filed and
approved by the city planning commission prior to the filing of the parcel map.
(Ord. 121 § 700, 1967).
20.28.020 Processing.
Any person desiring approval of a proposed minor land division shall cause ten
copies of a tentative map or record showing the proposed division to be
prepared and filed with the planning director.
   (1)   Tentative map requirements. The tentative map shall be a reproducible
print legibly drawn to a scale large enough to show clearly all details and
shall show, contain, or be accompanied in writing by the following matter:
      (A)   Date on which map prepared,
      (B)   Name, address, and telephone number of owner or owners or record
whose property is proposed to be divided together with their affidavit
consenting to the filing of the tentative map,
      (C)   Name, address, and telephone number of the person who prepared the
map,
      (D)   Data; north point; scale; the proposed minor land division
dimensioned in scale and tied to a known point or section corner; and a key map
showing the locations of the proposed division in relation to the surrounding
area,
      (E)   The dimensions and record boundaries of the total ownership
together with a legal description of the total ownership,
      (F)   The lot and/or parcel lines and approximate dimensions and
numerical designation of each parcel in the minor land division starting with
the number "1" except that interior parcel lines need not be shown on an
element plan map,
      (G)   Approximate location of all existing buildings and structures
within the proposed division; existing buildings on adjacent properties within
fifty feet of the proposed division shall also be shown,
      (H)   The location, names, existing widths and approximate grades of all
adjoining highways, streets, or other public ways, and the tract number of
adjoining subdivisions,
      (I)   The width, purpose, and approximate location of all existing or
proposed easements whether public or private,
      (J)   Existing use or uses and proposed use or uses of the property,
      (K)   Sufficient contours or elevations to determine the general slope
and topography of the property,
      (L)   Provision for sewerage and sewage disposal, showing sanitary sewer
connections which are available,
      (M)   Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or storm
water overflow and the location, width, and direction of all water courses,
      (N)   The abutting streets and alleys showing existing improvements and
proposed dedications, improvements and easements,
      (O)   All existing or proposed public utilities servicing the property,
      (P)   Such information as may be deemed necessary to consider properly
the proposed minor land division,
      (Q)   Commercial or industrial center or development shall show all
existing or proposed buildings or structures, together with all necessary
automobile parking spaces, yards, landscaping, and other items required by
applicable city ordinances;
   (2)   Action on the tentative map. Upon the filing of a tentative map, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall set the matter for hearing before
the planning commission.
   If the proposed division conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the
zoning ordinance, and the master plan, and in design will not be detrimental to
the public health, safety, and welfare, and the commission so finds the
commission shall approve or approve with conditions the tentative map;
otherwise the commission shall disapprove the tentative map. The secretary of
the commission shall notify the applicant of the action taken;
   (3)   Dedications and improvements. The commission may require as a
condition to the approval of a minor land division map the dedication or
improvement, or both of master plan highways, streets, alleys, other public
ways or easements determined by the commission to be necessary for local
traffic, drainage and sanitary needs.
      (A)   Improvements. Required improvements shall include drainage
facilities and street improvements on existing streets and on land shown on the
map as public or private streets. In addition, the commission shall not approve
any division which fails to provide that each lot or parcel created has access
on either a dedicated public thoroughfare or an easement of record providing
access to and from such dedicated public thoroughfare. Drainage facilities
shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications
approved by the city engineer and street improvements shall be installed
according to plans which shall have been approved by the city engineer.
      (B)   Agreement to improve. In lieu of improvement, the planning
commission in approving the tentative map shall require the owner to enter into
a suitable agreement or to post bond in the amount recommended by the city
engineer guaranteeing the installation of such improvements as shall be
required of the owner within the time specified in the agreement.
      (C)   Dedications. Any offer of dedication required as a condition of
approval shall be binding on the owner, his heirs, assigns or successors in
interest. When dedication is offered, such offer shall be properly executed by
all parties of interest as determined by a current preliminary title report
issued by a title company authorized by the laws of the state of California to
write same. The applicant shall furnish such report. The execution of the offer
of dedication shall be in a manner satisfactory to the city engineer. Such
offer may not be withdrawn nor shall any action be taken to jeopardize the
city's interest in such offer of dedication unless the city council refuses to
accept the dedication.
      (D)   Modifications. The planning commission may grant a modification of
the improvement and dedication requirements where it determines that existing
structures, title limitations, topography or other conditions create an
unnecessary hardship or make it obviously impractical to require such
improvement or dedication.
      (E)   Appeal. The applicant may appeal the decision of the planning
commission on a minor land division to the city council by written notice
thereof filed with the city clerk within fifteen days following his
notification of the commission's action.
   A hearing shall thereafter be held before the city council on the
applicant's proposal within fifteen days or the next succeeding meeting
following receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council
shall be final;
   (4)   Parcel map filing. Within one year after approval or approval with
conditions of the tentative map the owner shall file a letter of agreement to
any conditions and shall cause a parcel map, prepared by a licensed surveyor or
registered civil engineer and in compliance with Article 6, of the State
Subdivision Map Act, to be filed.
   Failure to file a letter of agreement and a parcel map within one year after
approval or approval with conditions of the tentative map shall terminate all
proceedings; however, one extension of one year may be granted upon application
in writing prior to the expiration of the first year;
   (5)   Building permit. No building permit shall be issued for structures on
a lot or parcel unless the lot or parcel is of record prior to October 12,
1961, or is shown on an approved parcel map, or an approved lot split map.
(Ord. 121 § 701, 1967).
Chapter 20.30
URBAN LOT SPLITS
Sections:
   
20.30.010   Purpose.
   
20.30.020   Definitions.
   
20.30.030   Approval process.
   
20.30.040   Standards and requirements.
   
20.30.050   Building Official determinations.
   
20.30.060   Exceptions.
20.30.010 Purpose.
This section establishes regulations for Urban Lot Splits, including a Primary
Dwelling Unit (PDU) and a Secondary Dwelling Unit (SDU) in residential zoning
districts, in accordance with Cal. Gov‘t Code Sections 65852.21 and 66411.7,
also commonly known as Senate Bill 9. The implementation of this section is
designed to expand housing opportunities within existing single-family
neighborhoods by permitting the development of up to two residential units on a
single-family zoned parcel. These regulations aim to provide diverse housing
options while preserving the residential character of neighborhoods, ensuring
consistency with the General Plan, and adhering to the zoning designations of
the parcel. The section seeks to balance the growing demand for additional
housing with the preservation of neighborhood integrity, efficient land use,
and the protection of environmental and infrastructure resources.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.30.020 Definitions.
   (a)   "Duplex" means an attached building (e.g. duplex) designed for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other, where both
dwellings are located on a single lot. More than one duplex may be located on a
single lot consistent with the density provisions of the general plan.
   (b)   "Primary Dwelling Unit (PDU)" means the main housing unit that is
either existing or is proposed to be the main housing unit on a single parcel
with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
sited on a parcel that meets all the criteria and standards set forth in this
chapter and title.
   (c)   "Secondary Dwelling Unit (SDU)" is an attached or detached dwelling
unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. This is a
housing unit that is authorized and eligible utilizing Senate Bill 9 and meets
all the criteria and standards set forth in this chapter and title. A Primary
Dwelling Unit must be established to create a Secondary Dwelling Unit.
   (d)   "Two-Unit Development" means a development that proposes no more than
two new units or proposed to add one new unit to one existing unit.
   (e)   "Urban Lot Split" means a subdivision of an existing parcel into no
more than two separate parcels that meets all the criteria and standards set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.30.030 Approval process.
The city shall ministerially approve, without discretionary review or public
hearing, a parcel map for the split of a single-family residential zoned lot
into two parcels if the following requirements are met, in addition to the
requirements of Section 21.080.040 – Standards and Requirements:
   (a)   The property is zoned Single-Family. The property in question is
located within a single-family residential zone. Single-family residential
zones only include R-1 (R-1-6,000, R-1-7,500, R-1-8,000, R-1-10,000, R-1-
15,000).
   (b)   Application. A Parcel Map as outlined in Chapter
20.28 shall be submitted.
      (1)   Only individual property owners may apply for an urban lot split.
"Individual property owner" means a natural person holding fee title
individually or jointly in the person's own name or beneficiary of a trust that
holds free title. "Individual property owner" does not include any corporation
or corporate person of any kind (partnership, LP, LLC, C corporation, S
corporation, etc.) except for a community land trust (as defined by Rev. & Tax
Code § 402.1(a)(11)(C)(ii)) or a qualified nonprofit corporation (as defined by
§ 214.15).
      (2)   Any person with a mortgage interest in the lot to be split under
this section must sign the application and the parcel indicate the person
consent to the project.
      (3)   An application for an urban lot split must be submitted on the
city's approved form. Only a complete application will be considered. The city
will inform the applicant in writing of any incompleteness within 30 days after
the application is submitted.
      (4)   The city may establish a fee to recover its costs for adopting,
implementing, and enforcing this section of the code, in accordance with
applicable law. The City Council may establish and change the fee by
resolution. The fee must be paid with the application.
   (c)   Approval.
      (1)   An application for a parcel map for an urban lot split is approved
or denied ministerially, by the Director of Community Development and Director
of Public Works/City Engineer, without discretionary review.
      (2)   A tentative parcel map for an urban lot split is approved
ministerially if it complies with all the requirements of this Chapter. The
tentative parcel map may not be recorded. A final parcel map is approved
ministerially as well, but not until the owner demonstrates that the required
documents have been recorded, such as the deed restriction and easements. The
final parcel map must be recorded.
      (3)   The approval must require the owner and applicant to hold the city
harmless from all claims and damages related to the approval and its subject
matter.
      (4)   The approval must require the owner and applicant to reimburse the
city for all costs of enforcement, including attorneys' fees and costs
associated with enforcing the requirements of this Code.
   (d)   Not Located on Prohibited Land. The property is not located in any of
the following areas and does not fall within any of the following categories:
      (1)   Historic. A Designated Historic District or property included on
the State Historic Resource Inventory, as defined in Section 5020.1 of the
Public Resources Code as it may be amended from time to time, or within a site
that is designated as a city landmark or historic property or district pursuant
to a city ordinance.
      (2)   Farmland. Prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance as
further defined in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(B) as it may be
amended from time to time.
      (3)   Wetlands. "Wetlands" as defined in the United State Fish and
Wildlife Service Manual, Part 660 FW 2 (June 21, 1993).
      (4)   Fire Zone. A very high fire hazard severity zone, as further
defined in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(D) it may be amended from time
to time. This does not apply to sites excluded from the specified hazard zones
pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 51179 or sites that adopted fire hazard
mitigation measures pursuant to existing building standards or state fire
mitigation measures applicable to the development.
      (5)   Hazardous Waste Site. A hazardous waste site that is listed
pursuant to Government Code Section 65962.5 or a hazardous waste site
designated by the Department of Toxic Substances Control pursuant to Section
25356 of the Health and Safety Code, unless the State Department of Public
Health, State Water Resources Control Board, or Department of Toxic Substance
Control has cleared the site for residential use or residential mixed uses.
      (6)   Earthquake Fault Zone. A delineated earthquake fault zone as
determined by the State Geologist in any official maps published by the State
Geologist, unless the development complies with applicable seismic protection
building code standards adopted by the California Building Standards Commission
under the California Building Standards Law and by the city's building
department.
      (7)   Flood Zone. A special flood hazard area subject to inundation by
the 1% annual chance of flood (100-year flood) as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in any official maps published by FEMA. If
an applicant is able to satisfy all applicable federal qualifying criteria in
order to provide that the site satisfies this subparagraph and is otherwise
eligible for streamlines approval under this section, the city shall not deny
the application on the basis that the applicant did not comply with any
additional permit requirement, standard, or action adopted by the city that is
applicable to that site. A development may be located on a site described in
this subparagraph if either of the following are met:
         (A)   The site has been subject to a Letter of Map Revision prepared
by FEMA and issued to the city; or
         (B)   The site meets FEMA requirements necessary to meet minimum flood
plain management criteria of the Nation Flood Insurance Program as further
spelled out in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(G)(ii) as that section may
be amended from time to time;
      (8)   Floodway. A regulatory floodway as determined by FEMA in any of its
official maps, published by FEMA unless the development gas received a no-rise
certification in accordance with Section 60.3(d)(3) of Title 44 of the Code of
Federal Regulations. If an applicant is able to satisfy all applicable federal
qualifying criteria in order to provide that the site satisfies this
subparagraph and is otherwise eligible for streamlined approval under this
section, the city shall not deny the application on the basis that the
applicant did not comply with any additional permit requirement, standard or
action adopted by the city that is applicable to that site.
      (9)   Planned for Habitat Conservation. Lands identified for conservation
in an adopted natural community conservation plan, habitat conservation plan,
or other adopted natural resource protection plan as further spelled out in
Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(I) as that section may be amended from
time to time.
      (10)   Habitat for Protected Species. Habitat for protected species
identified as candidates, sensitive, or species of special status by state or
federal agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 USC Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act (Chapter 1.5 (commencing with Section 2050) of Division
3 of the Fish and Game Code), or the Native Plant Protection Act (Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 1900) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code).
      (11)   Conservation Easement. Lands under a conservation easement.
   (e)   Lot Size.
      (1)   The lot to be split must be at least 2,400 square feet.
      (2)   The resulting lots must be at least 1,200 square feet.
      (3)   The parcel map divides an existing parcel to create no more than
two new parcels of approximately equal lot area, provided that each of the
resulting parcels shall not be less than 40% of the original lot area.
   (f)   Units. No more than two dwelling units of any kind may be constructed
or maintained on a lot that results from an urban lot split. For purposes of
this subdivision, the two-unit limitation applies to any combination of
primary/secondary dwelling units, ADUs, and JADUs.
   (g)   No Impact on Protected Housing. The proposed lot split shall not
require demolition or alteration of any of the following types of housing:
      (1)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law
that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and families of moderate,
low, or very low income.
      (2)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control.
      (3)   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant in the last three years.
      (4)   The parcel is not a parcel on which an owner of residential real
property has exercised the owner's right under Chapter 12.75 (commencing with
Section 7060) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code to withdraw
accommodations from rent or lease within the last 15 years before the date that
the development proponent submits an application.
   (h)   Right-of-Way Access. Each parcel shall have pedestrian and vehicle
access to the public-of-way. Said access may be provided directly or through an
easement.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.30.040 Standards and requirements.
An urban lot split shall comply with the following requirements:
   (a)   Map Compliance.
      (1)   The urban lot split must conform to all applicable objective
requirements parcel map of the Subdivision Map Act (Gov. Code § 66410 et. seq.,
"SMA"), including implementing requirements in this code and Chapter 20 -
Subdivision, except as otherwise expressly provided in this section.
      (2)   If an urban lot split violates any part of the SMA, the city's
subdivision regulations, including this section, or any other legal
requirement:
         (A)   The buyer or grantee of a lot that is created by the urban lot
split has all the remedies available under the SMA, including but not limited
to an action for damages or to void the deed, sale, or contract.
         (B)   The city has all the remedies available to it under the SMA,
including but not limited to the following:
            i.   An action to enjoin any attempt to sell, lease, or finance the
property.
            ii.   An action for other legal, equitable, or summary remedy, such
as declaratory and injunctive relief.
            iii.   Criminal prosecution, punishable by imprisonment in county
jail or state prison for up to one year, by a fine of up to $10,000.00, or
both; or a misdemeanor.
            iv.   Record a notice of violation.
            v.   Withhold any or all future permits and approvals.
   (b)   Setbacks. No setback shall be required for an existing structure or
structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an
existing structure. Except for those circumstances as stated above, the setback
for side and rear property lines shall be four feet. The front setback to the
property line shall be 20 feet. The distance between structures shall be ten
feet, free and clear, measured from wall to wall.
   (c)   Easements. The applicant shall provide easements for the provision of
public services and facilities as required. However, the city shall not require
dedications of right-of-way or the construction of offsite improvements for the
parcels being created as a condition of issuing a parcel map. Each easement
must be shown on the tentative parcel map. Copies of the unrecorded easement
agreements must be submitted with the application. The easement agreements must
be recorded against the property before the final map may be approved. If an
easement is recorded and the project is not completed, making the easement
moot, the property owner may request, and the city will provide, a notice of
termination of the easement, which the owner may record.
   (d)   Access. All parcels shall have access to, provide access to, or adjoin
the public right-of-way. Each resulting parcel must have frontage on the public
right-of-way of at least 15 feet. Each dwelling unit must have a designated
path of travel that meets the public right-of-way.
   (e)   Nonconforming. The city shall not require the correction of
nonconforming zoning conditions as a condition of approval for the urban lot
split.
   (f)   Affidavit. Prior to the approval and recordation of the parcel maps,
the applicant for the urban lot split as defined in this section shall sign an
affidavit and record a covenant, in a form approved by the city and county
recorder's office, stating the following: The property owner of an urban lot
split intends to occupy one of the dwelling units on the newly created lots as
their principal residence for a minimum of three years from the date of the
approval of the urban lot split. This subsection does not apply to an applicant
that is a "community land trust" or a "qualified nonprofit corporation" as
defined in the Revenue and Taxation Code. Additionally, other conditions from
this section may be recorded within the covenant.
   (g)   No Short-Term Rental. Any unit created pursuant to this section shall
be for a minimum of 31 days.
   (h)   Residential Use. The uses shall be limited to residential uses.
   (i)   Declaration of Prior Tenancies. If any existing housing is proposed to
be altered or demolished, the owner of the property proposed for an Urban Lot
Split shall sign an affidavit, in the form approved by the City Attorney,
stating that none of the conditions listed in subparagraph (g) above exist and
shall provide a comprehensive history of the occupancy of the units to be
altered or demolished for the past three years (five years if an existing unit
is to be demolished) on a form approved by the city.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.30.050 Building Official determinations.
The city may deny the lot split if the Building Official makes a written
finding, based upon a preponderance of the evidence, that the proposed Two-Unit
Development would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined and determined in
paragraph (2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5, upon public health and
safety or the physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.30.060 Exceptions.
An urban lot split shall not be approved if either of the following is
accurate:
   (a)   Any subject parcel has been established through prior exercise of an
urban lot split.
   (b)   Neither the owner of the parcel being subdivided nor any person acting
in concert with the owner has previously subdivided an adjacent parcel using an
urban lot split. A person "acting in concert with the owner" means a person
that has common ownership or control of the subject parcel with the owner of
the adjacent parcel, a person acting on behalf of, acting for the predominant
benefit of, acting on the instructions of, or actively cooperating with, the
owner of the parcel being subdivided.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
Chapter 20.32
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT
Sections:
   
20.32.010   Lot line adjustment defined.
   
20.32.020   Filing requirements.
   
20.32.030   Review by city.
   
20.32.040   Recordation.
20.32.010 Lot line adjustment defined.
A "lot line adjustment" is a modification of a boundary line between four or
fewer existing adjoining parcels, where the land taken from one parcel is added
to an adjoining parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally
existed is not thereby created. The proposed adjustment is exempt from the
Subdivision Map Act (Gov. Code Section 66410 et seq.), and no tentative map,
final map or parcel map, shall be required as a condition to the approval of a
lot line adjustment.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.32.020 Filing requirements.
   (a)   A property owner or his or her representative shall submit an
application to the Community Development Department and obtain final approval
by the Public Works Department.
   (b)   The application form and specifications shall be as established by the
Community Development Department.
   (c)   Application and processing fees shall be as established by the City
Council.
   (d)   The application for a lot line adjustment shall be prepared by a
person authorized to practice land surveying pursuant to Sections 8700 through
8806 of the State of California Business and Professions Code.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no record of survey shall be required
for a lot line adjustment unless required by Section 8762 of the California
Business and Professions Code.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.32.030 Review by city.
   (a)   The Community Development Director and City Engineer shall review the
application to determine whether or not the parcels resulting from the lot line
adjustment will conform to the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and
zoning and building ordinances.
   (b)   The Community Development Director and City Engineer shall not impose
conditions or exactions on his or her approval of a lot line adjustment except
to conform to the local general plan, any applicable specific plan, and zoning
and building ordinances, to require the prepayment of real property taxes prior
to the approval of the lot line adjustment, or to facilitate the relocation of
existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements.
   (c)   Within 30 days of the lot line adjustment application being accepted
as complete, the Community Development Director and City Engineer shall
conditionally approve, disapprove or notify the applicant and his or her
representative that the request does not meet the requirements of a lot line
adjustment.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
20.32.040 Recordation.
Upon approval of the lot line adjustment by the Community Development Director
and City Engineer, the lot line adjustment shall be reflected in a deed or
deeds. The lot line adjustment and deed(s) shall be recorded in the Office of
the Los Angeles County Registrar-Recorder. The lot line adjustment shall be
recorded within one calendar year from the date of approval. A copy of the
recorded lot line adjustment and deed(s) shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025)
Chapter 20.34
FEES
Sections:
   
20.34.010   Schedule.
20.34.010 Schedule.
The following fees shall be required for filing subdivision maps:
 
ACTION                                           FEE
(1)   Filing of subdivision tentative map     $500.00
(2)   Filing of final map Subdivision map     $100.00 plus $3.00 per lot or
                                                 parcel
(3)   Filing of minor land division tentative $60.00
map
(4)   Filing of parcel map                    $25.00 plus $3.00 per lot or
                                                 parcel
(5)   Filing of improvement plan              Estimated cost of plan
                                                 checking public improvements
(6)   Appeal                                  $10.00
(Ord. 736, § 4 (part), 2025; Ord. 121 § 800, 1967)
Title 21
ZONING  *
*   For statutory provisions pertaining to zoning rules and regulations, see
Gov. Code 65800 et seq. For statutory provisions pertaining to the creation of
zoning boards, see Gov. Code 65900 et seq.
Chapters:
Article I: Zoning Code Enactment and Applicability
   
21.02   Zoning Enactment
   
21.04   Purpose and Scope
   
21.06   Relationship to Other Provisions
   
21.08   Zoning Code Applicability
Article II: Zoning Code Administration and Enforcement
   
21.10   Administrative Responsibility
   
21.12   Interpretation of Code
   
21.14    Enforcement
   
21.15   Abatement of Public Nuisances
Article III: General Zoning District Provisions
   
21.16   Establishment of Zoning Districts, Adoption of Maps
Article IV: Base Zoning Districts and Related Use and Development Provisions
   
21.18   Residential Zoning Districts
   
21.20   Commercial Zoning Districts
   
21.22   Industrial Zoning District
   
21.24   Open Space Zoning District
   
21.26   Planned Unit Development Zoning District
Article V: Overlay Districts
   
21.30   Farm Animal Overlay Zoning District
   
21.32   Flood Hazard Overlay Zoning District
   
21.34   Mobile Home Park Overlay Zoning District
   
21.36   Oil Drilling Overlay Zoning District
   
21.37   Mixed Use Overlay (MUO) Zoning District
   
21.38   Special Housing Overlay (SHO) Zoning District
   
21.39   Emergency Shelter Overlay (ESO) Zoning District
Article VI: Specific Land Use Provisions
   
21.41   Small Lot Ownership Units
   
21.42   Accessory Uses
   
21.43   Single Room Occupancy
   
21.44   Adult Entertainment Businesses
   
21.45   Check Cashing Establishments
   
21.46   Radio and Television Antennas and Wireless Telecommunications Antenna
Facilities
   
21.47   [Reserved]
   
21.48   Commercial Cannabis Uses and Cultivation
   
21.49   Density Bonus
   
21.50   Recycling Facilities
   
21.52   Transitional and Supportive Housing
   
21.53   Residential Development on Higher Education- or Faith-Based Properties
   
21.56   Short-Term Rentals
   
21.57   Residential Care Facilities
   
21.58   Low-Barrier Navigation Centers
Article VII: Site Planning and General Development Provisions
   
21.60   Accessory Structures
   
21.62   Fences and Walls
   
21.64   Height Measurement and Exceptions
   
21.66   Landscaping
   
21.68   Parking and Loading
   
21.70   Performance Standards
   
21.72   Property Maintenance
   
21.76   Signs
   
21.78   Yard Requirements and Exceptions
Article VIII: Land Use and Development Permit Requirements/Procedures
   
21.80   General Permit Provisions
   
21.82   Approving Authority
   
21.84   General Application Processing Procedures
   
21.86   Notices and Hearings
   
21.88   Appeals
   
21.90   Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions
   
21.92   Permit Modification and Revocation
   
21.94   Zoning Ordinance Interpretation (Excludes Use Interpretations)
   
21.96   Zoning Clearance/Plan Check
   
21.98   Home Occupation Permit
   
21.100   Temporary Use Permit
   
21.102   Administrative Adjustment
   
21.103   Large Family Day Care Permit (LDC)
   
21.104   Temporary Sign Permit
   
21.106   Zoning Ordinance Use Interpretation
   
21.108   Variance
   
21.110   Conditional Use Permit
   
21.112   Certificate of Compatibility
   
21.114   Site Plan Review
   
21.116   Planned Unit Development
   
21.117   Preliminary Review of Housing Development
   
21.118   Specific Plan
   
21.120   Zoning Ordinance Text/Map Amendment
   
21.122   General Plan Text/Map Amendment
   
21.124   Development Agreement
   
21.126   Reasonable Accommodation
   
21.128   Affordable Housing Implementation Plan
Article IX: Nonconformities
   
21.130   General Nonconforming Provisions
Article X: Definitions
   
21.200   Definitions
 
Notes
  For statutory provisions pertaining to zoning rules and regulations, see Gov.
* Code 65800 et seq. For statutory provisions pertaining to the creation of
  zoning boards, see Gov. Code 65900 et seq.
ARTICLE I: ZONING CODE ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY
Chapter 21.02
ZONING ENACTMENT
Sections:
   
21.02.010   Title.
   
21.02.020   Authority.
   
21.02.030   Adoption of Code and Map.
21.02.010 Title.
This title constitutes, and may be referred to as, the zoning ordinance of the
City of La Mirada.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.02.020 Authority.
This zoning ordinance is enacted based on the authority vested in the city and
the State of California, including but not limited to: the State Constitution,
Planning and Zoning Law (California Government Code Section 65000 et seq.),
California Environmental Quality Act (California Public Resources Code Section
21000 et seq.), and the California Health and Safety Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.02.030 Adoption of Code and Map.
This zoning ordinance, the comprehensive land use and zoning regulations of the
city, together with the zoning map, are hereby adopted in conformance with
current State planning, zoning, and development laws.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.04
PURPOSE AND SCOPE
Sections:
   
21.04.010   Purpose.
   
21.04.020   Scope.
21.04.010 Purpose.
This zoning ordinance is adopted to promote and protect the public health,
safety, peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare in accordance with the
long-range, comprehensive general plan of the city, and for the following more
specific purposes:
   (1)   To guide, control, and regulate the future growth of the city by
encouraging orderly and beneficial new development and protecting the character
and economic stability of existing development;
   (2)   To assure the provision of adequate light, air, privacy and
convenience of access to property, and to secure the safety of persons and
property against fire, flood, erosion and other dangers;
   (3)   To regulate the location of buildings, and the uses of buildings and
land, so as to prevent undue interference with existing or prospective traffic
movements on public thoroughfares.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.04.020 Scope.
Unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions contained in this zoning
ordinance shall apply to all real property contained within the corporate
limits of the city.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.06
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
21.06.010   Relationship to prior ordinance.
   
21.06.020   Relationship to general plan.
   
21.06.030   Relationship to California Environmental Quality Act.
21.06.010 Relationship to prior ordinance.
The provisions of this title, as it existed prior to the effective date of
Ordinance No. 614, are repealed and superseded as provided in the ordinance
enacting this title. No provision of this title shall validate or legalize any
land use or structure established, constructed, or maintained in violation of
the title as it existed prior to repeal by the ordinance enacting this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.06.020 Relationship to general plan.
This zoning ordinance is intended to provide the legislative framework to
implement the goals and policies of the city general plan.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.06.030 Relationship to California Environmental Quality Act.
When a project is determined to be subject to the provisions of the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the application shall be reviewed in
accordance with the provisions of this title, Public Resources Code Section
21000 et seq. (CEQA), Section 15000 et seq. of Title 14 of the California Code
of Regulations (the CEQA Guidelines), and any environmental guidelines adopted
by the city.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.08
ZONING CODE APPLICABILITY
Sections:
   
21.08.010   Prior rights and violations.
   
21.08.020   Public nuisance.
   
21.08.030   Continuation of an existing land use or structure.
   
21.08.040   Conflict with other regulations.
   
21.08.050   Conflicts with planned unit developments.
   
21.08.060   Conflicts with specific plans.
   
21.08.070   Conflicts with development agreements.
   
21.08.080   Development applications in process.
   
21.08.090   Other requirements/permits.
   
21.08.100   Conflicting permits.
   
21.08.110   Severability, partial invalidation of zoning code.
   
21.08.120   Exemption - city projects.
21.08.010 Prior rights and violations.
The enactment of this title shall not terminate nor otherwise affect vested
land use development permits, approvals, or agreements authorized under the
provisions of any ordinance or resolution, nor shall violation of any prior
ordinance or resolution be excused by the adoption of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.020 Public nuisance.
Neither the provisions of this title nor the approval of any permit authorized
by this title shall authorize the maintenance of any public nuisance, as
defined by Chapter 9.02 of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.030 Continuation of an existing land use or structure.
It is unlawful and a violation of the La Mirada Municipal Code for anyone to
use a parcel or structure in a manner that violates any provision of this
title. However, a land use that was lawfully established before this title was
enacted, or before enactment of any applicable amendment to this title, may
continue, except as otherwise provided herein or by law. No expansion or
modification to a pre-existing legal nonconforming use or structure shall be
permitted except as allowed by Article IX of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.040 Conflicts with other regulations.
Where any conflict occurs between the provisions of this title and the
provisions of other titles of the La Mirada Municipal Code or other regulations
adopted by the city, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. Nothing
contained in this title shall be deemed to repeal or amend any regulation of
the city requiring a permit or license or both, nor shall anything in this
title be deemed to repeal or amend other titles of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.050 Conflicts with planned unit developments.
In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title and
standards in an adopted planned unit development, the requirements of the
planned unit development shall govern.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.060 Conflicts with specific plans.
In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title and
standards in an adopted specific plan, the requirements of the specific plan
shall govern.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.070 Conflicts with development agreements.
In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this title and
standards in an adopted development agreement, the requirements of the
development agreement shall govern.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.080 Development applications in process.
Following the effective date of this title, or any amendment of this title,
regulations of this title are applicable to all applications in process
(approved and pending), unless prohibited by state law or as otherwise vested
in accordance with
Chapter 21.90.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.090 Other requirements/permits.
Nothing in this title eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits
required by the city, or any permit or approval required by other provisions of
the Municipal Code or the regulations of any city department, including the
redevelopment agency, or any county, regional, state, or federal agency.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.100 Conflicting permits.
After the effective date of this title, or any amendment hereto, all permits
shall be issued in compliance with the provisions of this title. Any permit
that conflicts with the provisions of the title shall be deemed invalid.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.110 Severability, partial invalidation of zoning code.
If any portion of this title is held to be invalid, unconstitutional, or
unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The city
council hereby declares that this title and each article, section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase and portion thereof is
adopted without regard to the fact that one or more portions of this title may
be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable.   
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.08.120 Exemptions - city projects.
Activities of the city shall be exempt from the requirements of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
ARTICLE II: ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 21.10
ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY
Sections:
   
21.10.010   Composition of planning agency.
   
21.10.020   Responsibilities of the city council.
   
21.10.030   Responsibilities of the planning commission.
   
21.10.040   Responsibilities of the city manager.
   
21.10.050   Responsibilities of the community development director.
   
21.10.060   Permit review board.
   
21.10.070   Planning commission policies.
21.10.010 Composition of planning agency.
   (a)   California Government Code Section 65100 requires each jurisdiction to
establish a planning agency to carry out the land use and planning functions of
the jurisdiction. The functions of the planning agency, as designated by this
title, may be any one of the following, as further defined in this chapter and
title. In the absence of an assignment, the city council shall have planning
agency responsibility and authority.
      (1)   City council.
      (2)   Planning commission.
      (3)   City manager.
      (4)   Community development director.
      (5)   Permit review board.
   (b)   Responsible agencies shall have such duties as assigned by this title,
and specifically
Chapter 21.82.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.10.020 Responsibilities of the city council.
The city council shall have the following responsibilities:
   (1)   Appoint members of the planning commission.
   (2)   Hear and act upon appeals of decisions of the planning commission.
   (3)   Hear and act upon applications for final subdivision maps, zoning code
amendments, general plan amendments, specific plans, development agreements,
and planned unit developments. In the event that applications for other land
use permits are requested in conjunction with these entitlements, the city
council shall also be the final decision-making body for the other land use
permits.
   (4)   Direct planning-related policy amendments and special studies as
necessary or desired.
   (5)   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state law
or local ordinance.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.10.030 Responsibilities of the planning commission.
The planning commission shall have the following responsibilities:
   (1)   Hear and act upon appeals of decisions of the community development
director.
   (2)   Hear and act upon applications for conditional use permits, variances,
certificates of compatibility, and tentative parcel maps.
   (3)   Hear and make recommendations to the city council on applications or
proposals for amendments to this title.
   (4)   Initiate studies of amendments to this title, and make recommendations
to the city council for amendments to this title.
   (5)   Hear and make recommendations to the city council on applications for
tentative subdivision maps, general plan amendments, development agreements,
planned unit developments, specific plans, and other related planning studies.
   (6)   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state law,
local ordinance, or as directed by the city council.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.10.040 Responsibilities of the city manager.
The city manager shall have the responsibility and authority to administer and
enforce this title as follows:
   (1)   Hear and act upon appeals of the permit review board for temporary use
permit applications.
   (2)   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state law,
local ordinance, or as directed by the city council.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.10.050 Responsibilities of the community development director.
The community development director shall have the responsibility and authority
to administer and enforce this title as follows:
   (1)   Maintain the sections of this title, zoning map, and all records of
zoning actions and interpretations.
   (2)   Advise the city council, planning commission, and city manager on
planning matters.
   (3)   Provide administrative services for and staff meetings of the planning
commission.
   (4)   Conduct administrative functions authorized by this title, including
distribution and receipt of permit applications and corresponding fees;
application review and public noticing; determination and issuance of
administrative permits and approvals; and preparation of staff reports with
recommendations, proposed findings, and proposed conditions for quasi-judicial
and legislative actions by designated planning agencies.
   (5)   Provide information to the public, and facilitate public participation
on planning matters.
   (6)   Exercise such other powers and duties as are prescribed by state law,
local ordinance, or as directed by the city manager.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.10.060 Permit review board.
A permit review board is established consisting of representatives of the city
manager's office, the planning division, the finance and community development
department, and public safety. The permit review board shall have the
responsibility and authority to administer and enforce this title as follows:
Consider and act upon temporary use permit applications.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.10.070 Planning commission policies.
   (a)   Eligibility for Office. Members of the planning commission shall be
residents of the city and citizens of the United States. If a member of any
commission moves his or her residence outside of the city, such member shall
automatically be removed from office.
   (b)   Membership and Term. The planning commission shall consist of five
members. Each council member shall appoint one planning commission member,
whose term shall run concurrently with that of the appointing council member.
   (c)   Compensation. Planning commission members may receive compensation for
meeting attendance and reasonable traveling expenses as determined by
resolution of the city council.
   (d)   Vacancies. If a member of the planning commission is unable or
unwilling to complete his or her term, the city council shall fill the vacancy
by appointing a qualified person to serve the remainder of the term.
   (e)   Removal. Members of the planning commission serve at the pleasure of
the city council and may be removed from their position by a vote of a majority
of the members of the city council. No public hearing need be held prior to
removal, and no cause for removal need be shown.
   (f)   Meetings. The planning commission shall meet at least once each month
on a regularly scheduled time and day, and at such other times, as the
chairperson deems necessary to perform the duties of the commission.
   (g)   Appointment of Officers. The planning commission shall appoint a
chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson and
vice-chairperson shall serve at the pleasure of the commission. The chairperson
shall call an election annually in accordance with the adopted by-laws of the
commission.
   (h)   Rules. The planning commission shall adopt rules (by-laws) for the
transaction of its business, including rules for the election of officers.
   (i)   Record of Proceedings. The planning commission shall maintain summary
minutes and a taped recording of its proceedings. The taped recording shall be
retained as set forth in the city's record retention policy.
   (j)   Administrative Support. The community development director shall be
responsible for the administration of this section and shall assist the
planning commission in performing its functions.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.12
INTERPRETATION OF CODE
Sections:
   
21.12.010   Purpose.
   
21.12.020   Applicability and authority for interpretations.
   
21.12.030   Rules and interpretations.
   
21.12.040   Record of interpretations.
21.12.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the authority and procedures for
clarifying any ambiguity in the regulations of this title, and to ensure
consistent interpretation and application of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.12.020 Applicability and authority for interpretations.
   (a)   If ambiguity arises concerning the meaning or applicability of any
provision of this title, the community development director shall have the
responsibility to review pertinent facts, determine the intent of the
provision, and to issue an administrative interpretation for the following
provisions specified in this chapter:
      (1)   The development standards applicable to a particular zoning
district or use, or
      (2)   Zoning boundaries (see Section
21.16.030).
   (b)   If any ambiguity arises concerning the classification of a particular
use, the community development director shall have the responsibility to review
pertinent facts, determine the intent of the provision, and to refer the matter
to the planning commission for interpretation and decision. An administrative
record of all such decisions by the planning commission shall be maintained.
   (c)   Interpretations by the community development director and planning
commission may be appealed to the designated appeal authority pursuant to
Chapter 21.88.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.12.030 Rules of interpretation.
   (a)   Terminology. When used in this title, the following rules apply to all
provision of this title:
      (1)   Language. The words "shall," "must," "will," "is to," and "are to"
are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended,
and "may" is permissive.
      (2)   Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tense, and
the future tense includes the present.
      (3)   Number. The singular number includes the plural number, and the
plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the words indicates
otherwise.
      (4)   Conjunctions. "And" indicates that all connected items or
provisions shall apply. "Or" indicates that the connected items or provisions
may apply singly or in any combination. "Either…or" indicates that the
connected items and provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.
"Includes" and "including" shall mean "including but not limited to…".
      (5)   Local reference. "City" as used herein means the City of La Mirada
and all public officials, bodies and agencies referenced herein are those of
the city unless otherwise stated.
   (b)   Number of Days. Whenever the number of days is specified in this
title, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as
provided in this title, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days.
When the last of the specified number of days falls on a weekend or city
holiday, time limits shall extend to the end of the next working day.
   (c)   Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations
of this title, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements,
unless specifically stated otherwise.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.12.040 Record of interpretations.
   (a)   Whenever the community development director determines that an
ambiguity in a zoning regulation exists in accordance with Section 21.12.02,
the community development director shall issue an official interpretation.
Official interpretations shall be in writing and shall cite the provisions
being interpreted, together with an explanation of the meaning or applicability
of the provision(s) in the particular or general circumstances that caused the
need for interpretation.
   (b)   Any provision determined by the community development director to be
ambiguous pursuant to this chapter shall be clarified by amendment as soon as
is practical. The director shall maintain a complete record of all official
interpretations available for public review, indexed by the section number of
this title that is the subject of the interpretation, including all
interpretations made by the planning commission and city council. Any applicant
or property owner directly affected by such interpretation shall receive a
notice of action, including the record of interpretation and information
regarding appeal procedures pursuant to Section
21.84.090. All recorded interpretations shall be provided to the planning
commission, city manager, city attorney, city clerk, and department heads as an
information item within thirty days of the director's determination.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.14
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:
   
21.14.010   Enforcement authority.
   
21.14.020   Violations.
   
21.14.030   Verification of permitted uses.
   
21.14.040   Cost recovery.
21.14.010 Enforcement authority.
Under the supervision of the city manager or his or her designee, the code
enforcement officer of the city shall be responsible for enforcement of the
zoning ordinance. The city manager shall be authorized to designate, in
writing, additional officers of the city, not otherwise authorized by law, as
having authority to enforce the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 623 § 4(part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.14.020 Violations.
All violations of the zoning ordinance shall be subject to the penalties and
enforcement procedures set forth in
Chapter 1.08 of the La Mirada Municipal Code. All violations of the zoning
ordinance are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are subject to abatement as
provided in the La Mirada Municipal Code.
(Ord. 623 § 4 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.14.030 Verification of permitted uses.
After providing reasonable notice, the city may require the production of
evidence sufficient to establish that a business permittee or other person or
entity engaged in a regulated use of land is in compliance with all
entitlements, approvals, and any and all conditions of approval. Such evidence
may include, but is not limited to, financial records, operating plans, and
other verifiable information. A failure to provide the city with required
information to effectuate the provisions of this section may be considered
evidence of noncompliance.
(Ord. 623 § 4 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.14.040 Cost recovery.
   A.   The prevailing party in any action, administrative proceeding, or
special proceeding brought by the city to abate any violation of the zoning
ordinance as a nuisance, shall be entitled to recover reasonable attorneys fees
incurred in connection therewith. The city shall be entitled to recover any and
all costs, including administrative overhead, incurred in abating any violation
of the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Whenever a violation of the zoning ordinance ultimately results in the
issuance by a city code enforcement officer of a final notice to correct
violation(s), each owner(s) of the subject property shall be jointly and
severally liable for the following costs incurred by the city:
      1.   Office conference with the city prosecutor; and
      2.   Reinspection of the property for compliance, occurring on or after
the reinspection date specified in the final notice.
      The fees for the office conference with the city prosecutor and for each
reinspection shall be as set by resolution of the city council and shall not
exceed the actual cost to the city, including administrative overhead.
   C.   Office conference with the city prosecutor and reinspection costs shall
be recoverable as a debt to the city and a failure to pay the same within
thirty days of mailing or delivery by the city of a written request therefor to
the property owner(s) shall be deemed to be a violation of this section.
   D.   The city prosecutor is hereby authorized, at the time of sentencing of
any person, or accepting a plea, for a violation of the zoning ordinance, to
request the court to require payment of the office conference with the city
prosecutor and reinspection fees referred to in this section, as a condition of
sentencing. If payment of the fees is made as a condition of sentencing, the
city shall not separately seek payment of the same from the person so
sentenced.
(Ord. 623 § 4 (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.15
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
Sections:
   
21.15.010   Abatement of public nuisances--purpose and intent.
   
21.15.020   Definitions.
   
21.15.030   Declaration of nuisance.
   
21.15.040   Notice to abate--issuance.
   
21.15.050   Notice to abate--form and content.
   
21.15.060   Notice to abate--service.
   
21.15.070   Hearing before director.
   
21.15.080   Order to abate.
   
21.15.090   Order to abate--appeal.
   
21.15.100   Appeal--hearing before city appeals board.
   
21.15.110   Notice of city appeals board determination.
   
21.15.120   Owner to abate.
   
21.15.130   City to abate - report.
   
21.15.140   Costs of abatement
   
21.15.150   Costs of abatement--hearing before director.
   
21.15.160   Costs of abatement--assessment of lien.
   
21.15.170   Cost of abatement--appeal to city appeals board.
   
21.15.180   Cost of abatement--hearing before city appeals board.
   
21.15.190   Cost of abatement--resolution assessing lien.
   
21.15.200   Cost of abatement--recording of resolution.
   
21.15.210   Costs of abatement--payment of costs.
   
21.15.220   Assessment and collection of costs.
   
21.15.230   Penalties and alternative provisions.
21.15.010 Abatement of public nuisances--purpose and intent.
In accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section
38773.5, it is the intent of the city council, by the adoption of this chapter,
to provide a procedure for the abatement of public nuisances within the city in
order to effectively combat hazards to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter:
   “Admission charge party” means a party requiring an “admission charge,” as
defined in La Mirada Municipal Code Section
9.98.030.
   “Attractive nuisances dangerous to children” means abandoned and broken
equipment, neglected machinery or abandoned refrigerators which attract
children to use such things for play.
   “City appeals board” means the city planning commission.
   “Deteriorated parking areas” means parking areas including residential
driveways, parking lots, and other similar parking surfaces which are in a
state of disrepair with an accumulation of cracks, pot holes, loose gravel or
unpaved surfaces or which otherwise create an unsafe condition.
   “Director” means the city manager or designee thereof.
   “Discharge of restricted fireworks” means the discharge of “safe and sane”
fireworks in the city other than as permitted by this code, and/or the
discharge of fireworks deemed to be “dangerous fireworks” as defined in the
most recent edition of the California Fire Code at any time.
   “Hazardous buildings” means any building or structure which is vacant,
abandoned, partially destroyed, structurally unsafe or left in a state of
partial construction, including excavations and construction sites, and is
hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare, including any “substandard
building” as defined in Los Angeles County Code Chapter 99.
   “Hazardous pools” means any pool, pond, excavation or other body of water
which is abandoned, neglected, unattended, unfiltered or not otherwise
maintained or which is lacking security fencing as required by state law or
city code. Any such hazardous pool may include a pool, pond, excavation or
other body of water in such a condition so that the water therein becomes
polluted including, but not limited to, bacterial growth, algae, remains of
insects, animals, reptiles, birds, fish or other life forms, refuse, rubbish,
debris, papers and any other matter resulting in a hazard to the public health,
safety or welfare.
   “Illegal signs” means signs which move, flash, blink or float; or portable
sandwich board signs and temporary signs which stand freely or must be propped
against or tacked to another object to remain upright; or signs which are in
violation of the zoning ordinance as the zoning ordinance exists as of the
effective date of the ordinance in this chapter or as the same may be amended
from time to time after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
   “Illegal storage of vehicles” means maintaining, storing or keeping, or
permitting or allowing to be maintained, stored or kept any trailer, boat,
recreational vehicle, motor vehicle, mobile equipment of any type or nature or
any property in violation of the zoning ordinance as the zoning ordinance
exists as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or as
the same may be amended from time to time.
   “Improper maintenance of premises” means maintenance of property in such
condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare
or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code
Section 3480.
   “Lack of landscaping” means maintaining property with a lack of adequate
turf or plant material so as to cause excessive dust or erosion.
   “Nuisance party” means a loud or unruly party causing a second response by
sheriff’s personnel, as described in La Mirada Municipal Code Section
9.98.030.
   “Oil accumulation” means pooled oil accumulation, oil flowing onto public
rights-of-way, or excessive accumulations of grease or oil, which are a safety
hazard, on paved surfaces, buildings, walls or fences, on any residential
property or property utilized for commercial or industrial purposes.
   “Outside display of merchandise” means the outdoor display of store
merchandise on public sidewalks or parking lots without authorization from the
planning department.
   “Overgrown vegetation” means maintaining property with overgrown vegetation
including lawns, weeds, plants, shrubs, hedges and trees, and including any
such vegetation within parkway areas of the property subject to utility and
city easement. There shall be a conclusive presumption that vegetation is
overgrown under this chapter if the vegetation has not been properly cut and
trimmed within thirty days after notification that said vegetation is
overgrown.
   “Poorly maintained fences” means any wall or fence maintained in such
condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or
property or which does not conform to this title. (See
Chapter 21.62 of this code.)
   “Refuse, waste and illegal storage” means maintaining, storing or keeping,
permitting or allowing to be maintained, stored or kept, machinery, equipment,
or parts thereof, or furniture, household appliances, construction material,
packing boxes, paper, cardboard, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage, offal,
defecation, dead vegetation or similar matter on any property in violation of
the zoning ordinance as the zoning ordinance exists as of the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter or as the same may be amended from time
to time after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
   “Unpermitted structures” means unpermitted permanent, temporary or movable
structures such as tents, storage sheds, skateboard ramps, recycling bins and
any other unsafe or other substandard structure which is built, erected or
placed upon any lot.
   “Unsightliness” means maintenance of property so out of conformity with the
maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution
of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties.
   “Unsightly building or structure exteriors” means buildings or structures
with peeling, blistering or badly weathered paints, or showing evidence of
termite infestation, or which have become defective, or in a condition of
deterioration or disrepair, or which have been defaced by graffiti.
   “Visible garbage cans” means garbage cans or trash receptacles stored in
front or side yards of residential and commercial property and visible from
public streets except when left in places of collection at the time permitted
and in full compliance with Chapter 6.09 of this code.
(Ord. 624 §4 (part), 2008).
21.15.030 Declaration of nuisance.
The City Council, pursuant to the authority set forth in California Government
Code Section 38771, finds and declares that those conditions or situations
defined in Section 21.15.020, pertaining to hazardous buildings, hazardous
pools, refuse, waste and illegal storage, illegal storage of vehicles, lack of
landscaping, overgrown vegetation, unsightly buildings or structure exteriors,
attractive nuisances dangerous to children, visible garbage cans, oil
accumulation, poorly maintained fences, vehicles not parked on driveways,
unsightliness, improper maintenance of premises, illegal signs, outside display
of merchandise or other personal property, deteriorated parking areas,
unpermitted structures, or any other situation or condition constituting a
violation of this title, existing or permitted or allowed to exist on any
property within the city by any person, firm or corporation, and/or admission
parties, nuisance parties, and the discharge of restricted fireworks,
constitute public nuisances subject to abatement procedures set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.040 Notice to abate--issuance.
Upon determination by the director that a public nuisance exists, as defined in
this chapter, on any property within the city, the director shall cause a
notice to be issued to the owners of the affected property upon which the
nuisance exists.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.050 Notice to abate--form and content.
The notice to abate provided for in Section
21.15.040 shall be headed “Notice of Public Nuisance” in letters not less than
one inch in height and which shall, in legible characters, direct the abatement
of the nuisance referring to this chapter for particulars. The notice shall
indicate the nature of the alleged nuisance, the assessor’s parcel number and
street address, if any, of the property involved, and shall contain a
description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify
the location and extent of the nuisance. The notice shall state that the
property may be sold after three years by the county tax collector for unpaid
delinquent assessments. The notice shall further specify the date, time and
location of a hearing before the director, which date, time and location of
hearing shall be not less than seven days after the date of issuance of the
notice. The hearing shall be conducted to determine whether or not a public
nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists and shall be conducted by the
director who shall act as the hearing officer.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.060 Notice to abate--service.
The notice, in form and content as required by Section
21.15.050, shall be served by the following method:
   By posting the notice at a conspicuous place on the land, or upon the
premises, or upon any structure thereon, or upon the abutting public right-of-
way; and
   By sending a copy of the notice by certified mail addressed to the owner or
other person in charge or control of the property, at the address shown on the
last available assessment roll. The notice shall be placed in the United States
mail, postage prepaid, and shall be deemed served upon placing in the United
States mail, postage prepaid.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.070 Hearing before director.
At the time, date and place of the hearing to be conducted to determine whether
or not a public nuisance exists, as defined in this chapter, the director shall
consider the evidence available, including, but not limited to, applicable
staff reports and related material. The director shall give any interested
person a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. Based upon
the evidence so presented at the hearing, the director shall determine whether
a public nuisance exists.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.080 Order to abate.
In the event the director determines that a public nuisance exists, as defined
in this chapter, the decision shall be final and conclusive in the absence of
an appeal as provided in this chapter. The director shall, within five business
days after the close of the hearing, provide written notice of the decision to
the owner or other person in charge or control of the premises and to any other
person requesting the same. The notice of decision shall contain an order of
abatement, if a public nuisance is found to exist, and shall set forth the
nature of the nuisance, its location and the time and manner for its abatement
and shall be served in accordance with provision of Section
21.15.060B. Where an appeal is filed as provided in this chapter, such order of
abatement shall be suspended pending the review of such determination in the
manner set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.090 Order to abate--appeal.
The owner or other person in control or in charge of the property may appeal
the decision of the director to the city appeals board. Any such appeal shall
be filed with the city clerk, in writing, within ten business days from the
date the notice of decision is issued by the director in accordance with the
provisions of Section
21.15.080. The appeal, in writing, shall be accompanied by the fee required for
the taking of any such appeal, which fee shall be set by the city council by
resolution. Upon the receipt of an appeal in writing, with the appropriate fee
therefore, the city clerk shall set the appeal for a hearing before the city
appeals board.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.100 Appeal--hearing before city appeals board.
At the time and place set for the appeal hearing before the city appeals board,
the city appeals board shall review the decision of the director and shall
afford the appellant a reasonable opportunity to be heard in connection
therewith. Upon consideration of the evidence presented to the appeals board at
the hearing on the appeal, the city appeals board may sustain the action of the
hearing officer, modify the action with respect to any particulars set forth in
the order to abate issued by the hearing officer or may find that no public
nuisance exists. The city appeals board may continue the hearing on the appeal
from time to time if such continuance is deemed warranted in the appeal board’s
discretion.
   Upon conclusion of the hearing before the city appeals board on the appeal,
the city appeals board shall, within thirty days, issue its resolution making
its findings and determinations with respect to the appeal. In the event that
the city appeals board determines that a public nuisance exists, the resolution
shall set forth the nature of the nuisance, its location and the time and
manner for its abatement. The decision of the city appeals board shall be final
and conclusive.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.110 Notice of city appeals board determination.
A copy of the resolution adopted by the city appeals board shall be mailed to
the owner or other person in control or in charge of the premises within five
working days after the adoption thereof in accordance with Section
21.15.060.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.120 Owner to abate.
Upon issuance of an order to abate by the director, in accordance with the
provisions of Section
21.15.080 or, in the event of an appeal upon the mailing of notice of the city
appeals board’s determination concerning any appeal, the owner or other person
in charge or in control of the property shall comply with any such order to
abate in accordance with the terms, conditions, timeliness and methods of
abatement set forth therein.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.130 City to abate--report.
In the event the owner or other person in charge of or control of the property
fails or neglects to remove or to otherwise abate the nuisance in accordance
with the order issued by the director or the city appeals board, whichever is
applicable, the director, through city employees authorized by the director,
shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by city
crews or by private contractor. A report of the proceedings and an accurate
account of the cost of abating the nuisance on each separate property shall be
filed with the director.
(Ord. 624 §4 (part), 2008).
21.15.140 Costs of abatement.
Whenever the director is required to cause the abatement of a public nuisance
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the director shall keep an
accounting of the costs thereof, including incidental expenses concerning such
abatement. The term “incidental expenses” shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of
notices, specifications and contracts, inspection of the abatement work, the
costs of printing and mailing required under this chapter. Such costs shall
include reasonable attorneys’ fees provided the city elects to seek attorneys’
fees at the commencement of the abatement proceeding and is deemed to be the
prevailing party by a court of competent jurisdiction. If the property owner is
deemed to be the prevailing party then that party shall be entitled to receive
its reasonable attorneys’ fees.
   Upon abatement of the nuisance, the director shall cause to be prepared an
itemized statement of costs and set the same for a hearing before the director.
Upon receipt of the report itemizing the costs and expenses incurred in abating
the nuisance, including incidental expenses, the director shall cause a notice
of hearing to be issued which form of notice shall be headed in letters not
less than one inch in height as follows:
   NOTICE OF COSTS OF ABATEMENT AND HEARING
   The notice shall otherwise be in form and content as set forth in Section
21.15.050 and shall be served upon the owner or other person in charge or
control of the property in the manner set forth in Section
21.15.060.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.150 Costs of abatement--hearing before director.
At the time, date and place set for the hearing on the costs of abatement,
which hearing shall be at least seven business days after the date of the
giving of the notice as set forth in Section
21.15.140, the director shall conduct a hearing on the report. The owner of the
property, or such other person in charge or control of the property shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard with respect to the costs and expenses set
forth in the report. Any objections or protests raised by any of the persons
liable to be assessed for the costs of abating the nuisance may be submitted
orally, or in writing. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the director shall make
such revisions, corrections or modifications to the report as may be deemed
appropriate, after which the report shall be confirmed as submitted, or as
revised, corrected or modified. The hearing on the costs of abatement may be
continued from time to time. The director shall give notice in accordance with
the provisions of Section
21.15.060 to the owner of the property or to such other person in charge or in
control of the property within five days after the conclusion of the hearing as
to the director’s final determination regarding the costs of abatement. The
director’s decision shall be final unless appealed to the city appeals board in
the time and manner set forth in Section
21.15.170.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.160 Costs of abatement--assessment of lien.
The director shall prepare and file with the county auditor a certified copy of
the report and the amount approved in the report shall be a lien upon the
property to be assessed. The assessment shall be filed in the form and manner
required by the county auditor.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.170 Cost of abatement--appeal to city appeals board.
The owner or other person in control or in charge of the affected property may
appeal the decision of the director to the city appeals board. Any such appeal
shall be filed with the city clerk, in writing, within ten business days from
the date the notice is given of the director’s final determination concerning
the costs of abatement in accordance with the provisions of Section
21.15.140. The appeal, in writing, shall be accompanied by the fee required for
the taking of any such appeal which fee shall be set by resolution of the city
council. Upon the receipt of an appeal in writing with the appropriate fee
therefore, the city clerk shall set the appeal for a hearing before the city
appeals board and the city clerk shall notify the appellant of the time, date
and location of the hearing at least ten business days prior to the date of
hearing, in the manner set forth in Section
21.15.060.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.180 Cost of abatement--hearing before city appeals board.
At the time and place set for the appeal hearing concerning the costs of
abatement before the city appeals board, the city appeals board shall review
the decision of the director and shall afford the appellant a reasonable
opportunity to be heard in connection therewith. Any objections or protests
raised by any of the persons liable to be assessed for the costs of abating the
nuisance may be submitted orally, or in writing. Upon conclusion of the
hearing, the city appeals board may make such revisions, corrections or
modifications to the determination of the director as the city appeals board
may deem appropriate, after which said report shall be confirmed as submitted,
or as revised, corrected or modified. The city appeals board may continue the
hearing on the appeal from time to time if such continuance is deemed warranted
in the city appeals board discretion.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.190 Cost of abatement--resolution assessing lien.
Upon the conclusion of the city appeals board, the city appeals board shall
adopt its resolution making its findings and determinations with respect to the
amounts to be assessed with respect to the costs of abating the nuisance. The
amounts so approved by the city appeals board shall be lien upon the property.
The city appeals board shall adopt a resolution assessing such amounts as a
lien upon the property as that property is shown upon the last available
assessment roll, before the determination that a public nuisance exists.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.200 Cost of abatement--recording of resolution.
The city clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor a certified copy
of the resolution and the amounts approved in the resolution. The assessment
contained therein shall be filed in the form and manner required by the county
auditor.
(Ord. 624 §4 (part), 2008).
21.15.210 Costs of abatement--payment of costs.
Any person or entity liable for the costs of abatement may pay said costs of
abatement at any time prior to the hearing before the city appeals board. (Ord.
624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.220 Assessment and collection of costs.
The provisions of California Government Code Sections 38773.5, 38773.6, and
Sections 39580 to 39585, inclusive, as they exist as of the effective date of
the ordinance codified in this chapter and as they may be amended from time to
time, are incorporated by reference in and made a part of this chapter. The
county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the
parcel of land against which the assessment is levied. The amount of the
assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary
municipal taxes and, if delinquent, the amount thereof shall be subject to the
same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as provided for ordinary
municipal taxes.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
21.15.230 Penalties and alternative provisions.
   A.   Criminal penalties. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership or corporation to maintain or cause to be maintained, allow, or
permit to exist any condition defined in Section
21.15.020 and declared to be a public nuisance in Section
21.15.030. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision
of this subsection A or failing to comply with any of the requirements set
forth herein shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars, or by
imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Each and every person, firm, partnership, or corporation violating this section
shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any
portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership
or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefore as provided in this
section. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provision
of this subsection A may be punished by imposition of an administrative penalty
as provided by this code.
   B.   Civil penalties. Any condition declared to be a nuisance in this
chapter may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining
order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by
law for the abatement of such nuisances.
   C.   Cost recovery. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the
costs of abatement, including costs set forth in Section
21.15.140 and incidental expenses, as confirmed by either the city manager or
his designee after appeal, may be assessed against the owner or owners of the
property as a debt personal to the owners and as a lien to the property. In the
event the city manager or his designee assesses the costs of abatement against
the owners personally, the assessment shall be due and payable within twenty
days after service thereof in accordance with Section
21.15.060. In the event such assessment is not paid within twenty days, the
city may commence any legal proceeding available to it including, but not
limited to, suit in small claims court, municipal court or superior court to
recover the costs of abatement or may permit the lien to be assessed against
the property, or both. Any determination as to the method of collection shall
not operate or be construed as an election of remedies.
(Ord. 624 § 4 (part), 2008).
ARTICLE III: GENERAL ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
Chapter 21.16
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS, ADOPTION OF MAPS
Sections:
   
21.16.010   Designation of zoning districts.
   
21.16.015   Imperial Highway Specific Plan created.
   
21.16.020   Adoption of zoning map.
   
21.16.030   Zoning district boundaries.
   
21.16.040   Conformance with zoning district regulations.
21.16.010 Designation of zoning districts.
   (a) General. The city is divided into zoning districts to allow for the
orderly, planned development of the city and to implement the general plan.
Table 21.16.010 identifies all zoning districts. All zoning districts shall be
listed and appropriately designated on the official zoning map.
   (b)   Base Zoning District. Every parcel shall have a base zoning district
that establishes the primary type and intensity of land use permitted, along
with development regulations for that particular type and intensity of land
use.
   (c)   Overlay Zoning District. An overlay zoning district supplements the
base zoning district for the purpose of establishing special use or development
regulations for a particular area in addition to the provisions of the
underlying base zone. In the event of conflict between the base zoning district
regulations and the overlay zoning district regulations, the provisions of the
overlay zoning district shall apply. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.16.015 Imperial Highway Specific Plan created.
As authorized by California Government Code Section 65450, et seq., the
Imperial Highway Specific Plan is hereby created for the Imperial Highway
Corridor, as defined and described in the Imperial Highway Specific Plan
(Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified herein), Specific Plan No. SP1000-1, a
full, true and correct copy of which is located in the City’s Community
Development Department. The contents of said Specific Plan are incorporated by
reference as though fully set forth within this code. The Specific Plan shall
be designated on the City’s official zoning map as ‘Imperial Highway Specific
Plan’. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 646 § 2, 2011)
21.16.020 Adoption of zoning map.
The map shall be maintained on file in the office of the planning division. The
boundaries of the zoning districts as set forth on the zoning map are
confirmed, adopted, established, and may be changed in accordance with this
title.
 
Table 21.16.010
City of La Mirada Zoning Districts
Base      Zoning   General Plan Land Use
Zoning    District Designation Implemented
Districts Symbol   by Zoning District
Table 21.16.010
City of La Mirada Zoning Districts
Base                              Zoning     General Plan Land Use
Zoning                            District   Designation Implemented
Districts                         Symbol     by Zoning District
Residential zoning districts:                
   Single-family residential   R-1-6,000  Low density residential (LDR)
   Single-family residential   R-1-7,500  Low density residential (LDR)
   Single-family residential   R-1-8,000  Low density residential (LDR)
   Single-family residential   R-1-10,000 Low density residential (LDR)
   Single-family residential   R-1-15,000 Low density residential (LDR)
   Medium density residential  R-3        Medium density residential (MDR)
   High density residential    R-4        High density residential (MDR)
Commercial zoning districts:                 
   Administrative office       C-O        Commercial (C)
   Neighborhood commercial     C-1        Commercial (C)
   General commercial          C-4        Commercial (C)
   Freeway commercial          C-F        Commercial (C)
Industrial                        M-2        Industrial (I)
Open space                        O-S        Parks and open spaces (OS)
                                             Public/institutional (PI)
Planned unit development          PUD - #    All
Specific plan                     SP - #     All
   Imperial Highway Specific PlIHSP       All
Emergency shelter overlay         -ESO       Commercial
Farm animal                       -A         Low density residential
Flood hazard zone                 -F         All
Mobile home park                  -MH        Medium density residential (MDR)
Oil drilling                      -O         Commercial, industrial, parks and
                                             open space, public/institutional
Special housing overlay           -SHO       All
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 10, 2012; Ord. 647 § 1, 2011; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.16.030 Zoning district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning districts shown on
the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (1)   Where a zoning district’s boundaries approximately follow a lot,
alley, or street line, such lot lines and street and alley centerlines shall be
construed as the district boundaries; otherwise, such boundaries shall be
determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map unless dimensions
are specifically indicated.
   (2)   Where a public street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the
property encompassed by said street or alley shall be included within the
zoning district or districts of the adjoining properties. If the adjoining
properties are in different zoning districts, the boundary lines shall be the
centerline of the former street or alley and the extension of the side yard
lines of the abutting properties. In the event such street, alley, or right-of-
way was a boundary between two or more different zoning districts, the new
zoning district or zone boundary shall be the property line that is created by
such vacation.
   (3)   Areas annexed to the city shall come into the city at their existing
zone designation. If there is no prior designation, the city council shall
determine the nearest comparable zone for the area. The zoning map shall then
be amended to show the new city limits and zone.
   (4)   In the event of any other uncertainty regarding zone boundaries, the
city council, by written decision, shall determine the location of the zone
boundary. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.16.040 Conformance with zoning district regulations.
   (a) Except as otherwise provided in this title, development shall conform
with zoning district regulations specified below. Every department, official,
and employee of the city having the authority to issue any permit or license
required by law shall comply with the provisions of this title. Any license or
permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be void and
of no effect.
   (b)   Except as provided by this title, conformance with this title shall be
required as follows:
      (1)   No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building
shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building,
or premises be used or designated for any purpose or in any manner other than
is permitted in the zoning district in which such building, land, or premises
is located.
      (2)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally
altered to exceed the height limit, lot area, yard setback provisions, or lot
coverage designated in this title for the zoning district in which such
building is located.
      (3)   No yard or other open space abutting any building and provided for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of this title shall be considered
as providing a yard or open space for any other building on any other building
site.
      (4)   Uses or structures that do not conform shall comply with the
provisions of Article IX of this title. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008).
ARTICLE IV: BASE ZONING DISTRICTS AND RELATED USE AND DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
Chapter 21.18
RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
21.18.010   District purposes.
   
21.18.020   Permitted land uses.
   
21.18.030   Development standards.
   
21.18.040   Floor-area ratio standards for R-1 districts.
   
21.18.050   Objective design standards for R-1 districts.
   
21.18.060   Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU).
   
21.18.070   Primary Dwelling Units (PDU) and Secondary Dwelling Units (SDU).
   
21.18.080   Objective design standards for multi-family and mixed-use
residential.
   
21.18.090   Exterior mechanical equipment.
   
21.18.100   Additional standards for residential districts.
21.18.010 District purposes.
   (a)   Three residential zoning designations are established to implement the
low density residential (LDR), medium density residential (MDR), and high
density residential (HDR) land use designations of the general plan.
Residential zoning districts are as set forth in the following paragraphs.
   (b)   Single-family Residential (R-1) Zoning Districts. The R-1 districts
are established to designate areas for single-family dwellings (primarily
detached) and similar and related compatible uses. Except as otherwise provided
in Article VI,
Chapter 21.50, one dwelling is permitted on each lot in this district. This
district is further subdivided into five individual single-family categories,
with the suffix indicating the minimum lot size permitted as follows:
      (1)   R-1-6,000 (minimum lot size is 6,000 square feet);
      (2)   R-1-7,500 (minimum lot size is 7,500 square feet);
      (3)   R-1-8,000 (minimum lot size is 8,000 square feet);
      (4)   R-1-10,000 (minimum lot size is 10,000 square feet); and
      (5)   R-1-15,000 (minimum lot size is 15,000 square feet).
   (c)   Medium Density Residential (R-3) Zoning District. The R-3 zoning
district is established to designate areas for detached and attached
residential housing types at a maximum density of fifteen units per acre, and
related compatible uses.
   (d)   High Density Residential (R-4) Zoning District. The R-4 zoning
district is established to designate areas for all housing types at a maximum
density of twenty-eight units per acre, and related compatible uses. (Ord. 736,
§ 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.18.020 Permitted land uses.
   (a) Table 21.18.020 identifies permitted uses, uses permitted as an
accessory use, uses subject to conditional use permit approval, and prohibited
uses in all residential zoning districts, subject to compliance with all other
provisions of this title. Uses not listed in Table 21.18.020 are prohibited.
   (b)   Accessory use provisions are addressed in Article VI, Chapter
21.42.
Table 21.18.020
Permitted Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
            Single- family     Medium Density     High Density Residential
Allowed Use Residential Zoning Residential Zoning Zoning District (R-4)
            Districts (R-1)    District (R-3)
Table 21.18.020
Permitted Uses in Residential Zoning Districts
                           Single- family    Medium Density   High Density
Allowed Use                Residential       Residential      Residential
                           Zoning Districts  Zoning District  Zoning District
                           (R-1)             (R-3)            (R-4)
Accessory dwelling unit    See Section       See Section      See Section
                           21.18.060         21.18.060        21.18.060
Adult day care - large     CUP               CUP              CUP
family(1)
Adult day care - small-    P                 P                P
family(1)
Small family day care home P                 P                P
(4)
Large family day care home LDC               LDC              LDC
(4)
Child day care facility    CUP               CUP              CUP
Church, temple, synagogue,
mosque, or other place of  CUP               CUP              CUP
worship or similar
gathering place
Community center/          CUP               CUP              CUP
recreation facility
Dwelling:
   Detached single-familP                 P                P
   Duplex               X                 P                P
   Attached - 3 or more X                 P                P
units
   SB 9 unit            See Section       X                X
                           21.18.060
Employee housing for six   P                 P                P
or fewer employees
Group home (6 or fewer     P                 P                P
residents)
Guest house                CUP               CUP              CUP
Low-barrier navigation     X                 P                P
center
Mobile home park(1)        X                 CUP              CUP
Office/related support     X                 X                A(3)
facilities
Public park                P                 P                P
Residential care facility, P                 P                P
small(1)                   See               See              See
                           Chapter 21.57     Chapter 21.57    Chapter 21.57
Residential care facility, CUP               CUP              CUP
large(1)                   See               See              See
                           Chapter 21.57     Chapter 21.57    Chapter 21.57
Single room occupancy      X                 CUP              CUP
Schools:
   Public elementary/   P                 P                P
secondary
   Private elementary/  CUP               CUP              CUP
secondary
Transitional and           P                 P                P
supportive housing
Utility or public service  CUP               CUP              CUP
facility
Wireless communication     See Chapter
facilities                 21.46
 
Notes:
1.   See Article X Definitions. Also, uses must comply with applicable
provisions of State Health and Safety Code.
2.   See Article VI, Chapter
21.42.
3.   Office use and related support facilities (exercise facilities, cafeteria,
training facilities) are permitted in conjunction with multi-family use.
P = Permitted; CUP = Conditional Use Permit required; A = Accessory Use; LDC =
Large family day care home permit required; X = Prohibited
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 11, 2012; Ord. 651, § 6, 2012; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008; Ord. 705, § 6, 2018).
21.18.030 Development standards.
Table 21.18.030 sets forth the minimum development standards for residential
development in each zoning district. These standards shall be used for the land
use and development permitting process(s) as criteria for project review.
Table 21.18.030
Residential Development Standards
Development Standards Single-Family Residential (R-1)      R-3 R-4
                      -6,000 -7,500 -8,000 -10,000 -15,000
Table 21.18.030
Residential Development Standards
Development       Single-Family Residential (R-1)            R-3      R-4
Standards         -6,000   -7,500   -8,000   -10,000 -15,000
Lot size:                                                        
- minimum         6,000 sf 7,500 sf 8,000 sf 10,000  15,000  6,000 sf 10,000 sf
                                             sf      sf
- average         7,500 sf 9,000 sf 10,000   15,000  20,000  N/A      N/A
                                    sf       sf      sf
Lot width -       60 ft.   75 ft.   75 ft.   90 ft.  100 ft. 60 ft.   60 ft.
minimum
Lot coverage -    40%      40%      40%      40%     40%     50%      50%
maximum
Setback distance                                                 
- (1)(4) minimum:
   Front yard  20 ft.   20 ft.   20 ft.   20 ft.  20 ft.  20 ft.   15 ft.
   Side yard - 5 ft.    5 ft.    5 ft.    10 ft.  10 ft.  5 ft.    10 ft.
interior
   Street side 10 ft.   10 ft.   10 ft.   15 ft.  15 ft.  10 ft.   10 ft.
yard
   Rear yard(2)15 ft.   15 ft.   15 ft.   15 ft.  15 ft.  15 ft.   20 ft.
Height limit -                                                   
maximum:
   Main structu35 ft.   35 ft.   35 ft.   35 ft.  35 ft.  50 ft.   50 ft.(3)
                                                             (3)
   Accessory   15 ft.   15 ft.   15 ft.   15 ft.  15 ft.  15 ft.   15 ft.
structure
Open space -      No minimum                                 500 sf   400 sf
minimum(5)                                                   per unit per unit
 
Notes:
1.   In the R-1 zoning districts, the setback standards apply to the first
floor only. See Section 2.18.030(B) regarding second story setback
requirements.
2.   In the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts, the required rear yard area may be
used for parking, carports, or garages.
3.   Within 50 feet of a single-family residential property, the building
height shall not exceed 35 feet.
4.   Within 35 feet of any dwelling unit and 25 feet of any residential
property line, no barn, pen, coop, or other structure or area containing exotic
animals, livestock, or poultry shall be maintained. See Chapter
21.30.
5.   For the open space requirements for the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts, up
to 75% of the required open space can be provided in a common, usable
recreation area. Such common recreational area may include indoor recreation
facilities. Also, balconies of minimum dimensions 10 feet long and 6 feet deep
may be credited toward the open space requirement.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.18.040 Floor-area ratio standards for R-1 districts.
A two-tier regulatory scheme for floor-area ratio standards applies to the
development of new residential structures, as well as additions to existing
structures, in all R-1 zoning districts. These standards are set forth in Table
21.18.040. The first standard indicates the maximum floor-area ratio permitted
by right for various lot sizes in each of the R-1 zones. The second standard
represents a greater maximum floor-area ratio that may be permitted, subject to
certificate of compatibility review pursuant to this title.
 
Table 21.18.040
FAR Standards - R-1 Districts
Lot                Maximum FAR by Zoning District
Size               R-1-6,000 R-1-7,500 R-1-8,000 R-1-10,000 R-1-15,000
Up to 6,000 sf     0.40/0.50 0.40/0.50 0.40/0.50 0.40/0.50  0.40/0.50
6,001 to 10,000 sf 0.40/0.50 0.45/0.50 0.45/0.50 0.45/0.50  0.45/0.50
> 10,000 sf        0.35/0.45 0.35/0.45 0.40/0.45 0.50/0.60  0.55/0.65
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.18.050 Objective design standards for R-1 Districts.
Existing zoning regulates building height, setbacks, density, among other
requirements, while objective design standards regulate criteria such as site
layout, building orientation, architectural elements, pedestrian connections,
among others, to ensure that new housing, room additions, exterior remodels
maintain a design quality reflective of the City of La Mirada.
   (a)   Site design. Site design refers to the arrangement of layout and
relationships between – buildings, parking areas, pedestrian connection and
overall design. The site design standards in this chapter address site layout
and building placement, vehicular surface parking and access, pedestrian
circulation and access. A project application shall follow objective
requirements of the base zone it is located in, such as setbacks and building
height.
      (1)   Pedestrian circulation and access. Pedestrian walkways must be at
least four feet wide along their entire length, ensuring connections throughout
the site and to the entrances of dwelling unit.
         (A)   Pedestrian walkways shall connect public sidewalks, building
entrances, and vehicle parking areas.
         (B)   Materials. Walkways shall be constructed of firm, stable and
slip-resistant materials, such as poured-in-place concrete (including stamped
concrete), permeable paving, decomposed granite, or concrete pavers.
         (C)   Maintenance. Pedestrian walkways shall be maintained in good
condition for the life of the project and shall not be allowed to fall into
disrepair so as to constitute a nuisance or hazard to the public.
         (D)   Enhanced paving for building entrances. Primary building
entrances shall provide decorative and accent paving that contrast in color and
texture from the adjacent walkway paving. Grasscrete is prohibited.
   (b)   Building form, massing, and articulation.
      (1)   Building form and vertical hierarchy. Buildings two stories or less
shall include a defined base and a top, cornice, or parapet cap. All buildings
shall achieve this effect through at least two of the following:
         (A)   Color, texture, or material changes.
         (B)   Variations, projections, or reveals in the wall plane.
         (C)   Variations in fenestration size or pattern.
         (D)   Decorative architectural details, such as cornices and columns.
      (2)   Wall plane variation. Building façades visible from the primary
street shall not extend more than 20 feet in length without either an
architectural element or a two-foot variation in depth in the wall plane.
Building entrances, front porches, upper-story setbacks, projections, and
recessions, such as stoops, bay windows, overhangs, and trellises, count
towards this requirement.
      (3)   All-sided architecture. Buildings shall be designed and articulated
with common details, articulation, materials, and elements on all facades.
      (4)   Roof line variation. Roof lines shall not extend more than a length
of 30 feet without at least one prominent change as described below:
         (A)   Roof forms shall be used to manage apparent size of additions.
         (B)   Variation in architectural elements, such as, dormers,
projections, or roof orientation.
         (C)   Variation of roof height of at least 18 inches (as measured from
the highest point of each roof line).
         (D)   The roof style and pitch should be designed to match that of the
primary/existing residence.
   (c)   Dwelling unit entrances. Ensure that entries to dwelling units are
clearly defined.
   (d)   Visibility of entrances. If a dwelling unit is visible from the
primary street, provide a paved pathway connecting the public-right-of-way to
the front door. The pathway should have a minimum width of four feet. The unit
address and location must be identified by either an address plaque or by other
signage that is clearly legible from the public right-of-way. The plaque or
other signage must be clearly indicated on a site plan submitted with the
building-permit application. The site plan must also show how the unit will be
accessed by fire and safety personnel.
      (1)   Entrance to the primary residence shall be located on the ground
floor with direct access from the primary street right-of-way. Additionally, a
primary building entrance shall incorporate at least one of the following:
         (A)   Entrance recessed within an arch or cased decorative opening
with a minimum depth of 18 inches.
         (B)   Entrance emphasized by a change in roofline of at least 12
inches, or a tower or similar break in the wall façade.
         (C)   Entrance covered by an awning at least three feet in size.
   (e)   Balconies and decks.
      (1)   Location. Balconies and decks shall be located so they do not
directly align horizontally with windows and doors of adjacent dwelling units.
      (2)   Screening. Where private recreational space (such as balcony or
ground floor patio) is located 15 feet of a window of an adjacent dwelling
unit, railing, walls and fencing shall be constructed with wood metal, or
glazing, that shall match in architectural style to the home. Screening shall
be constructed to fully screen and have a minimum screen height of 6' in height
(measured from the finished floor of the private recreational space to the top
of the railing, fencing, or walls).
   (f)   Windows and doors.
      (1)   Location. Windows and doors shall be located so they do not
directly align horizontally with windows and doors of adjacent dwelling units.
      (2)   Privacy. Where windows are proposed within 15 feet of a window on
another building, the design and placement shall avoid unfiltered/direct views
into the adjacent site and shall be designed with one or more of the following:
         (A)   Use non-transparent or obscured glazing, such as frosted/
patterned glass. Reflective glazing is not permitted.
         (B)   Provide permanent architectural screens or affixed louvers at
windows.
         (C)   Offset windows horizontally at least 12 inches from any windows
in adjacent buildings (edge to edge), so as not to have a direct line-of-sight
into adjacent units.
         (D)   Windows shall be placed 6' above finished floor.
      (3)   Window treatment.
         (A)   Windows shall either be recessed at least three inches from the
plane of the surrounding exterior wall or shall have a trim or windowsill at
least one-half inch in depth.
         (B)   Windows facing a public street. Windows facing a public street
shall feature enhanced window treatments, such as decorative architectural
brackets, trim, shutters, awnings, and/or trellises.
         (C)   Window shutters. Exterior window shutters, when used, shall
match the size and shape of adjacent window openings.
         (D)   Window consistency. Window frame materials, color, and trim
shall be used on all elevations.
   (g)   Materials and colors.
      (1)   Wall material. The primary exterior siding material for buildings
shall be wood, composite wood, stone, stone veneer, granite, slate, brick,
brick veneer, stucco, plaster, fiber cement, vinyl, aluminum, or steel. The use
of exposed plywood or glass curtain walls is prohibited.
      (2)   Material and color transition. Changes in material or color shall
occur at inside corners of intersecting walls or at architectural features that
break up the wall plane, such as columns.
      (3)   Accent material. Use of two or more accent materials, such as
glass, tile, brick, stone, concrete, or plaster, shall be incorporated to
highlight building features.
   (h)   Utilities and mechanical equipment.
      (1)   Equipment and utility screening. In-ground and wall-mounted utility
elements such as but not limited to all mechanical units, air conditioning
units, wires, conduits, junction boxes, transformers, ballast, backflow
devices, irrigation controllers, switch and panel boxes, and utilities such as
gas and electrical meters shall be concealed from public view with screening by
physical elements incorporating the materials and colors of the primary
building design. Landscape screening with evergreen plants may be planted to
completely conceal the equipment or utility.
      (2)   Vents and exhaust. All wall-mounted vent and exhaust elements shall
be located at interior corners of building walls or behind building elements
that conceal them from public view. All flashing, sheet metal vents, exhaust
fans or ventilators, and pipe stacks shall be painted a color to match the
adjacent roof or wall material.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.18.060 Accessory Dwelling Units (ADU.
   (a)   Purpose. This section sets forth regulations for Accessory Dwelling
Units (ADU) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (JADU) in residential zoning
districts consistent with state law (California Government Code Sections 66310
through 66342). The implementation of this section is intended to increase
housing opportunities within existing neighborhoods by allowing the development
of Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs) and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units (JADUs)
on single-family zoned parcels, and allowing the development of multiple ADUs
on multi-family zoned parcels, to create new housing opportunities. The
regulations aim to promote a variety of housing options while maintaining the
residential character of neighborhoods, ensuring consistency with the General
Plan, and adhering to the zoning designations of the parcel. This section seeks
to balance the need for additional housing with the preservation of
neighborhood integrity, efficient land use, and protection of environmental and
infrastructure resources.
   (b)   Approval process. An ADU or JADU shall be considered and approved
ministerially subject to a Site Plan Review pursuant to Chapter
21.114. No public hearing or public notice shall be required.
   (c)   Development standards. An application for a Zoning Clearance (for an
ADU or JADU) shall be subject to ministerial review and shall only be approved
by the Community Development Department if the ADU satisfies all the standards
below.
      (1)   The ADU shall be permitted in the Single-Family Residential (R-1)
Zoning District, Multi-Family Residential Districts (R-3 and R-4), Planned Unit
Development Zoning District, Mixed Use Overlay Zoning District, and Special
Housing Overlay Zoning District.
      (2)   Maximum number of dwelling units.
         (A)   Single-family. One from each of the following categories shall
be permitted:
            i.   One ADU within an existing or proposed single-family residence
or within an existing accessory structure.
               a.   The ADU shall have exterior access
               b.   An efficiency unit shall be permitted.
               c.   The ADU shall not extend beyond the building envelope of
the existing or proposed single-family residence, or the existing accessory
structure.
               d.   Notwithstanding Section 21.080.050(B)1)(i)(a), a 150 square
foot addition may be permitted to an existing accessory structure provided the
addition is to accommodate ingress or egress only.
               e.   The ADU shall include a kitchen and bathroom.
            ii.   One new construction detached ADU.
               a.   The ADU shall include a kitchen and bathroom.
               b.   An efficiency unit shall be permitted.
            iii.   One JADU within an existing or proposed single-family
residence or within an existing accessory structure.
               a.   The JADU shall have exterior access.
               b.   The JADU shall not extend beyond the building envelope of
the existing or proposed single family residence, or the existing accessory
structure.
               c.   Notwithstanding Section 21.080.050(B)1)(i)(a), a 150 square
foot addition may be permitted to an existing accessory structure provided the
addition is to accommodate ingress or egress only.
               d.   The JADU shall include a kitchen, but may share a bathroom
with the primary unit.
               e.   An efficiency unit shall be permitted.
         (B)   Multi-family. Lots with existing multi-family residential
dwellings:
            i.   Accessory Dwelling Units may be constructed within portions of
multi-family dwelling structures that are not used as livable space (such as:
storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics basements, or garages),
provided the spaces meet state building standards for dwellings. The number of
ADUs on the lot shall not exceed 25% of the existing multi-family dwelling
units, and allow at least one such unit;
            ii.   If the existing multifamily dwelling has a rear or side
setback of less than four feet, the city shall not require any modification of
the existing multifamily dwelling as a condition of approving the application
to construct an accessory dwelling unit that satisfies the requirements of this
subparagraph.
         (C)   Multi-family. Lots with existing or proposed multi-family
residential dwellings:
            i.   Not more than eight ADUs that are located on a lot that has an
existing multi-family dwelling, but are detached from that multi-family
dwelling are subject to the height limit addressed in subsection (7), as
applicable, and rear and side yard setbacks of no more than four feet.
            ii.   In no case, shall the number of ADUs exceed the number of
primary units on the property.
         (D)   Notwithstanding anything else within this section that shall be
deemed contrary, if the lot was previously involved in a subdivision utilizing
the standards in
Chapter 21.80 (Urban Lot Split) and
Chapter 21.18 (Primary and Secondary Units), then an ADU or JADU would not be
allowed.
      (3)   Setback requirements.
         (A)   No additional setback is required for the following situations:
            i.   Those portions of ADU or JADU that are created by converting
existing living area or existing accessory structures to new ADUs; or
            ii.   Construction of a new ADU in the same location and to the
same dimensions as an existing lawful structure.
            iii.   Notwithstanding subsection i and ii, setbacks that are
sufficient for fire and safety shall be provided.
         (B)   For all other ADUs, setbacks with a minimum of four feet from
the rear, interior and side property lines and the ADU must comply with all
applicable front and street side yard setbacks listed in Section 21.17, unless
doing so would prohibit the construction of at least an 800 square foot ADU. If
proposed at the front of a property, the front required setback shall be
maximized to the extent allowed within these requirements.
         (C)   Newly constructed ADUs must maintain a minimum setback of ten
feet, free and clear, between on-site structures, measured from wall to wall.
      (4)   Historic properties. If an ADU is proposed on a lot with real
property that is listed on the California Register of Historic Place, then the
ADU shall conform with all federal, state, and local guidelines.
      (5)   Foundation. The ADU shall be built on a permanent foundation.
      (6)   Address. An ADU shall be provided with a separate address in the
form of a whole number.
      (7)   Height. Unless listed otherwise below, an ADU shall not exceed two
stories and shall not exceed 25 feet measured to the top of roof pitch.
Additionally, the ADU may contain an interior loft as allowed by the adopted
building codes.
      (8)   Second stories. An ADU may be up to two stories, or may be built on
a second floor, including an attached or detached garage or accessory building,
if the following requirements are met:
         (A)   When an ADU is built on the second story, or is two stories, the
footprint shall not extend past the roof line. An ADU can be constructed above
an existing attached accessory structure, however, the ADU's footprint shall
not encroach above the main home no greater than 20%.
         (B)   An ADU constructed above an existing garage shall adhere to
setbacks listed in section (3) above. The minimum side and year yard setback
for an exterior stairwell to a second floor ADU above a garage shall be five
feet. Exterior stairs to a second floor ADU above a garage shall not be
permitted along the front of the subject property. Interior stairs to a second
floor ADU above a garage shall not encroach into the required two vehicle
parking area within the garage. Exterior stairwells abutting a residential lot
should be screened and finished with a solid railing at least 42" tall for
privacy and safety.
      (9)   First Responder access. In order to provide first responder access
to the ADU, a paved pathway shall be provided from the right-of-way to the
entrance to all units.
      (10)   Nonconforming. Single-family dwellings and multi-family
residential dwellings shall not be required to correct legal nonconforming
zoning conditions (e.g., physical development upon the property) as a pre-
condition to obtaining authorization to construct an accessory dwelling unit or
junior accessory dwelling unit. However, this authorization shall not be
interpreted as allowing non-conforming use on a property (e.g., a single-family
dwelling in a commercial zone) to be expanded or intensified by allowing either
a new accessory dwelling unit or new junior accessory dwelling unit on the
property. Further, the city may deny the application upon a finding that
correcting the violation is necessary to protect the health and safety of the
public or occupants of the structure and/or a building is deemed substandard
pursuant to Section 17920.3 of the Health and Safety Code.
      (11)   Driveway maintenance/removal. If an existing garage for a single-
family dwelling is demolished or converted to allow an accessory dwelling unit,
after creation of the accessory dwelling unit, the driveway must continue to
operate in a manner that one or more cars can lawfully park on the driveway;
      (12)   Floor area ratio and lot coverage. The combined total lot coverage
and floor area ratio for both the primary residence and ADU shall not exceed
the maximum lot coverage and floor area ratio requirements of the applicable
zone in which the primary residence and ADU are located.
      (13)   Design. The design, materials, colors, architectural details and
finish of an ADU shall match the primary residence.
         (A)   The ADU shall incorporate a decorative porch feature to
distinguish its primary entrance. The address numbers shall be visible from the
public right-of-way, or on the primary entrance side when hidden from view of
the public-right-of-way.
         (B)   All bedrooms shall be accessed from a hallway or common area;
access between bedrooms is not permitted.
      (14)   Size requirements. The maximum living area of an ADU or JADU shall
comply with the following:
         (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city
shall not apply any development standards is said development standard prevents
the construction of an 800 square foot ADU. For purposes of this section,
development standard shall mean, and be limited to, lot coverage, floor area
ratio, open space, front setbacks, and minimum lot size.
         (B)   Maximum size of new built ADU:
            i.   800 square feet for ADUs with one bedroom or less.
            ii.   1,200 square feet for ADUs with more than one bedroom.
         (C)   Maximum size of converted ADU:
            i.   An ADU converted from the floor area within an existing
structure shall not exceed the legally permitted size of the structure.
         (D)   Maximum size of a JADU:
            i.   500 square feet. This size limit shall include any addition to
accommodate the JADU.
      (15)   Parking. In addition to the parking required for the primary
residence, a minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for an
ADU. No parking shall be required for a JADU. The parking space required for
ADUs must satisfy all the following:
         (A)   Parking shall not be in the front setback except on an approved
paved driveway. Required yards and open space shall not be used for parking.
         (B)   The ADU's parking space may be tandem, covered, or uncovered,
but must be paved.
         (C)   The ADU parking space may be side-by-side on an expanded paved
driveway with a maximum width of 30 feet provided the driveway apron is also
expanded to align with the new driveway width.
            i.   An expansion of the driveway must align with the top edges of
the driveway apron. A new driveway approach or curb cut for an ADU, if needed,
shall require a separate encroachment permit issued by the city's Public Works
Department.
         (D)   The dimensions of all parking spaces and driveways shall comply
with Chapter 21.68, "Parking and Loading," of the La Mirada Municipal Code. The
minimum parking space size for all parking shall be equal to a "standard"
parking stall.
         (E)   If an existing garage, carport or other covered parking is
converted or replaced with an ADU or JADU, the off-street parking shall not be
required to be replaced.
         (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, no
additional parking space is required for an ADU that satisfies any of the
following:
            i.   The ADU is located within one mile walking distance of a major
public transit stop as measured via the pedestrian path of travel starting at
the property line of the subject lot;
            ii.   The accessory dwelling unit is entirely located within an
architecturally and historically significant historic district;
            iii.   The ADU is completely inside of the proposed or existing
primary residence; or
            iv.   The ADU is located within one block of a car share vehicle.
      (16)   Utility connections. All sewer, water, gas, and electrical utility
connections of the ADU or JADU may be separated by the owner or connected to
the primary dwelling unit's system.
      (17)   Exterior equipment. Any proposed mechanical equipment visible from
the public right-of-way must be screened by a fence or wall, or a decorative
enclosure that compliments the architecture of the ADU. Mechanical equipment
shall not be permitted on the second story or the roof. Condensers shall be
ground mounted. All exterior equipment and associated components shall maintain
at least three feet from the side and rear property lines and shall not be
located within the required front yard area.
      (18)   Landscaping/private open space. In the situation that a garage is
converted and leaves a non-conforming driveway with a length less than 20'
long, a landscape planter shall separate the driveway from the new ADU. Such
landscape planters shall be raised and no less than 18" tall. As site
conditions allow, and concurrent with each newly established ADU or JADU, a
minimum of one tree of not less than 15 gallon size stock, shall be planted
upon the same parcel or lot as the ADU or JADU. The removal or loss of any tree
in conjunction with an ADU or JADU shall be replaced with three or more trees
using at least 15 gallon size stock. Each dwelling shall have open space
allotted in the form of a patio/decorative landscaped area/deck. The minimum
private usable open space required must be no less than 100 square feet per
dwelling with 6' minimum in each direction of the overall open space. The
required open space shall not be located within the required front or street
side yard setback. All areas of the site that are not utilized for buildings,
patios, parking, pedestrian, or vehicular access shall be landscaped. All
landscaping standards shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 21.66 when
not addressed in this section.
      (19)   Fire sprinklers. If an automatic sprinkler system is required for
the primary residence, the ADU and JADU must also provide an automatic
sprinkler system.
      (20)   Short term rentals. Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory
Dwelling Units shall not be rented for a period of less than 30-days.
      (21)   Owner occupancy.
         (A)   ADUs. No owner-occupancy shall be required.
         (B)   JADUs. A natural person with legal or equitable title to the
property must reside in either the principal dwelling unit or the junior
accessory dwelling unit as the person's legal domicile and permanent residence.
However, this owner-occupancy requirement shall not apply to any junior
accessory dwelling unit owned by a governmental agency, land trust, or housing
organization.
      (22) Declaration of restrictions. Before obtaining a building permit for
a JADU, the owner of the lot or parcel shall file with the County Recorder a
declaration of restrictions, which has been approved by the city attorney as to
its form and content, containing a reference to the deed under which the
property was acquired by the owner and placing the following restrictions on
the property, the property owner, and all successors in interest:
         (A)   The property owner must occupy either the primary dwelling unit
or JADU as his or her primary principal residence;
         (B)   The unit not being occupied by the property owner shall be
rented only for terms longer than 30 days;
         (C)   The JADU is not to be sold or conveyed separately from the
primary residence;
         (D)   The property owner and all successors in interest shall maintain
the JADU and the property in accordance with all applicable JADU requirements
and standards, including all city building, safety, health and fire codes;
         (E)   Any violation will be subject to penalties as provided in
Chapter 1.08, "Penalties, Administrative and Civil Remedies, and General
Provisions," of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
   (d)   Separate conveyance. Separate conveyance of the primary dwelling unit
and accessory dwelling unit shall not be permitted except for the following:
      (1)   The ADU is deed restricted to restrict occupancy by low- or
moderate-income households for a minimum period of 45 years.
      (2)   The ADU is being purchased by a qualified non-profit organization.
For purposes of this regulation, a qualified non-profit organization means a
nonprofit corporation organized pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code that has received a welfare exemption under Section 214.15 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code for properties intended to be sold to low-income
families who participate in a special no-interest loan program.
   (e)   The ADU/JADU shall comply with the objective design standards listed
in Section
21.18.080.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.18.070 Primary and secondary dwelling unit.
    (a) Purpose. This section sets forth regulations for Two-Unit Residential
Development which include a Primary Dwelling Unit (PDU) and Secondary Dwelling
Unit (SDU) in residential zoning districts, consistent with state law
(California Government Code Sections 65852.21 and 66411.7), also commonly
referred to Senate Bill 9. The implementation of this section is intended to
increase housing opportunities within existing neighborhoods by allowing the
development of up to two residential units on single-family zoned parcels to
create new housing opportunities. The regulations aim to promote a variety of
housing options while maintaining the residential character of neighborhoods,
ensuring consistency with the General Plan, and adhering to the zoning
designations of the parcel. This section seeks to balance the need for
additional housing with the preservation of neighborhood integrity, efficient
land use, and protection of environmental and infrastructure resources.
   (b)   Approval process. A housing development shall be considered and
approved ministerially and adhere to the Site Plan Review outlined in Chapter
21.114 – Site Plan Review, without discretionary review or a hearing, if it
meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The property is zoned Single-Family. The property in question is
located within a single-family residential zone. Single-family residential
zones only include R-1 (R-1-6,000, R-1-7,500, R-1-8,000, R-1-10,000, R-1-
15,000).
      (2)   Not located on prohibited land. The property is not located in any
of the following areas and does not fall within any of the following
categories:
         (A)   Historic. A Designated Historic District or property included on
the State Historic Resource Inventory, as defined in Section 5020.1 of the
Public Resource Code as it may be amended from time to time, or within a site
that is designated as a city landmark or historic property or district pursuant
to a city ordinance.
         (B)   Farmland. Prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance as
further defined in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(B) as it may be
amended from time to time.
         (C)   Wetlands. "Wetlands" as defined in the United State Fish and
Wildlife Service Manual, Part 660 FW 2 (June 21, 1993).
         (D)   Fire zone. A very high fire hazard severity zone, as further
defined in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(D) as it may be amended from
time to time. This does not apply to sites excluded from the specified hazard
zones pursuant to subdivision (b) of Section 51179 or sites that adopted fire
hazard mitigation measures pursuant to existing building standards or state
fire mitigation measures applicable to the development.
         (E)   Hazardous waste site. A hazardous waste site that is listed
pursuant to Government Code Section 65962.5 or a hazardous waste site
designated by the Department of Toxic Substances Control pursuant to Section
25356 of the Health and Safety Code, unless the State Department of Public
Health, State Water Resources Control Board, or Department of Toxic Substance
Control has cleared the site for residential use or residential mixed uses.
         (F)   Earthquake fault zone. A delineated earthquake fault zone as
determined by the State Geologist in any official maps published by the State
Geologist, unless the development complies with applicable seismic protection
building code standards adopted by the California Building Standards Commission
under the California Building Standards Law and by the city's building
department.
         (G)   Flood zone. A special flood hazard area subject to inundation by
the 1% annual chance of flood (100-year flood) as determined by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in any official maps published by FEMA. If
an applicant is able to satisfy all applicable federal qualifying criteria in
order to provide that the site satisfies this subparagraph and is otherwise
eligible for streamlines approval under this section, the city shall not deny
the application on the basis that the applicant did not comply with any
additional permit requirement, standard, or action adopted by the city that is
applicable to that site. A development may be located on a site described in
this subparagraph if either of the following are met:
            i.   The site has been subject to a Letter of Map Revision prepared
by FEMA and issued to the city; or
            ii.   The site meets FEMA requirements necessary to meet minimum
flood plain management criteria of the Nation Flood Insurance Program as
further spelled out in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(G)(ii) as that
section may be amended from time to time.
         (H)   Floodway. A regulatory floodway as determined by FEMA in any of
its official maps, published by FEMA unless the development gas received a no-
rise certification in accordance with Section 60.3(d)(3) of Title 44 of the
Code of Federal Regulations. If an applicant is able to satisfy all applicable
federal qualifying criteria in order to provide that the site satisfies this
subparagraph and is otherwise eligible for streamlined approval under this
section, the city shall not deny the application on the basis that the
applicant did not comply with any additional permit requirement, standard or
action adopted by the city that is applicable to that site.
         (I)   Planned for habitat conservation. Lands identified for
conservation in an adopted natural community conservation plan, habitat
conservation plan, or other adopted natural resource protection plan as further
spelled out in Government Code Section 65913.4(a)(6)(I) as that section may be
amended from time to time.
         (J)   Habitat for protected species. Habitat for protected species
identified as candidates, sensitive, or species of special status by state or
federal agencies, fully protected species, or species protected by the federal
Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 USC Sec. 1531 et seq.), the California
Endangered Species Act (Chapter 1.5 (commencing with Section 2050) of Division
3 of the Fish and Game Code), or the Native Plant Protection Act (Chapter 10
(commencing with Section 1900) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code).
         (K)   Conservation easement. Lands under a conservation easement.
      (3)   No impact on protected housing. The proposed two-unit development
would not require demolition or alteration of any of the following types of
housing:
         (A)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or
law that restricts rent to levels affordable to persons and families of
moderate, low, or very low income; or
         (B)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a public entity's valid exercise of its policy power; or
         (C)   Housing that has been occupied by a tenant at any time in the
last three years.
         (D)   The parcel is not a parcel on which an owner of residential real
property has exercised the owner's right under Chapter 12.75 (commencing with
Section 7060) of Division 7 of Title 1 of the Government Code to withdraw
accommodations from rent or lease within the last 15 years before the date that
the development proponent submits an application.
      (4)   Prevents demolition of 25%. The demolition of an existing unit
shall not exceed more than 25% of the existing exterior structural walls unless
the site has not been occupied by a tenant in the last three years.
   (c)   Standards and requirements. The following requirements shall apply in
addition to all other objective standards pertaining to the single-family
residential zone (R-1):
      (1)   Setbacks. No setback shall be required for an existing structure or
structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an
existing structure. Except for those circumstances as stated above, the setback
for side and rear property lines shall be four feet. The front setback to the
property line shall be 20 feet. The distance between structures shall be ten
feet, free and clear, measured from wall to wall.
      (2)   Easements. The applicant shall provide easements for the provision
of public services and facilities as required.
      (3)   Access. Each unit must adjoin the public right-of-way with a
designated path of travel.
      (4)   Parking. The required off-street parking shall be one space within
a garage per unit, except that no parking requirements will be required in
either of the following circumstances:
         (A)   The parcel is located within one-half mile walking distance of
either a high-quality transit corridor as defined by Public Resources Code
Section 21155(b) or a major transit stop as defined in Public Resource Code
Section 21064.3; or
         (B)   There is a designated parking area that supports one or more
car-share vehicles located within one block of the parcel.
      (5)   Additional unit. Any unit constructed must compliment the design of
the existing primary dwelling unit and must also comply with the existing
accessory dwelling unit standards and requirements set forth in Section 21.19
of this Code unless those standards and requirements conflict with this section
or state law, in which case this section and state law apply.
      (6)   800 square foot units. The city shall not impose any objective
zoning, subdivision, or design review standards that would have the effect of
physically precluding the construction of two units on either of the resulting
parcels or that would result in a unit size of less than 800 square feet. Any
modifications of development standards shall be the minimum modification
necessary to avoid physically precluding two units of 800 square feet each on
each parcel.
      (7)   Objective design standards. Units constructed pursuant to this
section shall comply with the objective design standards listed in Section
21.18.080.
      (8)   Lot coverage and floor area ratio. The maximum building coverage of
net lot area and floor area ratio for all single-family residential zones shall
be 40%. This lot coverage standard and floor area ratio is only enforced to the
extent that it does not prevent a two-unit development on the lot at 800 square
feet each with side and rear yard setbacks of four feet.
      (9)   Conversions and connected structures. Conversion of existing space
of an existing primary dwelling unit to form a duplex with a secondary dwelling
unit shall be permitted. However, conversion of an accessory structure shall
not be permitted. The city shall not reject an application solely because it
proposed adjacent or connected structures provided that the structures meet
building code safety standards and are sufficient to allow a separate
conveyance.
      (10)   Separate meters. Units that are created pursuant to this section
may have the option for separate utility meters.
      (11)   No short-term rental. Any unit created pursuant to this section
shall be rented for a minimum of 31 days.
      (12)   Residential use. The uses shall be limited to residential uses.
      (13)   Maximum units.
         (A)   On lots that utilize the urban lot split: No more than two
dwelling units of any kind may be constructed or maintained on a lot that
results from an urban lot split. For purposes of this subdivision, the two-unit
limitation applies to any combination of primary and secondary dwelling units,
accessory dwelling units, and junior accessory dwelling units.
         (B)   On lots that have not utilized an urban lots split: The lot is
allowed up to four units that comprise of a primary and secondary dwelling
units, accessory dwelling unit, and junior accessory dwelling units.
   (d)   Building official determinations. The city may deny a proposed two-
unit development if the building official makes a written finding, based upon a
preponderance of the evidence, that the proposed housing development project
would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined and determined in paragraph
(2) of subdivision (d) of Section 65589.5, upon public health and safety or the
physical environment and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.18.080 Objective design standards for ADUs, JADUs, and primary and secondary
units.
   (a)   Purpose. Existing zoning regulates building height, setbacks, density,
among other requirements, while objective design standards regulate criteria
such as site layout, building orientation, architectural elements, pedestrian
connections, among others, to ensure that existing housing and new housing like
Accessory Dwelling Units (ADUs), Primary Dwelling Units (PDU) and Secondary
Dwelling Units (SDU) maintains a design quality reflective of the City of La
Mirada.
      (1)   Site design. Site design refers to the arrangement of layout and
relationships between – buildings, parking areas, pedestrian connection and
overall design. The site design standards in this chapter address site layout
and building placement, vehicular surface parking and access, pedestrian
circulation and access. A project application shall follow objective
requirements of the base zone it is located in, such as setbacks and building
height.
         (A)   Pedestrian circulation and access. Pedestrian walkways shall be
provided with a minimum of four feet wide along their entire length, to provide
connections within the site and to the entrances of dwelling units.
            i.   Pedestrian walkways shall connect public sidewalks, building
entrances, and vehicle parking areas.
            ii.   Materials. Walkways shall be constructed of firm, stable and
slip-resistant materials, such as poured-in-place concrete (including stamped
concrete), permeable paving, decomposed granite, or concrete pavers.
            iii.   Maintenance. Pedestrian walkways shall be maintained in good
condition for the life of the project and shall not be allowed to fall into
disrepair so as to constitute a nuisance or hazard to the public.
            iv.   Enhanced paving for building entrances. Primary building
entrances shall provide decorative and accent paving that contrast in color and
texture from the adjacent walkway paving. Grasscrete is prohibited.
         (B)   Residential open space. Each dwelling unit shall provide a
minimum of 100 square feet per unit of residential open space. This requirement
may be provided through private open space (e.g. a private balcony or front
porch).
            i.   Private open space. Projects shall provide private space
according to the standards below.
               a.   Minimum dimensions. Private open spaces shall be provided
with a minimum of six feet in all directions and shall be delineated in overall
design with a roof covering or enhanced paving and/or landscaping. A covered
porch may be used to meet this requirement.
               b.   Screening. Private open space should not be located
directly adjacent to a window located within a neighboring unit without being
screened from view. Screening shall be constructed with wood, metal, or
glazing. Screening shall be constructed to fully screen and have a minimum
screen height of 6' in height (measured from the finished floor of the private
recreational space to the top of the railing, fencing, or walls).
         (C)   Building form, massing, and articulation.
            i.   Building form and vertical hierarchy. Buildings two stories or
less shall include a defined base and a top, cornice, or parapet cap. All
buildings shall achieve this effect through at least two of the following:
               a.   Color, texture, or material changes.
               b.   Variations, projections, or reveals in the wall plane.
               c.   Variations in fenestration size or pattern.
               d.   Decorative architectural details, such as cornices and
columns.
            ii.   Wall plane variation. Building façades visible from the
primary street shall not extend more than 20 feet in length without either an
architectural element or a two-foot variation in depth in the wall plane.
Building entrances, front porches, upper-story setbacks, projections, and
recessions, such as stoops, bay windows, overhangs, and trellises, count
towards this requirement.
            iii.   All-sided architecture. Buildings shall be designed and
articulated with common details, articulation, materials, and elements on all
facades.
            iv.   Roof line variation. Roof lines shall not extend more than a
length of 30 feet without at least one prominent change as described below:
               a.   Roof forms shall be used to manage apparent size of
additions.
               b.   Variation in architectural elements, such as, dormers,
projections, or roof orientation.
               c.   Variation of roof height of at least 18 inches (as measured
from the highest point of each roof line).
               d.   The roof style and pitch should be designed to match that
of the primary/existing residence.
         (D)   Dwelling unit entrances. Ensure that entries to accessory
dwelling units are clearly defined.
         (E)   Visibility of entrances. If an ADU, PDU, or SDU is visible from
the primary street, provide a paved pathway connecting the street to the front
door. The pathway should have a minimum width of four feet. The unit address
and location must be identified by either an address plaque or by other signage
that is clearly legible from the public right-of-way. The plaque or other
signage must be clearly indicated on a site plan submitted with the building-
permit application. The site plan must also show how the unit will be accessed
by fire and safety personnel.
            i.   Entrance to the primary residence shall be located on the
ground floor with direct access from the primary street right-of-way.
Additionally, a primary building entrance shall incorporate at least one of the
following:
               a.   Entrance recessed within an arch or cased decorative
opening with a minimum depth of 18 inches.
               b.   Entrance emphasized by a change in roofline of at least 12
inches, or a tower or similar break in the wall façade.
               c.   Entrance covered by an awning at least three feet in size.
            ii.   Upper-floor unit entrance. Exterior entrances to individual
dwelling units on upper floors are permitted.
               a.   Locate exterior stairways to an addition or ADU, PDU, or
SDU to the rear or side of the primary dwelling.
               b.   Exterior stairwells shall be fully enclosed.
         (F)   Balconies and decks.
            i.   Location. Balconies and decks shall be located so they do not
directly align horizontally with windows and doors of adjacent dwelling units.
            ii.   Screening. Where private recreational space (such as balcony
or ground floor patio) is located 15 feet of a window of an adjacent dwelling
unit, railing, walls and fencing shall be constructed with wood metal, or
glazing. Screening shall be constructed to fully screen and have a minimum
screen height of 6' in height (measured from the finished floor of the private
recreational space to the top of the railing, fencing, or walls).
         (G)   Windows and doors.
            i.   Location. Windows and doors shall be located so they do not
directly align horizontally with windows and doors of adjacent dwelling units.
            ii.   Privacy. Where windows are proposed within 15 feet of a
window on another building, the design and placement shall avoid unfiltered/
direct views into the adjacent site and shall be designed with one or more of
the following:
               a.   Use non-transparent or obscured glazing, such as frosted/
patterned glass. Reflective glazing is not permitted.
               b.   Provide permanent architectural screens or affixed louvers
at windows.
               c.   Offset windows horizontally at least 12 inches from any
windows in adjacent buildings (edge to edge), so as not to have a direct line-
of-sight into adjacent units.
               d.   Windows shall be placed 6' above finished floor.
            iii.   Window treatment.
               a.   Windows shall either be recessed at least three inches from
the plane of the surrounding exterior wall or shall have a trim or windowsill
at least one-half inch in depth.
               b.   Windows facing a public street. Windows facing a public
street shall feature enhanced window treatments, such as decorative
architectural brackets, trim, shutters, awnings, and/or trellises.
               c.   Window shutters. Exterior window shutters, when used, shall
match the size and shape of adjacent window openings.
               d.   Window consistency. Window frame materials, color, and trim
shall be used on all elevations.
         (H)   Materials and colors.
            i.   Wall material. The primary exterior siding material for
buildings shall be wood, composite wood, stone, stone veneer, granite, slate,
brick, brick veneer, stucco, plaster, fiber cement, vinyl, aluminum, or steel.
The use of exposed plywood or glass curtain walls is prohibited.
            ii.   Material and color transition. Changes in material or color
shall occur at inside corners of intersecting walls or at architectural
features that break up the wall plane, such as columns.
            iii.   Accent material. Use of two or more accent materials, such
as glass, tile, brick, stone, concrete, or plaster, shall be incorporated to
highlight building features.
         (I)   Utilities and mechanical equipment.
            i.   Equipment and utility screening. In-ground and wall-mounted
utility elements such as but not limited to all mechanical units, air
conditioning units, wires, conduits, junction boxes, transformers, ballast,
backflow devices, irrigation controllers, switch and panel boxes, and utilities
such as gas and electrical meters shall be concealed from public view with
screening by physical elements incorporating the materials and colors of the
primary building design. Landscape screening with evergreen plants may be
planted to completely conceal the equipment or utility.
            ii.   Vents and exhaust. All wall-mounted vent and exhaust elements
shall be located at interior corners of building walls or behind building
elements that conceal them from public view. All flashing, sheet metal vents,
exhaust fans or ventilators, and pipe stacks shall be painted a color to match
the adjacent roof or wall material.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025)
21.18.090 Objective design standards for multi-family and mixed-use
residential.
    (a)    Introduction.
      (1)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of the design standards of this
chapter is to provide the public, building and design professionals, and
decision-makers with objective criteria for eligible new residential and mixed-
use development in the city. The intent is to provide clear design direction
that enhances La Mirada's residential character, allows for design flexibility,
and ensures a high-quality living environment. It is in alignment with the
goals of the city and state to address the housing affordability in this
community.
      (2)   Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to multi-
family and mixed-use residential development in all zoning districts that
qualify for streamlined, ministerial processing pursuant to California
Government Code Section 65913.4, as well as any other multi-family or mixed-use
development project that qualifies for objective, ministerial review pursuant
to State housing law.
         (A)   This chapter provides objective design standards required for
use in the review of "housing developments" of two or more residential units
governed by California Government Code Section 65913.4 (Streamlined Ministerial
Approval Process) and "housing development projects" as governed by California
Government Code Section 65589.5 (Housing Accountability Act). These sections
detail the review processes required for projects that provide, generally,
either affordable or market rate multi-family housing development projects with
at least two units or mixed-use development projects with at least two thirds
square footage designated for residential uses.
         (B)   These objective design standards are intended to apply
exclusively to multifamily and mixed-use residential developments streamlined
by State housing laws. These objective design standards do not apply to any
other land development type, including detached single-family dwelling units.
Developments proposing detached dwelling unit product types or any other land
development types are subject to the applicable objective standards found in
other relevant regulatory documents and sections of code.
         (C)   Modification or expansion of an existing conforming structure
used for multi-family housing or mixed-use development that includes attached
units is also eligible to use applicable standards of the Multi-family Housing
and Mixed-Use Development Objective Design Standards Manual.
         (D)   For full eligibility criteria, see the California Government
Code sections listed above or the city's development application materials.
      (3)   Consistency with other applicable objective standards. Projects
shall comply with all objective city policies, development standards, and
design standards as established in the General Plan, the La Mirada Municipal
Code, and as applicable the Imperial Highway Specific Plan. Projects shall meet
objective standards in this chapter in addition to all pertinent requirements
of the La Mirada Municipal Code, such as Chapter
21.18, Residential Zoning Districts, and the Imperial Highway Specific Plan. If
there is any conflict between these objective standards and other city and/or
state objective standards, the less restrictive objective standard applicable
to the project shall apply.
      (4)   Permit required. Any eligible project processed pursuant to this
chapter shall require a site plan review design review of projects processed
pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted by the appropriate approving
authority and shall only include consistency with adopted objective design
standards. Additionally, no findings shall be required for approval of the
project.
   (b)   Site design. Site design refers to the arrangement of – and
relationships between – buildings, parking areas, common and private
recreational space, and pedestrian connections. The site design standards in
this chapter address site layout and building placement, vehicular surface
parking and access, pedestrian circulation and access, landscaping, and private
and common recreational space. A project application shall follow objective
requirements of the base zone it is located in, such as setbacks and building
height.
      (1)   Vehicular parking and access. Vehicular parking and access shall
comply with the provisions of Chapter
21.68, Parking and Loading, of this Title. In addition, projects shall provide
the following:
         (A)   Primary access. Side street or alley access shall serve as the
primary vehicular access to parking areas, if available. If not available, the
primary street shall serve vehicular access.
         (B)   Number of access points.
            i.   Normal lots. A maximum of one vehicle access point from the
street is permitted per 100 feet of street frontage.
            ii.   Corner lots.
               a.   One vehicular access point is permitted per lot where all
street frontages are less than 100 linear feet.
               b.   Two vehicular access points are permitted on lots where at
least one street has a frontage of 100 linear feet or more.
         (C)   Enhanced paving for entrance driveways. Paving treatment using
patterned and/or colored pavers, brick, or decorative colored and/or scored
concrete shall be used for entrance driveways, a minimum of 12 feet in length,
and spanning the width of the entrance driveway.
         (D)   Vehicle light intrusion. Vehicle headlights shall be obstructed
from direct alignment with habitable interior spaces with a minimum three-foot
evergreen shrub or vine and/or features such as fencing or walls.
      (2)   Pedestrian circulation and access. Pedestrian walkways shall be
provided with a minimum of four feet along their entire length, to provide
connections within the site and across the site.
         (A)   Pedestrian walkways shall connect residential dwelling units to
areas throughout the site, such as vehicle parking areas, bicycle parking
areas, common open space, waste and recycling enclosures, and other amenities.
         (B)   Pedestrian walkways shall connect public sidewalks, building
entrances, and vehicle parking areas.
         (C)   Pedestrian walkways shall connect building entrances and vehicle
parking areas through the site interior to all transit stops directly adjacent
to the site.
         (D)   Through lot connection. Through lots located more than 300 feet
from a street intersection, measured from the closest point of the lot, shall
provide a publicly accessible sidewalk or walkway connecting the two streets.
         (E)   Materials. Walkways shall be constructed of firm, stable and
slip-resistant materials, such as poured-in-place concrete (including stamped
concrete), permeable paving, decomposed granite, or concrete pavers.
         (F)   Paving for pedestrian crossings. Where an intersection of
pedestrian and vehicle access exists, enhanced paving treatment using patterned
and/or colored pavers, brick, or decorative colored and scored concrete shall
be used. Pedestrian crossings shall feature enhanced paving a minimum width of
five feet and span the length of the intersecting drive area.
         (G)   Maintenance. Pedestrian walkways shall be maintained in good
condition for the life of the project and shall not be allowed to fall into
disrepair so as to constitute a nuisance or hazard to the public.
         (H)   Enhanced paving for building entrances. Primary building
entrances shall provide decorative and accent paving that contrast in color and
texture from the adjacent walkway paving. Grasscrete is prohibited.
      (3)   Residential open space. Multi-family and mixed-use residential
developments of ten residential units or more shall provide a minimum of 150
square feet per unit of residential open space. This requirement may be
provided through common open space (e.g. shared amenities such as a park,
children's playground, rooftop deck, or community pool), private open space
(e.g. a private balcony or front porch), or some combination thereof.
         (A)   Common open space. Projects shall provide common space according
to the standards below.
            i.   Minimum dimensions. Common open spaces shall provide a minimum
of 20 feet in all directions.
            ii.   At least 20% of the common open space shall be landscaped
with trees, shrubs, and other vegetation.
            iii.   Visibility. Common open space shall be located and arranged
to allow a clear line of sight into the space from pedestrian walkways on the
interior of the site.
         (B)   Private open space. Projects shall provide private space
according to the standards below.
            i.   Minimum dimensions. Private open spaces shall provide a
minimum of six feet in all directions.
            ii.   Screening. Where private recreational space (such as a
balcony or ground floor patio) is located within 15 feet of a window of an
adjacent dwelling unit, railings, walls, and fencing shall be constructed with
wood, metal, or glazing. Screening shall be constructed to fully screen and
have a minimum screen height of 6' in height (measured from the finished floor
of the private recreational space to the top of the railing, fencing, or
walls).
      (4)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 21.66, Landscaping, of this Title and applicable state mandates, such
as the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (Title 24, Part 11, Chapter 4
Section CalGreen Building Code). Projects shall provide a minimum of 20% of the
lot size in landscape coverage.
         (A)   Plant selection. Plant materials are limited to native or non-
invasive drought-tolerant species. Artificial or synthetic plants, except for
turf, are prohibited. Artificial turf is not permitted in front or street side
setbacks.
         (B)   Pedestrian walkways. Pedestrian walkways shall be flanked on
both sides with landscaping, and may include a mix of turf, groundcover, and
shrubs. Both sides of walkways shall provide trees which shall be spaced to
shade at least 25% of the overall walkway length at maturity.
         (C)   Number of plants. A minimum of one 15-gallon tree or equivalent
box size and ten five-gallon shrubs shall be planted for every 1,000 square
feet of required landscape area.
         (D)   Groundcover. Groundcover shall be sized and located to cover at
least 50% of all landscape areas that are not planted with shrubs or trees
within five years of installation. While groundcovers and shrubs are
establishing, a minimum layer of three-inch bark mulch or decorative gravel
shall be placed within all landscape areas to provide 100% coverage of such
landscape areas.
   (c)   Building design. Topics in this chapter include building massing and
form, façade articulation, roof forms, building and unit entrances,
fenestration, parking structure design, and building materials and colors.
      (1)   Building form, massing, and articulation.
         (A)   Building form and vertical hierarchy. Buildings that are three
stories or more in height shall be designed to differentiate between a defined
base; a middle or body; and a top, cornice, or parapet cap. Buildings two
stories or less shall include a defined base and a top, cornice, or parapet
cap. All buildings shall achieve this effect through at least two of the
following:
            i.   Color, texture, or material changes.
            ii.   Variations, projections, or reveals in the wall plane.
            iii.   Variations in fenestration size or pattern.
            iv.   Decorative architectural details, such as cornices and
columns.
         (B)   Wall plane variation. Building façades visible from the primary
street shall not extend more than 40 feet in length without either an
architectural element or a two-foot variation in depth in the wall plane.
Building entrances, front porches, upper-story setbacks, projections, and
recessions, such as stoops, bay windows, overhangs, and trellises, count
towards this requirement.
         (C)   All-sided architecture. Buildings shall be designed and
articulated with common details, articulation, materials, and elements on all
facades.
         (D)   Corner lots. Buildings located on corner lots shall include one
or more of the following features on both street-facing facades, located within
25 feet of the corner of the building closest to the intersection:
            i.   An entrance to a ground-floor use or a primary building
entrance.
            ii.   A different material application, color, or fenestration
pattern of windows and doors from the rest of the façade.
            iii.   A change in height of at least 18 inches from the height of
the abutting façade.
         (E)   Roof line variation. Roof lines shall not extend more than a
length of 40 feet without at least one prominent change as described below:
            i.   Variation in roof form, such as hip, mansard, gable, shed, and
flat with parapet.
            ii.   Variation in architectural elements, such as parapets or
varying cornices.
            iii.   Variation of roof height of at least 18 inches (as measured
from the highest point of each roof line).
         (F)   Flat roofs and parapets.
            i.   Where rooftop equipment is located within ten feet of a roof
edge, a parapet shall be provided that is a minimum of six inches taller than
all roof-top equipment, unless other screening solutions are provided.
            ii.   Interior side of parapet walls shall not be visible from a
common open space or public right-of-way.
            iii.   Parapets shall be capped with precast treatment, continuous
banding, projecting cornices, dentils, or similar edge treatment.
      (2)   Building and individual dwelling unit entrances. Buildings should
provide a combination of primary building entrances which connects to a lobby,
hallway, or corridor that serves multiple residential units or non-residential
tenants; and entrances to individual dwelling units.
         (A)   Visibility of entrances. At least one primary building entrance
or individual unit entrance shall be visible from every front lot line and
street side lot line.
         (B)   Primary building entrance. A primary building entrance shall be
located on the ground floor within 20 feet of a primary street right-of-way.
Additionally, a primary building entrance shall incorporate at least two of the
following:
            i.   Entrance flanked by columns, decorative fixtures, or other
similar elements.
            ii.   Entrance recessed within a large arch or cased decorative
opening.
            iii.   Entrance emphasized by a change in roofline of at least 12
inches, or a tower or similar break in the wall façade.
            iv.   Entrance covered by a large portico projecting at least six
feet from the wall façade.
            v.   Entrance covered by an awning.
         (C)   Individual dwelling unit entrance.
            i.   General requirement. All individual unit entrances shall have
either a projected sheltering element or be recessed from the main facade; the
projection or recess shall have a minimum depth of 24 inches.
            ii.   Visibility. All individual unit entrances shall be
illuminated or shall face towards a common area or public street.
            iii.   Street-facing unit entrance. Each dwelling unit located
within 20 feet of a primary street right-of-way shall include at least one
street-facing porch, balcony, or patio unless a setback of five feet or less is
provided.
            iv.   Upper-floor unit entrance. Exterior entrances to individual
dwelling units on upper floors are permitted.
      (3)   Windows and doors.
         (A)   Location. Windows and doors shall be located so they do not
directly align horizontally with windows and doors of adjacent dwelling units.
         (B)   Privacy. Where windows are proposed within 15 feet of a window
on another building, the design and placement shall avoid unfiltered/direct
views into the adjacent site and shall be designed with one or more of the
following:
            i.   Use non-transparent or obscured glazing, such as frosted/
patterned glass. Reflective glazing is not permitted.
            ii.   Provide permanent architectural screens or affixed louvers at
windows.
            iii.   Offset windows horizontally at least 12 inches from any
windows in adjacent buildings (edge to edge), so as not to have a direct line-
of-sight into adjacent units.
            iv.   Window shall be placed 6' above finished floor.
         (C)   Window treatment.
            i.   Windows shall either be recessed at least three inches from
the plane of the surrounding exterior wall or shall have a trim or windowsill
at least one-half inch in depth.
            ii.   Windows facing a public street. Windows facing a public
street shall feature enhanced window treatments, such as decorative
architectural brackets, trim, shutters, awnings, and/or trellises.
            iii.   Window shutters. Exterior window shutters, when used, shall
match the size and shape of adjacent window openings.
      (4)   Materials and colors.
         (A)   Wall material. The primary exterior siding material for
buildings shall be wood, composite wood, stone, stone veneer, granite, slate,
brick, brick veneer, stucco, plaster, fiber cement, vinyl, aluminum, or steel.
The use of exposed plywood or glass curtain walls is prohibited.
         (B)   Window consistency. Window frame materials, color, and trim
shall be used on all elevations.
         (C)   Material and color transition. Changes in material or color
shall occur at inside corners of intersecting walls or at architectural
features that break up the wall plane, such as columns.
         (D)   Accent material. Use of two or more accent materials, such as
glass, tile, brick, stone, concrete, or plaster, shall be incorporated to
highlight building features.
         (E)   Affordable units and market rate units in the same development
shall be constructed of the same exterior materials and details such that the
units are not distinguishable from one another in quality and detail.
      (5)   Garages and carports. The sections below address garages and
carports. Parking requirements are contained in Section 21.68.
         (A)   Garages.
            i.   Garage doors shall be recessed a minimum of six inches from
the surrounding wall plane.
            ii.   Garage doors shall not occupy more than 50% of the width of
any building façade when facing the public-right-of-way. This limitation does
not apply to detached garages located in the rear half of a lot.
            iii.   Garages shall feature at least one of the following
treatments:
               a.   Garage door windows.
               b.   Paneled garage door surface.
               c.   Two different colors.
         (B)   Carports. Carports shall incorporate the same colors and
materials as the primary residential or mixed-use building design.
   (d)   Mixed-use standards. The following standards shall be implemented by
mixed-use projects in addition to the standards in the previous section, Site
Design. Topics in this chapter specifically remedy potential conflicts and
considerations derived from the integration of various uses. The following
standards are broken into vertical mixed-use and horizontal mixed-use; all
standards apply to structures that contain both vertical and horizontal mixed-
uses.
      (1)   Ground floor height. The ground floor of a mixed-use building shall
have a minimum floor height of 12 feet, measured from finished ground floor to
the bottom of the finished second floor.
      (2)   Ground floor transparency. Exterior walls facing a public street
shall include transparent windows and doors for at least 50% of the building
wall area located between three and seven feet above the elevation of the
sidewalk. Parking garages are not required to meet the ground floor
transparency requirement.
      (3)   Street-facing setbacks. Street-facing setbacks shall be landscaped
and/or prepared for use by pedestrians. The setback area on each lot shall
contain at least two amenities per 50 linear feet, such as benches, drinking
fountains, shade structure, or other design element (e.g., public art,
planters, kiosks, etc.).
      (4)   Street-facing entrance. Mixed-use buildings located within 20 feet
of a primary street right-of-way shall incorporate at least one primary
building entrance directly from the public sidewalk or right-of-way. The
primary building entrance shall include weather protection that is a minimum
six feet wide and four feet deep by recessing the entrance or providing an
awning or similar weather protection element.
         (A)   Product display windows. The bottom of any product display
window shall be between 18 to 36 inches in height, measured from the height of
the sidewalk. Product display windows shall be internally lit.
         (B)   Ground floor pedestrian scale. Mixed-use building facades
located adjacent to the primary street shall provide two of the following for
every 40 feet in façade length:
            i.   An awning, canopy, or other shade/weather protection structure
a minimum of ten feet in height.
               a.   If provided as one continuous awning, canopy, or other
shade/weather protection structure, the structure shall extend a minimum of ten
feet in length.
               b.   If provided as multiple awnings, canopies, or other shade/
weather protection structures, the structure shall be provided at a minimum
over every window.
            ii.   A change in exterior wall material, consistent with Section
D. Materials and Colors of this Chapter (21.80.030(D)).
            iii.   Planter boxes located under each window or on either side of
entry doors, each a minimum of four feet in length.
   (e)   Utilitarian elements. The following standards relate to the
operational fixtures and structures of multi-family residential and mixed-use
buildings.
      (1)   Bicycle parking. A minimum of one long-term bicycle parking space
shall be provided for every unit for multiple-unit residential and group
residential projects, and a minimum of one bicycle parking space shall be
provided for every 1,000 square feet of non-residential space. A minimum of
five bicycle parking spaces provided per establishment.
         A.   Location. Enclosed, fenced, covered, or locked bicycle storage
areas are strongly encouraged for multi-family and mixed-use developments.
Bicycle parking shall be located outside of the public right-of-way when
feasible, must not encroach upon pedestrian walkways, and must be within 100
feet of a main entrance to the use it serves.
         B.   Anchoring and security. For each bicycle parking space required,
a stationary, securely anchored object must be provided to which a bicycle
frame and one wheel can be secured with a high-security lock if both wheels are
left on the bicycle. One such object may serve multiple bicycle parking spaces.
         C.   Size and accessibility. Each short-term bicycle parking space
must be a minimum of two feet in width and six feet in length and must be
accessible without moving another bicycle. Two feet of clearance must be
provided between bicycle parking spaces and adjacent walls, poles, landscaping,
street furniture, drive aisles, and pedestrian ways and at least five feet from
vehicle parking spaces.
      (2)   Trash, recycling, and green waste container enclosures. Enclosures
for recycling, green waste, and any other waste containers required by law are
required for multi-family and mixed-use developments, and shall comply with the
provisions of Section
21.72.070, of this Title and City Hauler Requirements. Enclosures shall be
located within a building, incorporated into the exterior building design, or
located within a detached enclosure designed and placed as follows:
         A.   Location. The enclosure shall be located to the rear or side of
the building(s) and located outside of view from a public right-of-way.
         B.   Materials. The enclosure shall incorporate the materials and
colors of the primary residential or mixed-use building design.
      (3)   Fences and walls. Fences and walls shall comply with the provisions
of Chapter
21.62, Fences and Walls, of this Title.
         A.   Fences and walls shall be designed with the same materials and
colors as the primary residential or mixed-use building(s).
         B.   Where fences and walls of different materials or finishes
intersect, a natural transition or break, such as a column or pilaster, shall
be provided.
      (4)   Lighting. Outdoor light fixtures, including pole lights, wall-
mounted lights and bollards shall be fully-shielded and downward-facing in
order to minimize glare and light trespass within and beyond the project site.
         A.   The maximum height of freestanding outdoor light fixtures is 16
feet; within 15 feet of an adjacent property line, the maximum height of
freestanding outdoor light fixtures is 12 feet.
         B.   All areas for pedestrian and vehicular circulation, entrances,
parking, and common recreational spaces shall incorporate lighting programmed
with dusk to dawn lighting for safety and security.
         C.   Energy-efficient fixtures incorporating light emitting diode
(LED) lamps or equivalent energy-efficient fixtures shall be used.
      (4)   Equipment and utility screening. In-ground and wall-mounted utility
elements such as but not limited to all mechanical units, air conditioning
units, wires, conduits, junction boxes, transformers, ballast, backflow
devices, irrigation controllers, switch and panel boxes, and utilities such as
gas and electrical meters shall be concealed from public view with screening by
physical elements incorporating the materials and colors of the primary
building design. Landscape screening with evergreen plants may be planted to
completely conceal the equipment or utility.
      (5)   Vents and exhaust. All wall-mounted vent and exhaust elements shall
be located at interior corners of building walls or behind building elements
that conceal them from public view. All flashing, sheet metal vents, exhaust
fans or ventilators, and pipe stacks shall be painted a color to match the
adjacent roof or wall material.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.18.100 Exterior mechanical equipment.
   (a) Applicability. These provisions shall apply to the installation of any
mechanical or similar equipment attached to the exterior or roof of a
residential structure, including but not limited to air conditioning and/or
filtration units, water heater,, windmills, utility lines, and piping, whether
installed during original construction or as a retrofit.
   (b)   Community Development Director Review Required. No building or other
similar permit for the installation of any exterior mechanical or similar
equipment, excluding solar energy systems, shall be issued until the community
development director or designee has reviewed and approved an exterior
mechanical equipment plan pursuant to
Chapter 21.96 of this title.
   (c)   Plan Requirements. A fully dimensioned plan for proposed exterior
mechanical equipment shall be submitted to the community development director
indicating, at a minimum:
      (1)   Lot dimensions;
      (2)   All buildings and structures, existing and proposed, on the site;
      (3)   Location of doors;
      (4)   Location, height, and materials of walls, fences, and landscaping;
and
      (5)   Location and dimensions of equipment to be installed and, when
possible, photographs or renderings of the proposed equipment.
   (d)   Limitations. The following limitations shall apply to mechanical or
similar equipment:
      (1)   Air conditioners, water heaters, swamp colors, heat exchangers, and
the like shall not be mounted to the roof of any structure. Notwithstanding
this, existing equipment that has been legally installed to the roof of a
structure may be replaced, provided the new equipment does not exceed the
volume area of the permitted equipment being replaced;
      (2)   Mechanical equipment shall not be located within a front yard
setback and shall be located at least five feet from any other property line,
except for rear property lines that abuts an alley;
      (3)   Mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from any public
right-of-way, alley, and adjoining property;
Figure 21.18.050
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5396.jpg]
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.18.110 Additional standards for residential districts.
   (a) Fences and walls.
      (1)   Where a multi-unit residential development abuts any R-1 zone, a
minimum six-foot-high decorative masonry wall shall be constructed along the
lot line between the multi-unit development and R-1 zone.
      (2)   Chapter
21.62 of this title establishes all other regulations applicable to fences and
walls.
   (b)   Open Space - How Calculated. Open space shall be calculated as the
total area on a lot remaining after the following areas have been deducted:
      (1)   That portion of the lot covered by buildings and other structures,
as defined in Section
21.200.130;
      (2)   All areas used to provide parking spaces and access to any parking
space (e.g. driveways);
      (3)   All area included in a required front yard;
      (4)   Any ground area having a ground slope greater than ten percent; and
      (5)   Any open area having a width or depth or height of less than ten
feet.
   (c)   Family day care homes, small and large, shall comply with the
following applicable standards:
      (1)   Operators of either a small or large family day care home shall
maintain a valid license issued by the Los Angeles County Department of Social
Services.
      (2)   Operators of either a small or large family day care home that are
not the owner of record of the property on which the use is being conducted
shall obtain property owner authorization in writing prior to commencing the
use.
      (3)   Family day care homes, small and large, shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the State of California Health and Safety Code.
      (4)   Family day care homes, small and large, shall not generate noise
that exceeds the noise standards contained in Section
21.70.080 (“Noise and Vibration”) of Title 21 of the city’s Municipal Code and
shall also comply with Chapter 9.04 (“Noise - Disorderly Conduct”) of Title 9
of the city's Municipal Code.
      (5)   Family day care homes, small and large, shall not have publicly
visible signs identifying or advertising the use.
      (6)   Small family day care homes shall be permitted by right and shall
conform to the zoning standards in which they are located.
      (7)   Small family day care homes shall not be required to obtain a city
business license.
      (8)   In addition to the above, operators of large family day care homes
shall be required to obtain a large family day care home permit (LDC) in
accordance with Chapter
21.103 of this Title.
   (d)   Other Applicable Regulations. The following chapters of this title
apply to all development in residential zones:
      
21.42   Accessory uses
      
21.46   Antennas and wireless communications facilities
      
21.50   Recycling facilities
      
21.60   Accessory structures
      
21.64   Height measurements and exceptions
      
21.66   Landscaping
      
21.68   Parking and loading
      
21.72   Property maintenance
      
21.76   Signs
      
21.78   Yard requirements and exceptions
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 651, § 7, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
Chapter 21.20
COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
Sections:
   
21.20.010   District purposes.
   
21.20.020   Permitted land uses.
   
21.20.040   Limitation on bars in the C-1 and C-4 districts.
   
21.20.050   Development standards.
   
21.20.055   Drive-through facility standards.
   
21.20.057   Micro-brewery standards.
   
21.20.060   Outdoor storage and display.
   
21.20.070   Screening of mechanical equipment.
   
21.20.080   Screening of trash enclosures.
   
21.20.090   Utilities.
   
21.20.100   Other applicable regulations.
21.20.010 District purposes.
Four commercial zoning districts are established to implement the commercial
(C) land use designation of the general plan. Commercial zoning districts are
as follows:
   (1)   Administrative office district (C-O). The CO district provides areas
suitable for the location of offices for professional services - including
medical and dental services - and for business activities which involve a
relatively low volume of direct consumer contact.
   (2)   Neighborhood commercial (C-1) district. The C-1 district provides
areas suitable for low-intensity retail and service commercial activities
oriented to serving nearby residential areas. Typical uses include small
pedestrian-oriented commercial activities that have minimal impact on adjacent
uses through application of good site design, access and parking arrangements,
landscaping, and lighting standards.
   (3)   General commercial (C-4) district. The C-4 district provides areas
appropriate for a wide range of retail and service uses to meet the present and
prospective needs of the community as a whole. Regulations are intended to
prevent the impairment of safe and efficient movement of traffic and to
encourage attractive development that is compatible with adjacent residential
land uses.
   (4)   Freeway commercial (C-F) district. The C-F district provides areas
appropriate for intense regional-serving commercial and business uses abutting
freeways. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.20.020 Permitted land uses.
Table 21.20.020 identifies permitted uses, permitted accessory uses, uses
permitted subject to conditional use permit approval, and uses prohibited in
all commercial zoning districts, subject to compliance with all other
provisions of this title. Uses not listed in Table 21.20.020 are prohibited.
Chapter
21.42  contains additional regulations regarding accessory uses.
Table 21.20.020
Permitted Uses in Commercial Zoning Districts11
Table 21.20.020
Permitted Uses in Commercial Zoning Districts11
Use                                                                           C-O  C-1 C-4  C-F
                                                                                       (1)
                                                                              See Article VI,
Adult entertainment business                                                  Chapter
                                                                              21.44
Antique shop (see also secondhand store)                                      X    P   CUP  X
Arcades, including centers with computer terminals for entertainment          X    CUP CUP  CUP
( internet cafes )
Art gallery                                                                   X    P   X    P
Artist studio                                                                 X    P   X    X
Astrology/fortune telling                                                     X    P   P    X
Auction house                                                                 X    X   CUP  X
Automotive and large equipment sales and services:
   a.   Automotive sales, rental, and leasing (new and used)            X    X   CUP  CUP
   b.   Automotive repair/installation (excludes body and paint)        X    CUP CUP  CUP
   c.   Automotive storage (including RVs, no dismantling or sales)     X    X   CUP  X
Automotive and large equipment sales and services: (Cont.)
   d.   Heavy equipment rental and sales (trucks, construction)         X    X   CUP  CUP
   e.   Large equipment repair (includes auto body repair and painting) X    X   CUP  X
Banks and financial services                                                  P    P   P    A
Banquet halls                                                                 X    CUP X    X
Bars6                                                                         X    CUP CUP  X
Boat sales (new or used)                                                      X    X   X    CUP
Book stores                                                                   X    P   P    P
Business support services (blueprinting, computer-services, film processing,  P    P   P    P
equipment rental, etc.)
Caretaker housing2                                                            A    A   A    A
Check cashing businesses3                                                     X    CUP CUP  X
Church, temple, synagogue, mosque, or other places of worship or similar      CUP  CUP CUP  X
gathering place
Commercial entertainment:
   a.   Indoor (motion picture theaters, performing arts, dance halls)  X    CUP P    CUP
   b.   Outdoor (amphitheaters, sports arenas, drive- in motion picture X    X   CUP  CUP
theaters)
Commercial recreation:
   a.   Indoor (batting cages, billiard, bowling alley, etc.)           X    X   CUP  CUP
   b.   Outdoor (batting cages, water parks, golf courses, etc.)        X    X   CUP  CUP
Community center/recreational facility (public)                               P    P   X    CUP
Community service facility and/or utility                                     P4   P4  X    P4
Day care facility - child or adult                                            CUP3 CUP CUP  X
Drive-through facility                                                        X    CUP CUP  CUP
Drug store/pharmacy                                                           A3   P   P    X
Dwelling units, higher education and faith-based properties                   See
                                                                              Chapter 21.53
Equipment sales, rental, or repair (excludes automotive and large equipment)  X    P   P    P
Gun shop (including accessory sale of firearms)                               X    X   CUP  CUP
Food and beverage sales:
   a.   Grocery store (includes large, full-service markets)            X    P   P    CUP
   b.   Specialty store (deli, butcher, coffee, bakery, produce)        P    P   P    P
   c.   Convenience store (includes smaller stores for retail sales of  CUP  CUP CUP  CUP
convenience items)
Health/fitness club                                                           A3   CUP P    CUP
Home improvement sales and services, including hardware stores                X    P   P    P
Horse stables - commercial                                                    X    X   X    X
Hospital/medical services:
   a.   General hospital facilities (primarily inpatient)               P    X   CUP  CUP
   b.   Medical/dental offices (see Section 21.20.030)                  P    P   P    P
   c.   Laboratory and research/development facilities                  P    CUP CUP  X
   d.   Emergency medical (exclusive of continuing care)                CUP  X   X    X
   e.   Psychiatric hospital services (primarily inpatient)             P    X   X    X
   f.   Ambulance service                                               CUP  X   X    X
   g.   Medical clinic (including urgent care)                          CUP  X   CUP  X
   h.   Alternative medicine clinic/office                              CUP  X   CUP  X
Hotel/motel                                                                   X    X   CUP  CUP
Karaoke/Music Studios and combination thereof                                 X    X   CUP  CUP
Kennel                                                                        X    CUP CUP  X
Laundry, self-service                                                         CUP  CUP X    X
Liquor stores6                                                                X    CUP CUP  X
Long-term residential care facility (licensed by the state for medical        X    X   X    X
supervision on a 24-hour basis)
Lumber and building material yards                                            X    X   CUP  X
Massage establishment(12)                                                     CUP  X   CUP  CUP
Micro-brewery - ancillary to bona fide restaurant13                           X    X   P/CU P/
                                                                                       P    CUP
Micro-brewery - stand-alone13                                                 X    X   X    CUP
Museum                                                                        X    P   X    P
Nursery and garden centers                                                    X    P   P    CUP
Office - business and professional                                            P    P   P    P
Parking structure (public or private)                                         CUP  X   CUP  CUP
Pawn shop                                                                     X    X   CUP  X
Performing arts center                                                        X    CUP P    P
Personal services (barber shops, beauty salons/spas, tailors, dry cleaning,
self-service laundry, travel agencies, electrolysis, acupuncture/acupressure  A3   P   P    X
and the like)
See Section 21.20.040
Pet store (including sales and grooming, but not boarding)                    X    P   P    P
Public and private non-profit clubs, lodges, meeting halls                    X    CUP CUP  X
Research and Development                                                      X    X   X    CUP
Restaurants and bars:
   a.   Restaurant with no alcohol sales                                P    P7  P7   P
   b.   Restaurant with alcohol sales6                                  CUP  CUP CUP  CUP
   c.   Night clubs and discotheques5                                   X    X   X    X
Retail sales                                                                  P    P8  P    P
                                                                              See Article VI,
Recycling facilities                                                          Chapter
                                                                              21.50
Schools:
   a.   College, university, professional                               CUP  CUP X    X
   b.   Elementary and secondary (private)                              CUP3 CUP X    X
   c.   Vocational (specialized trade)                                  P    CUP CUP  CUP
   d.   Specialty (non-degree such as language, dance)                  P    P   CUP  CUP
Secondhand store                                                              X    CUP CUP  X
Service station                                                               X    CUP CUP  CUP
Self-storage facility (mini-warehouse)                                        X    X   CUP  X
Tobacco retail businesses6                                                    CUP  X   CUP  CUP
Tanning salon                                                                 X    CUP X    X
Tattoo parlor                                                                 X    CUP X    X
Veterinary services (clinic and hospital, may include accessory grooming and  CUP  CUP CUP  X
boarding)
Warehouse                                                                     A3   X   CUP3 A
                                                                              See Article VI,
Wireless communications facilities                                            Chapter
                                                                              21.46
 
P = Permitted; CUP = Conditional Use Permit required; A = Accessory; X = Not
Permitted
Notes:
1.   For any commercial business in the C-4 zone located within 50 feet of any
residentially zoned property, the hours of business operation shall be limited
to between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
2.   Caretaker housing is permanent or temporary housing accessory to the
primary use for caretakers or others employed for the purpose of site security
and/or monitoring of facilities. A maximum of one caretaker housing is
permitted for each commercial property. Additional units may be granted with a
conditional use permit.
3.   Subject to requirements set forth for such uses in Article VI.
4.   Any community service facility or utility directly abutting residential
property and which has the potential to cause off-site impacts (e.g., noise,
odor) beyond the property line shall require approval of a conditional use
permit.
5.   Such uses may be permitted as accessory to a permitted restaurant,
provided a conditional use permit is granted.
6.   Alcoholic beverage sales stores, bars, liquor stores, or tobacco retail
business shall not be located within 600 feet of any public or private school,
church, temple, or park, nor shall any bar, liquor store, or tobacco retail
business be located within 100 feet of any residential zone, nor within 500
feet of any bar or other liquor store, or other tobacco retail business,
respectively.
7.   A conditional use permit is required if the proposed restaurant is
freestanding with less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area and/or
includes a drive-through facility and/or includes outdoor dining.
8.   Permitted with a maximum gross floor area of 2,500 square feet. A
conditional use permit is required for a larger facility.
9.   Karaoke/music studio and combination thereof means any business selling or
offering to provide full karaoke services in conjunction with music studio
services either separately or combination thereof and similar type operations
as determined by the Planning Division.
10.   Research and development of high reliability/technology electrical and
electric components and subsystems, including manufacturing, testing and
assembly for military, aerospace and/or government systems.
11.   Any expansion or intensification of a use previously granted a CUP shall
require the filing of a new CUP application.
12.   Shall comply with applicable provisions of Chapter 4.10, Title 4 of the
La Mirada Municipal Code.
13.   Shall comply with applicable provisions of Section 21.20.057.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 728. § 7, 2023; Ord. 682, § 6, 2016; Ord.
652, § 7, 2012; Ord. 624 §§ 5, 6, 2008; Ord. 618 § 4, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A
(part), 2008).
21.20.040 Limitation on bars in the C-1 and C-4 districts.
Notwithstanding the use provisions specified in Section
21.20.020 , within commercial shopping center in the C-1 or C-4 zoning
district, the total gross building floor area utilized as a bar or bar-related
use shall not exceed fifteen percent of the total gross building floor area of
the commercial development. The community development director shall have the
authority to determine whether an individual parcel is part of a shopping
center. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.20.050 Development standards.
Table 21.20.050 sets forth the minimum development standards for commercial
development in each commercial zoning district. These standards shall be used
for the land use and development permitting process(s) as criteria for project
review.
Table 21.20.050
Commercial Development Standards
Development Standard C-O C-1 C-4 C-F
Table 21.20.050
Commercial Development Standards
Development Standard       C-O      C-1      C-4      C-F
Setback - minimum:
   Front yard           10 ft.   10 ft.   50 ft.   50 ft.
   Street side yard     10 ft.   10 ft.   0 ft.    20 ft.
   Side yard (interior) 5 ft.(1) 5 ft.(1) 0 ft.(1) 10 ft.
   Rear yard            10 ft.   10 ft.   0 ft.    20 ft.
Building height - maximum  50 ft.2  25 ft.2  35 ft.2  6 stories
Lot coverage - maximum     50%      50%      50%      N/A
Floor-area ratio - maximum 1.0      0.40     1.0      2.0
 
Notes:
1.   Where the property abuts residential property, a minimum 10-foot setback
distance is required.
2.   Where the property is within 50 feet of a residential property, the
maximum building height is 35 feet.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.20.055 Drive-through facility standards.
In addition to the definition provided in Section
21.200.050  of this code, “drive-through facilities” shall include restaurants,
banking institutions with drive-up teller/ATM access, pharmacies, and other
facilities with drive-through aisle service. Drive-through facilities shall be
subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, and shall be developed/
operated in the following manner:
   1.   Pedestrian walkways that intersect drive-through drive aisles shall
provide clear pedestrian visibility, and they shall be emphasized by enriched
paving, striping and signage.
   2.   Drive-through aisles shall have a minimum twelve-foot width and a
minimum ten-foot interior radius at curves. Also, each entrance to an aisle and
the direction of flow shall be clearly designated by signs/pavement marking(s)
or raised curbs.
   3.   Drive-through aisles shall be constructed with (PCC) concrete, or other
approved decorative material.
   4.   Drive-through aisles shall not obstruct on-site or off-site
circulation.
   5.   The minimum number of vehicle stacking/queuing spaces in the drive-
through aisle shall comply with the table below. A vehicle stacking/queuing
analysis, as prepared by a qualified consultant, may be required by the city as
part of a conditional use permit to determine the stacking/queuing spaces
required in addition to the minimum.
Type of Drive-Through Minimum Stacking/Queuing Spaces* Measured From
Type of Drive-Through Minimum Stacking/Queuing Measured From
                      Spaces*
Bank teller lane      4                        Teller or window
Automated teller lane 4                        Teller
Restaurant/café      6                        Order box to pick-up window
                      1                        Before order box
Pharmacy              4                        Drop-off/pick-up window
Dry cleaner           4                        Drop-off/pick-up window
Other                 As determined by the community development director
*Stacking/queuing spaces shall measure 20 ft. each minimum
 
   6.   Access to drive-through aisles shall be separated by at least ten feet
from any other driveways (i.e., access driveways to parking lots, alleys, and
the like).
   7.   Circulation to drive-through aisle entrances shall be designed so that
any overflow stacking/queuing occurs on the subject site without impacting the
public right-of way.
   8.   The provision of drive-through service facilities shall not justify a
reduction in the number of required off-street parking spaces.
   9.   All service areas and ground-mounted and roof-mounted mechanical
equipment shall be screened from public view.
   10.   Landscaping and a minimum three-foot-tall garden wall, along the
outside edge of the drive-through aisle, shall be used to screen the drive-
through aisle from any public right-of-way, and shall be used to minimize the
visual impact of menu boards and/or directional signs. To reduce the impact on
adjacent sensitive uses, the height of the garden wall shall be increased to
four feet when the headlights of vehicles traveling through the drive-through
aisle will be directed toward residential zones/uses.
   11.   Menu boards shall not exceed forty square feet in area, with a maximum
height of six feet, and shall be screened from the public right-of-way, to the
fullest extent possible.
   12.   Outdoor speakers shall be located a minimum of fifty feet from any
residential zoning district/use; this distance may be reduced if the director
of community development determines that sufficient noise and light impact
mitigation measures are employed. Use of visual feedback systems that do not
have a speaker are encouraged.
   13.   Pick-up windows, order areas, drive-through aisles, and any outdoor
seating areas shall be oriented so as to minimize potential noise impacts to
adjacent residential zoning districts/uses.
   14.   Drive-through facilities within an integrated shopping center shall
have an architectural style consistent with the theme established in the
center.
   15.   The architecture of drive-through facilities shall be compatible with
surrounding uses in terms of form, materials, color, scale, and the like.
Structure plans shall have variation in depth and angle to create variety and
interest in its basic form and silhouette. Articulation of structure surface
shall be encouraged through the use of openings and recesses that create
texture and shadow patterns. Structure entrances shall be well articulated and
project a formal entrance through variation of architectural plane, pavement
surface treatment, and landscape plaza(s).
   16.   The premises shall be kept in a neat, clean and orderly condition at
all times.
   17.   Restaurants with drive-through service shall not sell or serve
alcohol.
   18.   Every drive-through establishment shall have trash receptacle(s) on
the premises in compliance with Sections
21.20.080 and
21.22.070 of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
   19.   A six-foot-high, solid decorative masonry wall shall be constructed on
each property line that abuts a residential zoning district/use. The design of
the wall and the proposed construction materials shall be subject to the
approval of the planning division.
   20.   Drive-through establishments, including all sound equipment, must be
operated in compliance with Section
21.70.080 (Noise and vibration) of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 723 § 5, 2022; Ord. 624 § 7, 2008).
21.20.057 Micro-brewery standards. 
Micro-brewery means a facility that is used to produce beer in accordance with
a valid alcohol production license from the State of California. A micro-
brewery shall be limited to brewing no more than 15,000 barrels of beer per
year and shall be established and operated in compliance with the following
applicable standards.
   1.   Micro-brewery - ancillary to a bona fide restaurant, shall be a brewery
operation that is secondary to a restaurant, where the primary business
operation is the on-site preparation and serving of food for consumption on the
premises. A micro-brewery - ancillary to a bona fide restaurant, shall be
subject to the following:
      a.   An existing restaurant with a valid Conditional Use Permit (CUP) and
California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC) License for the on-
sale of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to add a micro-brewery operation
to the existing restaurant operations as an ancillary use without having to
obtain a new CUP or amend the existing CUP.
      b.   An existing or new restaurant without a valid CUP or ABC License for
the on-sale of alcoholic beverages shall obtain the approval of a CUP before
being permitted to have a micro-brewery operation that is ancillary to the
restaurant use.
      c.   Brewing equipment (e.g., grain silo or other equipment) may be
located outside of the building serving the micro-brewery use provided it is
not located in any required parking space, access way, or visible from the
public right-of-way. Any exposed brewing equipment, including roof-mounted
equipment, shall be screened in a manner that complements the exterior design/
architecture of the subject building.
      d.   The retail sale of products brewed on the premises for off-site
consumption shall be permitted.
      e.   A restaurant with a drive-through service window shall not be
permitted to have a micro-brewery operation.
   2.   Micro-brewery - Stand-alone, shall be a brewery operation that is
primarily engaged in the brewing of beer. A micro-brewery - stand-alone, shall
be subject to the following:
      a.   Review and approval of a CUP before initiating any micro-brewery
operations.
      b.   Brewing equipment (e.g., grain silo or other equipment) may be
located outside of the building serving the micro-brewery use provided it is
not located in any required parking space, access way, or visible from the
public right-of-way. Any exposed brewing equipment, including roof-mounted
equipment, shall be screened in a manner that compliments the exterior design/
architecture of the subject building.
      c.   On-site preparation of food shall be permitted indoors and outdoors.
      d.   Outside food vendors may be conditionally permitted when included as
part of an approved CUP.
      e.   Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between 10 a.m. and
11 p.m., Monday through Thursday, and the hours between 8 a.m. and 12 a.m. (the
following day), Friday through Sunday.
      f.   The retail sale of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption shall
be limited to beer brewed on the premises and wine only. On-site sales and
consumption shall not include fortified wines or distilled spirits.
      g.   The retail sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption
shall be limited to beer brewed on the premises only.
      h.   The wholesale and distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be
limited to beer brewed on the premises only. The wholesale and distribution of
wine and distilled spirits is prohibited.
      i.   Outdoor seating/patio area shall not occupy any required parking
spaces, or access ways; comply with ADA access requirements; consist of durable
well-maintained furnishings manufactured for outdoor use; and shall not include
any commercial signs visible from outside the outdoor seating/patio area.
      j.   Ancillary retail sales of merchandise shall be limited to items
directly associated with the micro-brewery. The area dedicated to the display
of merchandise shall not exceed 25% of the gross floor area.
      k.   Live entertainment, dancing, amplified music, or other entertainment
activities shall not occur on-site without issuance of applicable permits by
the City of La Mirada.
      l.   Facility tours, brewing classes, and the sale of brewing equipment
shall be permitted.
      m.   No admission fee, cover charge, or minimum purchase requirements
shall be imposed on any patrons. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 728, § 9,
2023)
21.20.060 Outdoor storage and display.
(a) Temporary Sales. Location of display area for temporary sales is to be
limited to those areas generally adjacent to the front building elevation of
the tenant space, and shall in no manner interfere with vehicle circulation and
required parking spaces. Display areas shall be designed to be viewed primarily
from on site rather than from the public right-of-way. Such temporary sales
activity shall require a temporary use permit pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 21.100.
   (b)   Outdoor Display Areas. The design of the outdoor display area and its
physical delineation shall place an emphasis on aesthetic and functional
integration into the site and building design. The physical limits of display
areas shall be clearly delineated through treatments such as decorative
pavement, decorative bollards, landscaped planters, or similar features. All
outdoor display areas shall be designed in a manner to allow free pedestrian
movement within and around their vicinity, including compliance with federal
ADA requirements.
   (c)   Pest Control. Where storage is permitted in accordance with this
title, materials, including wastes, shall be stored and grounds maintained in a
manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or
create a health hazard. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.20.070 Screening of mechanical equipment.
   (a)   Roof-mounted Mechanical Equipment. All roof-supported mechanical
equipment such as air conditioners, heating and ventilating systems, ducts,
cooling towers, solar equipment, and similar equipment shall be screened or
enclosed, as viewed from a public street or public alley. Screening materials
shall consist of materials architecturally compatible with the building for
which the equipment is provided.
   (b)   Air Conditioning/Filtration Units. All air conditioning and/or
filtration units shall be screened or enclosed in manner that is visually
compatible with the structure upon which it is located and installed and/or
designed such that no portion of the unit is visible from any public street or
adjoining lot. Units requiring approval of a building permit shall be subject
to zoning clearance (
Chapter 21.96). The community development director may impose conditions to
minimize noise, dust, and vibration and to ensure compatibility with
surrounding property. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.20.080 Screening of trash receptacles.
All trash receptacles and other refuse or waste storage shall be kept in an
enclosed building or within a trash enclosure area. Any such trash enclosure
area shall consist, at a minimum, of a three- sided, six-foot-high decorative
block or similar wall structure, with the fourth side comprised of a closable,
latchable solid gate
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5398.jpg]
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.20.090 Utilities.
   (a)   Utility lines, wastelines, vents, and other piping affixed to the
exterior of a building shall be structurally encased and screened from public
view with building materials that are similar in nature and color to that of
the permanent building. The developer or owner of a property shall be
responsible for utility service connections, in cooperation with the utility
company.
   (b)   All electrical, telephone, community antenna television and similar
service wires and cables that provide direct service to the property being
developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property be
installed underground, to the maximum extent permitted by law. The developer or
owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and he
or she shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the
installation of such facilities. When above-ground facilities are the only
feasible alternative, they should be sited as unobtrusively as possible. For
the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment including,
but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal
boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be
placed above ground with written approval of the public works director.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.20.100 Other applicable regulations.
   The following chapters of this title apply to all development in all
commercial zoning districts:
   
21.42   Accessory uses
   
21.44   Adult businesses
   
21.46   Antennas and wireless communications facilities
   
21.48   Commercial cannabis uses and cultivation
   
21.50   Recycling facilities
   
21.60   Accessory structures
   
21.62   Fences and walls
   
21.64   Height measurement and exceptions
   
21.66   Landscaping
   
21.68   Parking and loading
   
21.70   Performance standards
   
21.72   Property maintenance
   
21.76   Signs
   
21.78   Yard requirements and exceptions
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 700 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 612 Exhibit A
(part), 2008).
Chapter 21.22
INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.22.010   District purpose.
   
21.22.020   Permitted and prohibited land uses.
   
21.22.030   Development standards.
   
21.22.040   Screen wall.
   
21.22.050   Outdoor storage and display.
   
21.22.060   Screening of mechanical equipment.
   
21.22.070   Screening of trash enclosures.
   
21.22.080   Utilities.
   
21.22.090   Other applicable regulations.
21.22.010 District purpose.
The industrial (M-2) zoning district is established to provide areas
appropriate for a wide variety of industrial, manufacturing, and support uses.
The use and development regulations in this chapter are intended to ensure that
the appearance and effects of industrial uses are compatible with the character
of the area in which they are located, and to minimize any adverse impact of
industrial uses on nearby properties.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.020 Permitted and prohibited land uses.
   (a)   General. Table
21.22.020  identifies permitted uses, uses subject to conditional use permit
review and approval, permitted accessory uses, and prohibited uses, in the M-
2 zoning district, subject to compliance with all other provisions of this
title. Uses not listed in Table
21.22.020  are prohibited.
Chapter 21.42  contains additional regulations regarding accessory uses.
   (b)   Uses Specifically Prohibited. The following uses or classes of uses
are specifically prohibited in the M-2 zoning district:
      (1)   Livestock and poultry keeping, slaughtering, and rendering.
      (2)   Blast furnace, boiler works, foundry.
      (3)   Manufacture or bulk storage of acid, ammonia, explosives,
fertilizer, gypsum, lime, plaster of paris, or tallow.
      (4)   Tannery, fat rendering, distillation of bones.
      (5)   Any use involving the emission of gases or odorous matter in
quantities perceptible beyond the boundaries of the property on which such
materials are used or produced.
Table 21.22.020
Permitted Uses in M-2 Zoning District
Use M-2
Table 21.22.020
Permitted Uses in M-2 Zoning District
Use                                                            M-2
Adult entertainment business                                   See Article VI,
                                                               Chapter 21.44
Airport, heliport, aircraft landing field                      CUP
Automotive repairs/services (maintenance, body, paint, tire)   CUP
Bus and/or truck terminal                                      CUP
Business support services (blueprinting, computer-services,    P
film processing, equipment rental, etc.)
Caretaker housing1                                             A
Community center/recreation facility (public)                  P
Corporation yard                                               P
Drive-through facility                                         CUP
Equipment rental, sales, and repair (excludes automobile)      CUP
Hazardous materials handling2                                  CUP
Hotels/motels/banquet halls                                    CUP
Home improvement sales and services                            P
Junkyards, metal reclamation, auto wrecking                    X
Kennel                                                         CUP
Laboratories, research and development (excludes               P
manufacturing)
Laundry, commercial (cleaning plants, industrial laundries,    P
carpet and upholstery cleaners)
Liquor store4                                                  CUP
Lumber and building materials yard                             P
Machine shop, tin shop, sheet metal shop, welding, not         P
including a foundry
Manufacturing, processing, packaging, treatment, fabrication   P
plants3
Massage establishment                                          X
Micro-brewery - ancillary to bona fide restaurant8             P/CUP
Micro-brewery - stand-alone8                                   CUP
Office: business, professional, or administrative              P
Public and private non-profit clubs, lodges, and meeting halls CUP
Recreation facilities, commercial                              CUP
Recycling facilities                                           See Article VI,
                                                               Chapter 21.50
Rental equipment facilities                                    CUP
Restaurants and bars:
   a.   Bars                                             CUP
   b.   Restaurant with no alcohol sale                  P
   c.   Restaurant with alcohol sales                    CUP
   d.   Night clubs, discotheque, dance hall             X
Retail sales - as primary use6                                 CUP
Self-storage facility (mini-warehouse)                         CUP
Service station                                                CUP
Storage yard5                                                  CUP
Tobacco retail businesses4                                     CUP
Transitional housing7                                          CUP
Utility facility                                               P
Warehouse                                                      P
Wireless communication facility                                See Article VI,
                                                               Chapter 21.46
Woodworking shop, cabinet shop, carpenter shop                 P
 
Notes:
1.   Caretaker housing is permanent or temporary housing accessory to the
primary use for caretakers or others employed for the purpose of site security
and/or monitoring of facilities. One or more such unit may be granted with a
conditional use permit.
2.   This use includes all uses engaged in the handling of substances subject
to the maintenance of a risk management prevention program as defined by the
State of California Health and Safety Code Section 25534.
3.   This use category applies to both raw and previously prepared materials,
excluding uses involving an incinerator, blast furnace or other similar
industrial process (e.g., batch plants, truss manufacturing, canneries, co-
generation plants, equipment assembly). Such uses are subject to conditional
use permit review.
4.   No liquor store or tobacco retail business, shall be located within 600
feet of any public or private school, church, temple, or park, nor shall any
liquor store or tobacco retail business be located within 100 feet of any
residential zone, nor within 500 feet of any other liquor store or tobacco
retail business, respectively.
5.   Outdoor storage of trailers, boats, campers, and other recreational
vehicles also requires approval of a conditional use permit.
6.   "Primary use" for the purpose of retail sales shall mean that 50% or more
of the gross floor area of the business is devoted to retail sales display,
merchandising, or sales area.
7.   Subject to requirements set forth for such uses in Article VI: Specific
Land Use Provisions.
8.   Shall comply with applicable provisions of Section
21.20.057.
P = Permitted Use; CUP = Conditional Use Permit Required; A = Accessory Use; X
= Prohibited
(Ord. 728, §8, 2023; Ord. 652, § 8, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008; Ord.
682, § 7, 2016).
21.22.030 Development standards.
Table 21.22.030 sets forth the minimum development standards for industrial
development in the M-2 district. These standards shall be used for the land use
and development permitting process(s) as criteria for project review.
Table 21.22.030
M-2 District Development Standards
Development Standard M-2
Table 21.22.030
M-2 District Development Standards
Development Standard       M-2
Setbacks - minimum
   Front yard           20 ft.
   Street side yard     20 ft.
   Side yard - interior 0 ft.1
   Rear yard            0 ft.1
Building height - maximum  60 ft.2
Maximum lot coverage       50%
Floor-area ratio - maximum 1.0
 
Notes:
1.   Where a property abuts a residential property, public school property, a
park, a playground, or street, the minimum setback distance is 20 feet.
2.   Where the property is within 50 feet of any residential property, the
maximum building height is 20 feet.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.040 Screen wall.
Wherever an industrial property abuts any property zoned for residential use or
any property developed with a school, a minimum six-foot-high decorative block
wall, consisting of such materials as slumpstone, stucco, wrought-iron work
with masonry pilasters, or other similar decorative materials determined
suitable by the community development director, shall be constructed on the
property line between the industrial and residential or school use.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.050 Outdoor storage and display.
   (a)   Temporary Sales. Location of display area for temporary sales is to be
limited to those areas generally adjacent to the front building elevation of
the tenant space, and shall in no manner interfere with vehicle circulation and
required parking spaces. Display areas shall be designed to be viewed primarily
from on-site rather than from the public right-of-way. Such temporary sales
activity shall require a temporary use permit pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 21.100.
   (b)   Outdoor Display Areas. The design of the outdoor display area and its
physical delineation shall place an emphasis on aesthetic and functional
integration into the site and building design. The physical limits of display
areas shall be clearly delineated through treatments such as decorative
pavement, decorative bollards, landscaped planters, or similar features. All
outdoor display areas shall be designed in a manner to allow free pedestrian
movement within and around their vicinity, including compliance with federal
ADA requirements.
   (c)   Pest Control. Where storage is permitted in accordance with this
title, materials, including wastes, shall be stored and grounds maintained in a
manner that will not attract or aid the propagation of insects or rodents or
create a health hazard.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.060 Screening of mechanical equipment.
   (a)   Roof-mounted Mechanical Equipment. All roof-supported mechanical
equipment such as air conditioners, heating and ventilating systems, ducts,
cooling towers, solar panels, and similar equipment shall be screened or
enclosed, as viewed from a public street or public alley. Screening materials
shall consist of materials architecturally compatible with the building for
which the equipment is provided.
   (b)   Air Conditioning/Filtration Units. All air conditioning and/or
filtration units shall be screened or enclosed in manner that is visually
compatible with the structure upon which it is located and installed and/or
designed such that no portion of the unit is visible from any public street or
adjoining lot. Units requiring approval of a building permit shall be subject
to a zoning clearance (
Chapter 21.96). The community development director may impose conditions to
minimize noise, dust, and vibration and to ensure compatibility with
surrounding property.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.070 Screening of trash enclosures.
All trash receptacles and other refuse or waste storage shall be kept in an
enclosed building or within a trash enclosure area. Any such trash enclosure
area shall consist, at a minimum, of a three-sided, six-foot-high decorative
block or similar wall structure, with the fourth side comprised of a closable,
latchable solid gate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4310.jpg]
 
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.080 Utilities.
   (a)   Utility lines, wastelines, vents, and other piping affixed to the
exterior of a building shall be structurally encased and screened from public
view with building materials that are similar in nature and color to that of
the permanent building. The developer or owner of a property shall be
responsible for utility service connections, in cooperation with the utility
company.
   (b)   All electrical, telephone, community antenna television and similar
service wires and cables that provide direct service to the property being
developed shall, within the exterior boundary lines of such property be
installed underground, to the maximum extent permitted by law. The developer or
owner is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and he
or she shall make the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the
installation of such facilities. When above-ground facilities are the only
feasible alternative, they should be sited as unobtrusively as possible. For
the purposes of this section, appurtenances and associated equipment including,
but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal
boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be
placed above ground upon written approval of the public works director.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.22.090 Other applicable regulations.
   The following chapters of this title apply to all development in the M-
2 zoning district:
   
21.42   Accessory uses
   
21.44   Adult businesses
   
21.46   Antennas and wireless communications facilities
   
21.48   Commercial cannabis uses and cultivation
   
21.50   Recycling facilities
   
21.60   Accessory structures
   
21.62   Fences and walls
   
21.64   Height measurement and exceptions
   
21.66   Landscaping
   
21.68   Parking and loading
   
21.70   Performance standards
   
21.72   Property maintenance
   
21.76   Signs
   
21.78   Yard requirements and exceptions
(Ord. 700 § 5 (part), 2017; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.24
OPEN SPACE ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.24.010   District purpose.
   
21.24.020   Permitted land uses.
   
21.24.030   Development standards.
   
21.24.040   Other applicable regulations.
21.24.010 District purpose.
The open space (O-S) zoning district provides areas for recreational activity
and open space needs, including open space for flood control purposes,
cemeteries, and passive recreation. This district allows for recreational
development of land and necessary public facilities, including schools.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.24.020 Permitted land uses.
Table 21.24.020 identifies permitted uses, uses requiring a conditional use
permit, accessory uses, and prohibited uses, subject to compliance with all
other provisions of this title. Uses not listed in Table 21.24.020 are
prohibited.
Table 21.24.020
Permitted Uses in the Open Space Zoning District
Use O-S
Table 21.24.020
Permitted Uses in the Open Space Zoning District
Use                                           O-S
Caretaker residence                           A
Cemetery                                      CUP
Community center/recreation facility (public) P
Public park                                   P
                                              A
Recycling facilities                          (See Article VII,
                                              Chapter 21.50)
Schools:
   Public elementary/secondary             P
   Private elementary/secondary            CUP
Wireless communication facilities             See
                                              Chapter 21.46
 
P - Permitted; CUP = Conditional Use Permit required; A = Accessory Use; X =
Not Permitted
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.24.030 Development standards.
Table 21.24.030 sets forth the minimum development standards for structures in
the O-S zoning district. Any public school used as a public educational
facility is not required to adhere to these standards.
 
Table 21.24.030
Open Space District Development Standards
Development Standard      O-S
Setbacks - minimum
   Front yard          20 ft.
   Side yard           15 ft.
   Rear yard           40 ft.
Building height - maximum 25 ft.
 
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.24.040 Other applicable regulations.
The following chapters of this title apply to all development in the O-S zoning
district, with the exception of public schools used as a public educational
facility:
   
21.46   Antennas and wireless communications facilities
   
21.60   Accessory structures
   
21.62   Fences and walls
   
21.64   Height measurements and exceptions
   
21.66   Landscaping
   
21.68   Parking and loading
   
21.72   Property maintenance
   
21.76   Signs
   
21.78   Yard requirements and exceptions
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.26
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.26.010   District purpose.
   
21.26.020   Establishment of a PUD.
   
21.26.030   Permitted land uses.
   
21.26.040   Development standards.
21.26.010 District purpose.
The planned unit development (PUD) zoning district is established to provide
opportunity for creative development which does not adhere to uniform standards
but is flexible and provides for a mix of compatible uses.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.26.020 Establishment of a PUD.
A PUD shall be established through an amendment to the zoning map and pursuant
to the provisions contained in
Chapter 21.116. A development agreement, approved pursuant to
Chapter 21.124, may serve to implement a PUD.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.26.030 Permitted land uses.
Each PUD document shall identify permitted and prohibited uses consistent with
the goals, policies, and underlying land use designation of the general plan.
No change from the approved list of uses shall be permitted unless the PUD is
amended pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 21.120.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.26.040 Development standards.
Each PUD document shall identify the development standards applicable to all
lots and structures within the PUD district. Any change to those standards
shall be required to comply with
Chapters 21.102,
21.108, and
21.120.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
ARTICLE V: OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Chapter 21.30
FARM ANIMAL OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.30.010   Purpose and applicability.
   
21.30.020   Permitted land uses.
   
21.30.030   Performance standards.
21.30.010 Purpose and applicability.
   (a) The farm animal (-A) overlay zoning district is established to allow for
the keeping of farm animals on residential properties with a minimum ten
thousand square feet of land area, where conditions are met to ensure such use
is compatible with surrounding residential character of the neighborhood.
   (b)   The farm animal (-C) overlay zoning district is established to allow
for the keeping of chicken animals on residential properties that have a
detached residential dwelling unit, where conditions are met to ensure such use
is compatible with the surrounding residential character of the neighborhood.
   (c)   All such animal keeping shall comply with all other provisions of the
Municipal Code and Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code regulating the
keeping of animals.
   (d)   Definitions of the terms used in this chapter are contained in Article
X. (Ord. 733, § 2, 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.30.020 Permitted land uses.
In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying zoning district, the uses
listed in Table 21.30.020 may be established in the -A and -C overlay zoning
districts.
Table 21.30.020
Permitted Uses in the Farm Animal Overlay Zoning District
Allowed Use -A
Table 21.30.020
Permitted Uses in the Farm Animal Overlay Zoning District
Allowed Use                                                                        -A
Keeping of domestic animals                                                        P1
Keeping of exotic animals:
   a.   Up to a combination of 2 exotic animals per 10,000 square feet of lanP2
   b.   More than 2 exotic animals per 10,000 square feet of land            CUP2
Grazing or raising of livestock animals:
   a.   Up to a combination of 2 livestock animals per 10,000 square feet of P2nd
   b.   More than 2 livestock animals per 10,000 square feet of land         CUP2
Raising of poultry animals:
   a.   Up to a combination of 12 poultry animals per 10,000 square feet of lP2d
   b.   More than 12 poultry animals per 10,000 square feet of land          CUP2
   Allowed Use                                                                  -C
Keeping of domestic animals                                                        P1
Keeping of exotic animals                                                          X4
Raising of poultry animals:
   a.   Up to 6 chickens                                                     P3
   b.   Keeping of roosters                                                  X4
P = Permitted; CUP = Conditional Use Permit; X = Prohibited
Notes:
1.   Permitted in accordance with regulations of Title 10 of the Los Angeles
County Code and regulations of the Los Angeles County Department of Animal Care
and Control.
2.   Animals and any structure or pen containing such animals shall be kept and
maintained a minimum distance of 35 feet from all residential dwelling units
and 25 feet from all property lines.
3.   Poultry animals and any structure, coop, house, or pen containing such
animals shall be kept and maintained at a distance of five feet from all
residential dwelling units and five feet from all property lines.
4.   Animals are prohibited.
(Ord. 733, § 3, 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.30.030 Performance standards.
   (a)   The following performance standards shall apply to all properties
located in the -A overlay zone, in addition to those required by the underlying
zoning district:
   (1)   The keeping of all animals shall be subject to the regulations and
conditions of the animal control division of the Los Angeles County Health
Department.
   (2)   All fences and gates used for the enclosure of horses or other large
domestic animals shall be of such design, materials, and construction as are
sufficient to prevent the escape for the animal(s) enclosed.
   (3)   The property shall be required to comply with all applicable health
and safety regulations provided for in any other statue or ordinance.
   (4)   Each property owner or lessee shall be responsible for the continuous
maintenance of the animal keeping facility in a sanitary condition which
includes, but is not limited to, the cleaning of corrals, stables, barns, and
other areas to which animals have access, and for the disposal of manure,
offal, soiled straw, and other refuse as required.
   (5)   Animal waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, run off, or leach so
as to create a nuisance or be offensive to other persons in the vicinity.
Manure may be disposed of by removal or fertilizing. If waste is to be used as
compost, proper procedures must be used to control insects and to minimize
offensive odors.
   (6)   Each lot and structure shall be maintained so that there is no
standing surface water within areas in which large domestic animals are kept.
   (7)   All buildings used for the keeping of animals and all corral or
enclosure fences shall be constructed and maintained in a neat and orderly
condition and kept in good repair.
   (8)   Corral and stable areas shall be sprinkled or otherwise treated to a
degree so as to prevent dust generation. All accumulation of manure, mud, or
refuse shall be eliminated so as to prevent the breeding of flies.
   (9)   Property owners or lessees who keep large domestic animals on their
property shall carry out a fly control program when necessary to control the
fly population. This program may incorporate the use of traps, pesticides, and
other appropriate control measures.
   (b)   The following performance standards shall apply to all properties
located in the - C overlay zone, in addition to those required by the
underlying zoning district:
   (1)   The keeping of all animals shall be subject to the regulations and
conditions of the animal control division of the Los Angeles County Health
Department.
   (2)   The slaughtering of animals on the premises is strictly prohibited.
   (3)   All fences, gates, structures, coops, houses, or pens used for the
enclosure of poultry animals shall be of such design, materials, and
construction as are sufficient to prevent the escape for the animal(s)
enclosed.
   (4)   The property shall be required to comply with all applicable health
and safety regulations provided for in any other statute or ordinance.
   (5)   Each property owner or lessee shall be responsible for the continuous
maintenance of the animal keeping facility in a sanitary condition which
includes, but is not limited to, the cleaning of structures, coops, houses, or
pens to which animals have access, and for the disposal of litter, soiled
straw, and other refuse as required.
   (6)   Animal waste shall not be allowed to accumulate, run off, or leach so
as to create a nuisance or be offensive to other persons in the vicinity.
Poultry litter may be disposed of by removal or fertilizing. If waste is to be
used as compost, proper procedures must be used to control insects and to
minimize offensive odors.
   (7)   Each lot and structure shall be maintained so that there is no
standing surface water within areas in which poultry animals are kept.
   (8)   All buildings used for the keeping of animals and all structures,
coops, houses, or pens shall be constructed and maintained in a neat and
orderly condition and kept in good repair.
   (c)   Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to excuse any violations of
Chapter 21.72, Property Maintenance.
(Ord. 733, § 4, 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.32
FLOOD HAZARD OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.32.010   Purpose.
   
21.32.020   Methods of reducing flood losses.
   
21.32.030   Definitions.
   
21.32.040   Applicability.
   
21.32.050   Basis for establishing the flood overlay (F) zoning district.
   
21.32.060   Compliance.
   
21.32.070   Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   
21.32.080   Interpretation.
   
21.32.090   Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   
21.32.100   Severability.
   
21.32.110   Designation of the floodplain administrator.
   
21.32.120   Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
   
21.32.130   Site plan review.
   
21.32.140   Appeals.
   
21.32.150   Standards of construction.
   
21.32.160   Standards for utilities.
   
21.32.170   Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
   
21.32.180   Standards for manufactured homes.
   
21.32.190   Standards for recreational vehicles.
   
21.32.200   Floodways.
   
21.32.210   Variance.
   
21.32.220   Conditions for variances.
   
21.32.230   Appeal board.
21.32.010 Purpose.
The flood hazard overlay (F) zoning district is established to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable
regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and
privately owned land within flood-prone, mudslide (i.e. mudflow) or flood-
related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:
   A.   Protect human life and health;
   B.   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
   C.   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   D.   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   E.   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
   F.   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted
areas caused by flood damage;
   G.   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
   H.   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.020 Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:
   A.   Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases
in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
   B.   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   C.   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
   D.   Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may
increase flood damage; and
   E.   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.030 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   “A zone.” See “special flood hazard area.”
   “Accessory structure” means a structure that is either:
      1.   Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or
      2.   A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred
fifty square feet and one thousand five hundred dollars in value.
   “Accessory use” means a use that is incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.
   “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or
fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been
eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on
the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
   “Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.
   “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood
insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet;
a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable
and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   “Area of special flood hazard.” See “special flood hazard area.”
   “Base flood” means a flood that has a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also called the “one hundred year flood”). Base
flood is the term used throughout this chapter.
   “Base flood elevation (BFE)” means the elevation shown on the flood
insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
   “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e.,
below ground level - on all sides.
   “Building.” See “structure.”
   “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth,
fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a
floodplain that may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July
13, 1985 pursuant to Ordinance 365.
   “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   “Flood, flooding, or flood water” means:
      1.   A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source;
and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
      2.   The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.
   “Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.
   “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has
delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
   “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal
Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate
map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.
   “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source. See “flooding.”
   “Floodplain administrator” is the community official designated by title to
administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and the zoning
ordinance, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application
of police power, which control development in flood-prone areas. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet
floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
   “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”
   “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the
“regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.
   “Fraud and victimization” as related to Sections
21.32.210 through
21.32.230 (Variance) of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not
cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement,
the planning commission will consider the fact that every newly constructed
building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the
community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be
constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years
to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property
and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience,
danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition,
future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to
potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance
rates.
   “Functionally dependent use” means a use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
   “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality
that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public
health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
   “Hardship” as related to Sections
21.32.210 through
21.32.230 (Variance) of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would
result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The variance shall be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or
financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic
considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of
one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship.
All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a
variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property
owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally
intended.
   “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   “Historic structure” means any structure that is:
      1.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register;
      2.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      3.   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or
      4.   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
   “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   “Levee system” means a flood protection system, which consists of a levee,
or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.
   “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. (See “basement” definition).
      1.   An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor
that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor
provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
         a.   The flood openings standard in Section
21.32.150C.3;
         b.   The anchoring standards in Section
21.32.150A;
         c.   The construction materials and methods standards in Section
21.32.150B; and
         d.   The standards for utilities in Section
21.32.160.
      2.   For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are
prohibited as they are considered to be basements. (See “basement” definition).
This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.
   “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or
without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The
term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”
   “‘Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
   “Market value” is defined in the Los Angeles County substantial damage/
improvement procedures. See Section
21.32.120B.1.
   “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations
shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.
   “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for
which the “start of construction” commenced on or after July 13, 1985, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 13,
2007.
   “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation,
channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel,
refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or
projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the
direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its
propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
   “One hundred year flood” or “100-year flood.” See “base flood.”
   “Program deficiency” means a defect in a community’s floodplain management
regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation
of those floodplain management regulations.
   “Public safety and nuisance” as related to Section
21.32.210 through
21.32.230 (Variance) of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance
must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire
community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully
obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable
lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle that is:
      1.   Built on a single chassis;
      2.   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      3.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
      4.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters or recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
   “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is
not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may
be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from
flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   “Sheet flow area.” See “area of shallow flooding.”
   “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject
to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown
on a FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
   “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed
new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the
date of the permit. The “actual start” means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or
footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work
beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets
and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the “actual start of construction” means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above
ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
   “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
   “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic
structure.
   “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.
   “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of
1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the
floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
   “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or
other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
“Watercourse” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. 622-U §2 (part), 2008).
21.32.040 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all properties within the flood hazard overlay (F)
zoning district.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.050 Basis for establishing the flood hazard overlay (F) zoning district.
The flood hazard overlay (F) zoning district designation applies to special
flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
in the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Los Angeles County and Incorporated
Areas” dated September 30, 2005, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), dated September 28, 2008,
and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter. The FIS and attendant mapping is the
minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by
studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which
are recommended to the city council by the floodplain administrator. The study,
FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at city clerk’s office in city hall located at
13700 La Mirada Boulevard, La Mirada, California.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.060 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor.
Nothing herein shall prevent the city council from taking such lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.070 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another chapter, ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.080 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
   A.   Considered as minimum requirements;
   B.   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   C.   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state
statutes.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.090 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of city council, any officer or employee
thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.100 Severability.
This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable.
Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the
chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 622-U §2 (part), 2008).
21.32.110 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
The city manager or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer,
implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying site plan reviews in
accord with its provisions.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.120 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include,
but not be limited to the following:
   A.   Permit Review. Review all site plan reviews to determine:
      1.   Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including
determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing
structures;
      2.   All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
      3.   The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
      4.   The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying
capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a
floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood
more than one foot at any point within the City of La Mirada; and
      5.   All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are
approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not
be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved
CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.
   B.   Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage
Procedures.
      1.   Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, “Answers to Questions about
Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying
and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial
damage, to include defining “market value.”
      2.   Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions
and implemented by community staff.
   C.   Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood
elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 21.32.050, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or
other source, in order to administer Section
21.32.150 through
21.32.200.
      NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods
from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in
Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year)
Flood Elevations” dated July 1995.
   D.   Notification of Other Agencies.
      1.   Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
         a.   Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of
Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;
         b.   Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency; and
         c.   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.
      2.   Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:
         a.   Within six months of information becoming available or project
completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or
assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA
for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
         b.   All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on
conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow
construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as
specified in the “start of construction” definition. Such submissions are
necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting
flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements
are based on current data.
      3.   Changes in corporate boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the
corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and
include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate
limits.
   E.   Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public
inspection and make available as needed the following:
      1.   Certification required by Section
21.32.150C.1 and Section
21.32.180 (Lowest floor elevations);
      2.   Certification required by Section
21.32.150C.1 (Elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);
      3.   Certification required by Section
21.32.150C.3 (Wet floodproofing standard);
      4.   Certification of elevation required by Section
21.32.170A.3 (Subdivisions and other proposed development standards);
      5.   Certification required by Section
21.32.200B (Floodway encroachments); and
      6.   Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification
for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report
submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   F.   Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions.
The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section
21.32.140.
   G.   Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as
that term is defined in Section
21.32.030.
   H.   Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA.
   I.   Planning. Assure community’s general plan is consistent with floodplain
management objectives herein.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.130 Site plan review.
Approval of a site plan review shall be obtained before any construction or
other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special
flood hazard established in Section
21.32.050. Application for a site plan review shall be made on forms furnished
by the City of La Mirada. The applicant shall provide the following minimum
information:
   A.   Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
      1.   Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question,
existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their
location;
      2.   Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other
utilities;
      3.   Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any
proposed fill, and drainage facilities;
      4.   Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
      5.   Base flood elevation information as specified in Section
21.32.050 or subsection C of Section
21.32.120;
      6.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest
floor (including basement) of all structures; and
      7.   Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section
21.32.150C.2 and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.
         a.   Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that
the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in
Section
21.32.150C.2.
         b.   For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of
foundation openings as required in Subsection
21.32.150C.3 of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and
7-93.
         c.   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
         d.   All appropriate certifications listed in Section
21.32.120E of this chapter.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.140 Appeals.
The planning commission of the City of La Mirada shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.150 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
   A.   Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
   B.   Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and
substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be
constructed:
      1.   With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to
flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;
      2.   Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
      3.   With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding; and
      4.   Within zones AH or AO on the community’s flood insurance rate map,
so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
flood waters around and away from proposed structures.
   C.   Elevation and Floodproofing.
      1.   Residential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
basement:
         a.   In AE, AH, A1-30 zones on the community’s flood insurance rate
map, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
         b.   In an AO zone on the community’s flood insurance rate map,
elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the
depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above
the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
         c.   In an A zone on the community’s flood insurance rate map, without
BFE’s specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A zone], elevated to or above the base
flood elevation; as determined under Section
21.32.120C.
         d.   Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest
floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or
licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator.
      2.   Nonresidential construction. All new construction or substantial
improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform
to Section
21.32.150C.1 or:
         a.   Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section
21.32.150C.1, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
         b.   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
         c.   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the
standards of Sections
21.32.150C.2(a) and (b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to
the floodplain administrator.
      3.   Flood openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of
structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding
basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the
following minimum criteria:
         a.   For non-engineered openings:
            (1)   Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a
total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area subject to flooding;
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade;
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwater; and
            (4)   (A)   Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have
openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly
enter; or
               (B)   Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.
      4.   Manufactured homes. See Section
21.32.180.
      5.   Garages and low cost accessory structures.
         a.   Attached garages.
            (1)   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed
with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters. See Section
21.32.150C.3. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood
resistant materials. See Section
21.32.150B.
            (2)   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the
above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking
areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.
         b.   Detached garages and accessory structures.
            (1)   Accessory structures used solely for parking (two-car
detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as
defined in Section
21.32.030, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood
elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in
accordance with the following requirements:
               (A)   Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking
or limited storage;
               (B)   The portions of the accessory structure located below the
BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;
               (C)   The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;
               (D)   Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory
structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;
               (E)   The accessory structure must comply with floodplain
encroachment provisions in Section
21.32.200; and
               (F)   The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the
automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section
21.32.150C.3.
            (2)   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the
above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards
in Section
21.32.150.
(Ord. 622-U §2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.160 Standards for utilities.
   A.   All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall
be designed to minimize or eliminate:
      1.   Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and
      2.   Discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   B.   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them, or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.170 Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including
proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty lots
or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:
      1.   Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood
elevations (BFE).
      2.   Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures
and pads on the final plans.
      3.   If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following
as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered
civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application
for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain
administrator:
         a.   Lowest floor elevation.
         b.   Pad elevation.
         c.   Lowest adjacent grade.
            A.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
            B.   All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
            C.   All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide
adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.180 Standards for manufactured homes.
   A.   All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on
sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a
new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage as the result of a flood, shall, within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the
community’s flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation
such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the
base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored
foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   B.   All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites
in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH,
and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the
provisions of Section
21.32.180A will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation
system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so
that either the:
      1.   Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood
elevation; or
      2.   Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other
foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than
thirty-six inches in height above grade. Upon the completion of the structure,
the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a
registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the
community building inspectors to be properly elevated. Such certification and
verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.190 Standards for recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s
flood insurance rate map will either:
   1.   Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or
   2.   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is
ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to
the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has
no permanently attached additions; or
   3.   Meet the permit requirements of Section
21.32.130 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in Section
21.32.180A.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.200 Floodways.
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood
waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
   A.   Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction,
substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community’s flood insurance rate
map, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point
within the City of La Mirada.
   B.   Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the City of La Mirada shall
prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil
engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge.
   C.   If subsections A and B of Section
21.32.200 are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and
other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood
hazard reduction provisions of Section
21.32.150.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.32.210 Variance.
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk
and will not be modified by the granting of the variance.
   The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general
principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are
not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with
physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of
this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the
surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property
and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain
to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property
owners.
   It is the duty of the planning commission to help protect its citizens from
flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of
insuring a structure is built below flood level are so serious that variances
from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite
rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can
only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance
guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple
provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The
criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives
other than a variance are more appropriate.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.220 Conditions for variances.
   A.   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-
half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the
procedures of Sections
21.32.110 through
21.32.200 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases
beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
   B.   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic
structures” (as defined in Section
21.32.030 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
   C.   Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if
any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   D.   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance
is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
“Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the
requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an
elevation requirement, this means the planning commission need not grant
permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation
the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the planning
commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of this
chapter. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice over the signature of a community official that:
      1.   The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base
flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance
coverage, and
      2.   Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life
and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by
the floodplain administrator in the Office of the Los Angeles County Recorder
and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of
the affected parcel of land.
   E.   The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance
actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances
issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
21.32.230 Appeal board.
   A.   In passing upon requests for variances, the planning commission shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and the:
      1.   Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of
others;
      2.   Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      3.   Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and
future owners of the property;
      4.   Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the
community;
      5.   Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      6.   Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are
not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      7.   Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      8.   Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      9.   Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and
emergency vehicles;
      10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment
transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and
      11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.
   B.   Variances shall only be issued upon a:
      1.   Showing of good and sufficient cause;
      2.   Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
      3.   Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in
increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense, create a nuisance (see “public safety and nuisance”), cause
fraud and victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
         a.   Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial
improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections
21.32.220 are satisfied and that the structure or other development is
protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does
not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public
nuisance.
         b.   Upon consideration of the factors of Section
21.32.210A and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 622-U § 2 (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.34
MOBILE HOME PARK OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.34.010   Purpose.
   
21.34.020   Permitted uses.
   
21.34.030   Development standards.
   
21.34.040   Additional development standards.
21.34.010 Purpose.
   (a)   The mobile home park (-MH) overlay zoning district is established to
set forth standards to be applied to the development of new mobile home parks.
This overlay district may only be applied in combination with an underlying
zoning district of medium density residential (R-3) or high density residential
(R-4). The standards herein are intended to ensure a suitable living
environment for those persons residing within a mobile home park and to ensure
compatibility of such park with the surrounding area.
   (b)   Unless otherwise specified, the provisions of California Code of
Regulations Title 25 shall apply.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.34.020 Permitted uses.
In addition to the land use regulations of the underlying zoning district, the
accessory uses listed in Table
21.34.020 may be established in the -MH overlay zoning district. Additional
accessory use provisions are addressed in
Chapter 21.42.
 
Table 21.34.020
Accessory Uses in the -MH Overlay Zoning District
Use                                                                      -MH
Administrative office for mobile home park                               A
Recreational facilities associated with mobile home park (swimming pool, A
recreation building, outdoor sports court or recreation area)
Service facilities for mobile home park residents                        A
 
A = Accessory Use
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.34.030 Development standards.
Table 21.34.030 sets forth the minimum development standards required for all
new mobile home parks. In the event of conflict between these standards and
those required for the underlying zoning district, the standards set forth in
Table 21.34.030 shall prevail.
 
Table 21.34.030
Mobile Home Park (-MH) Development Standards
Development Standard                          -MH
Site area - minimum
   a.   Mobile home park                5 acres
   b.   Individual mobile home site or l2,000 sf per acre
Minimum number of mobile homes sites per park 50
Dimensions for individual mobile home sites - minimum
   a.   Lot width                                                            30
                                                                                   ft.
   b.   Lot depth                                                            65
                                                                                   ft.
Setback distances - minimum
   a.   Structural setback from abutting public street right-of-way          25
                                                                                   ft.
   b.   Structural setback from interior property lines abutting residential 20
property                                                                           ft.
   c.   Structural setback from interior property lines abutting non-resident10
property                                                                           ft.
   d.   Internal street setback distance                                     10
                                                                                   ft.
   e.   Distance between mobile home structures                              10
                                                                                   ft.
   f.   Distance between mobile homes and internal lot lines                 3
                                                                                   ft.
   g.   Distance between mobile homes and detached accessory structures      3
                                                                                   ft.
Building coverage: individual mobile home lot - maximum                            70%
Height - maximum
   a.   Main structure(s)                                                    15
                                                                                   ft.
   b.   Accessory structure(s)                                               10
                                                                                   ft.
 
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.34.040 Additional development standards.
The following additional standards shall apply to all new mobile home parks.
   (1)   Management. Every mobile home park community shall be properly managed
to ensure maintenance of common facilities and to ensure individual home sites
are developed and maintained in accordance with recorded rules and regulations
for the park.
   (2)   Site use and improvements. Each mobile home shall be located on an
approved mobile home site, and all mobile home sites shall be designed to
accommodate independent mobile homes. No mobile home site shall be used as the
location for more than one mobile home or trailer. Each mobile home shall be
skirted.
   (3)   Roadways. Mobile home parks shall be developed with a minimum thirty-
six-foot wide driveway entrance. Interior private streets shall be a minimum
twenty-four-foot width with no parking on either side of any private road, a
minimum thirty-two-foot width where parking is allowed on one side, and a
minimum forty-foot width where parking is allowed on both sides. Individual
mobile home sites shall have direct access from an interior street and not from
a public street outside the park. Mobile home park roadways and driveways shall
be paved and maintained in good repair in accordance with city standards.
   (4)   Drainage. All mobile home parks shall be located on a graded site with
no depressions in which surface water will accumulate. The ground shall be
sloped to provide storm drainage run-off by means of surface or subsurface
drainage facilities.
   (5)   Fences and walls. Along the common boundary between a mobile home park
and any single-family residential property, a minimum six-foot-high decorative
solid masonry wall shall be constructed to serve as a visual screen and buffer
between uses.
   (6)   Landscape buffer. When a mobile home park shares a common boundary
with any residential property, the required twenty-foot structural setback area
along all such common boundaries shall be landscaped and may be used for
recreational purposes as authorized in conjunction with the conditional use
permit.
   (7)   Landscaping. All required minimum setback areas around the perimeter
of the park shall be permanently landscaped and maintained with ground cover,
trees, and shrubs. Additionally, at least one tree shall be planted for each
mobile home site.
   (8)   Accessory structures (storage cabinets). Each mobile home site shall
be permitted a maximum of two accessory storage cabinet structures, with a
maximum combined area of one hundred square feet for storage purposes.
Accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard of any site and
shall be set back a minimum of three feet from the mobile home structure, with
the exception that non-combustible structures need not be setback from the lot
lines or mobile home structure.
   (9)   Recreation area. A recreation area shall be provided and maintained on
site at a rate of one hundred fifty square feet for each mobile home unit
within the park. If children under the age of eighteen are permitted within the
development, this requirement shall be increased to two hundred square feet for
each mobile home space. Recreation areas include recreation rooms, landscaped
buffer zones, walkways, playgrounds, and other similar amenities.
   (10)   Trash and recycling areas. Centralized trash and recycling areas with
enclosures are required to be located throughout the park. All enclosures shall
be constructed in accordance with the standards of the city. Individual trash
and recycling containers may be permitted, subject to approval of the
franchised refuse collection company.
   (11)   Utilities. Unless otherwise specifically authorized by the designated
approving authority, all utilities providing service to the park shall be
placed underground. Equipment appurtenant to the underground facilities (e.g.,
transformers, meter cabinets) may be placed above ground.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.36
OIL DRILLING OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.36.010   District purpose.
   
21.36.020   Applicability.
   
21.36.030   Permit requirements.
   
21.36.040   Special application requirements.
   
21.36.050   Development and operational standards.
21.36.010 District purpose.
The oil drilling (-O) overlay zoning district is established to protect the
health, safety, public welfare, and physical environment of the city by the
reasonable regulation of oil and gas production facilities and operations.
Provisions herein are intended to supplement the regulations of the State
Division of Oil and Gas.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.36.020 Applicability.
This overlay district is permitted in combination with all underlying zoning
districts with the exception of residential zoning districts or any zoning
district which allows residential use (for example, planned unit development).
This overlay district may only be applied to properties containing a minimum of
forty acres, but not more than one hundred sixty acres in gross area.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.36.030 Permit requirements.
A zoning code amendment is required to rezone a property with the oil drilling
(-O) overlay designation, and a conditional use permit is required for
development and operation of an oil drilling facility.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.36.040 Special application requirements.
In addition to the standard permit processes listed in Article VIII, the
following special requirements shall apply to all applications for oil drilling
facilities and operations.
   (1)   Application submittal requirements. The application shall contain a
statement that the applicant has proprietary or contractual authority to drill
for and produce oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances under the surface of
at least seventy-five percent of the property to be included in the overlay
district. If authority is contractual, the contract shall be provided with the
application. The application shall also include a report from a state-licensed
geologist confirming that the production of oil from beneath the proposed
district would not, in his or her opinion, result in any noticeable subsidence.
   (2)   Public notice. Standard public hearing notice requirement for property
owners within three hundred feet of the subject parcel shall be extended to
five hundred feet.
   (3)   Staff review. The staff report to the designated approving authorities
(planning commission and ultimately city council) shall include discussion of
whether or not exploration for oil, gas, and other hydrocarbon substances is
geologically justified in the district.
   (4)   Findings and conditions. Any action of the city council to approve an
application for oil drilling and production shall include the standard findings
for all requested entitlements and compliance with all applicable provisions
herein. In addition to the development standards set forth in Section
21.36.050, the city council may impose additional conditions to protect the
public health, safety, welfare, and physical environment of La Mirada.
   (5)   Term of conditional use permit. As identified in
Chapter 21.106, the conditional use permit is a limited term permit and must be
exercised within a specified period or become null and void. The conditional
use permit term limit for oil drilling facilities and operation shall be ten
years. Additionally, the permit shall become null and void if the approval is
not exercised within one year from the effective date of the permit. Oil
drilling facilities abandoned for a period of one year shall become null and
void.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.36.050 Development and operational standards.
The following minimum development and operational standards shall apply to all
oil drilling and production facilities. Applicable standards shall be
incorporated into project conditions of approval.
   (1)   Not more than one controlled drill site shall be permitted for each
forty acres of land.
   (2)   Unless the city council determines that closer spaces are necessary
for efficient oil field development, the minimum separation distance between
controlled drill sites shall be one thousand three hundred twenty feet.
   (3)   Within one year from the effective date of district and permit
approval, the lessee or developer shall execute an offer in writing giving to
each record owner or property located in the oil drilling district who has not
executed the lessee's or developer's lease or other authorization to drill the
right to share in the proceeds of production from wells bottomed in the
district, upon the same basis as those property owners who have by lease or
other legal consent granted to the lessee or developer the right to drill for
and product oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances from the subsurface of the
district. The offer shall remain open for acceptance for a period of five years
from the effective date. During the period the offer is in effect, the owner/
developer shall impound all royalties to which the owners or any of them may
become entitled and pay to the record owners of property in the district who
had not signed the lease at the time of such effective date, but who accept
such offer in writing within the five-year period. Any such royalties impounded
at the time the offer expires, which are not due or payable as hereinabove
provided, shall be paid pro rata to those owners who, at the time of such
expiration, are otherwise entitled to share in the proceeds of such production.
   (4)   In the case of properties under lease to a lessee who has not been
permitted to drill and produce within an established oil drilling overlay
district, the city council shall require that the lessee or developer who is
authorized to drill and produce hydrocarbons from the district shall offer a
consolidation agreement to the lessee who has not been permitted to drill and
produce. Such consolidation agreement shall contain an offer in writing, open
for acceptance for one hundred eighty days, giving such other lessee the choice
of: assigning his or her leases to the district operator subject to terms and
conditions agreed upon, or a consolidation agreement providing that each such
lessee shall contribute to the cost of drilling, producing, or otherwise
developing hydrocarbons within the district and shall share in the proceeds of
production from the district either in the proportion that the area of his or
her leasehold bears to the total area of the district, or in accordance with
some other formula agreed upon.
   (5)   If circumstances do not permit the construction of controlled drill
sites in adjoining or closely spaced districts in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, or if good zoning practice would be best served
by consolidating competitive drilling and producing operations, the city
council shall require competing lessees or developers of such district to enter
into joint operations for the conduct of a unit plan of development of
hydrocarbon reserves.
   (6)   Prior to commencement of operations, each lessee or developer shall
post a group surety bond for one hundred thousand dollars in favor of the city
to ensure compliance with conditions, provisions, restrictions, and
requirements of this chapter to the satisfaction of the city attorney. The
surety shall remain in effect for the life of the permit. This requirement may
not be modified, waived, or extended.
   (7)   The designated approving authority determines that oil drilling and
production activities have caused or may cause subsidence in the elevation of
the ground within the district or within the immediate vicinity (based on
expert data), the approving authority shall require the lessee or developer to
take corrective action, including re-pressurizing the oil producing structure
or cessation of oil drilling and production.
   (8)   The drilling of the wells shall be conducted in accordance with good
oil field practice. Blow-out prevention equipment shall be installed and
maintained in connection with the drilling of any well. Down-hole shut-off
valves shall be installed on completed wells to guard against the danger of
blow-outs.
   (9)   Producing wells that are required to be pumped shall be equipped with
subsurface hydraulic units. All surface pumps and compressors shall be located
within acoustically designed enclosures, adequately soundproofed. Wells shall
be serviced with portable type equipment only.
   (10)   All oil and gas produced from the wells on the property shall be
transported from the drill site by means of underground pipeline connected
directly with the producing pump or with tanks or treating facilities by a
completely closed system without venting products to the atmosphere at the
production site, and in no event shall there be any storage or treatment
facilities on the property other than necessary to conform production to
pipeline requirements. LACT (lease automatic custody transfer) procedures shall
be adopted wherever practical, but in no event shall more than three-day
storage or two one thousand-barrel tanks (whichever is greater) be erected or
maintained on the property. Furthermore, the production tanks and production
equipment shall be so placed and located with respect to enclosing fixtures
surrounding the site as to not be visible to persons on adjacent public streets
or from adjacent residential property having approximately the same ground
level elevation as the average ground level surrounding the drill site.
   (11)   No refining process or any process for the extraction of products
from natural gas shall be carried on at the drill site, except for such minor
process as necessary to make natural gas acceptable for delivery in the city
gas mains.
   (12)   All tools, pipe, and other equipment in connection with the drilling
and production activities shall be stored and kept on the drill site within a
walled and landscaped enclosure.
   (13)   Drilling procedures shall be conducted efficiently for the purpose of
removing and discontinuing derrick and drilling operations in the shortest
possible time period.
   (14)   All drilling work shall be insured with limits as required by the
public works director, and in no event less than two million dollars, against
liability in tort and public liability and property damage, and against
pollution liability damage in such amount as may be required by the public
works director with respect to drilling or production, or activities or
operations incident thereto. Each such policy shall be conditioned or endorsed
to cover such agents, lessees, or representatives of the owner, lessee or
permittee as may actually conduct drilling, production, or incidental
operations permitted. The insurance policy shall be reviewed and kept with the
city attorney. A certificate of insurance carrier and its address and a sworn
statement that such insurance will be maintained in full force and effect, and
shall be submitted to the city attorney prior to issuance of required permits.
   (15)   The drill site and approaches thereto shall at all times be kept in a
clean, free from weeds and debris, other than necessary and incidental drilling
equipment and supplies, and shall be effectively landscaped and maintained as
required and conditioned. Special attention shall be paid to the accumulation
of oil/oil products/equipment which might cause fumes or odors detrimental to
the adjoining property. Furthermore, upon completion of the drilling
operations, all equipment and supplies, except those actually necessary in
production work and as specified on plans for the installation of the various
production facilities and devices, shall be removed from the property, so that,
as far as practicable, there be no evidence above the ground of the presence of
the oil producing facilities in the pits and cellars heretofore specified.
   (16)   All pumping units established in the district shall be installed in
pits so that no part thereof will be above the surface of the ground.
   (17)   Adequate fire fighting apparatus and supplies, approved by the fire
department shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during
drilling and production operations.
   (18)   All production equipment shall be constructed and operated so that no
noise, vibration, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances shall ever
be permitted to result from production operations carried on at any drill site.
Structures on the site shall not be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly
or unsafe. If capable of reducing factors of nuisance or annoyance, proven
technological improvements in methods of production shall be adopted as they
become available.
   (19)   All permanent equipment shall be painted and kept in neat condition.
All production operations shall be as free from noise as possible with modern
oil operations.
   (20)   In compliance with safety and clearance requirements, all equipment
used in connection with the flowing or pumping of wells shall be properly
screened.
   (21)   When drilling is completed on a well, the site shall be free of
debris, landscaped with planting of shrubbery so as to screen from public view,
and permanent equipment kept in good condition.
   (22)   An internal combustion engine or electrical equipment may be used in
the drilling or pumping operations of the well, and if an internal combustion
engine is used, mufflers shall be installed on the engine to reduce noise.
Muffler installation shall be to the satisfaction of the fire department.
   (23)   All waste substances used or produced in connection with oil drilling
production or operations shall be retained in watertight receptors from which
they may be piped or hauled for terminal disposal in a dumping area
specifically approved for such disposal by the Los Angeles Regional Water
Pollution Control Board.
   (24)   Drilling, pumping and other power operations shall use electrical
power generated off-site.
   (25)   Drilling operations shall be conducted in connection with only one
well at a time in any one district, and such well shall be completed before
operations for the drilling of another well are commenced; provided, however,
that the city may permit the drilling of more than one well at a time after the
discovery well has been completed.
   (26)   All oil drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such
a manner as to eliminate, as far as practicable, dust, noise, vibration or
noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted practices
incident to drilling for and production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon
substances.
   (27)   All parts of the derrick above the derrick floor not reasonably
necessary for ingress and egress, including the elevated portion thereof used
as a hoist, shall be enclosed with fire resistive soundproofing material
approved by the county fire department, and the same shall be painted or
stained so as to render such material as unobtrusive as practicable.
   (28)   All tools, pipe and other equipment used in connection with any
drilling or production operations shall be screened from view, and all drilling
operations shall be conducted or carried on behind a solid fence, which shall
be maintained in good condition at all times, and be painted or stained so as
to render such fence as unobtrusive as practicable.
   (29)   Materials, equipment, tools or pipe used for drilling or production
operations shall be delivered to or removed from the controlled drilling site
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. daily. Special approval from the
city planner is required for delivery and removal outside of specified hours.
With the exception of drilling and production operations, no work shall be
conducted on the property between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.,
Sundays, or state holidays.
   (30)   No earthen sumps shall be used.
   (31)   No oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances may be produced from any
well hereby permitted unless all equipment necessarily incident to such
production is completely enclosed. Enclosures shall be approved by the building
and fire departments, shall be permanent in nature, and shall be designed to be
compatible with surrounding development. The architectural treatment of the
enclosure's exterior shall also be subject to planning commission approval.
   (32)   No oil, gas or other hydrocarbon substances may be produced from any
well located within a one-half mile radius of any residential property or use,
unless all equipment necessarily incidental to such production is installed
below the natural surface of the ground and such installation and equipment
shall be made in accordance with fire department requirements.
   (33)   Any production tanks shall be installed below the natural surface of
the ground and the installation thereof shall be made in accordance with safety
requirements of the fire department.
   (34)   Except as otherwise required by law or ordinance, no sign shall be
constructed, erected, maintained or placed on the premises in connection with
the drilling or production operations.
   (35)   Suitable and adequate sanitary toilet and washing facilities shall be
installed and maintained in a good condition at all times.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.37
MIXED USE OVERLAY (MUO) ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.37.010   District purpose.
   
21.37.020   Establishment of a mixed use overlay (MUO) district.
   
21.37.030   Permitted land uses in the MUO district.
   
21.37.040   Accessory land uses in the MUO district.
   
21.37.050   Conditional land uses in the MUO district.
   
21.37.060   Mixed use overlay development standards.
21.37.010 District purpose.
   The purposes of the mixed use overlay district include the following:
   (a)   To implement the policies of the core area plan; and
   (b)   To provide for an increased variety and intermixture of residential
and commercial activities. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 6 (part),
2012).
21.37.020 Establishment of a mixed use overlay (MUO) district.
The mixed use overlay district has been established as part of the
implementation of the La Mirada Housing Element. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025;
Ord. 661 § 6 (part), 2012).
21.37.030 Permitted land uses in the MUO district.
Permitted land uses within the mixed use overlay district shall be as follows:
   (a)   Multiple family dwellings and residential infill.
   (b)   Retail stores, shops and offices supplying commodities or performing
services such as those provided by department stores, specialty shops, personal
and business service establishments, antique shops, artists' supply stores and
similar uses.
   (c)   Restaurants, including outdoor eating areas and establishments. For
the purpose of this district only, a restaurant is an eating establishment
which serves food to customers primarily for consumption on the premises. It
includes, but is not limited to, lunch counters, coffee shops, cafes, pizza
parlors, soda fountains, fast-food and full-service dining establishments. It
may provide alcoholic beverage sales for drinking on premises provided that
such sales are ancillary to food service.
   (d)   Business and technical schools, and schools and studios for
photography, art, music and dance.
   (e)   Mixed uses - residential with commercial.
   (f)   Single room occupancy (SRO) development(s) pursuant to the
requirements outlined in Section
21.43.030.
   (g)   Low-barrier navigation center. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 §
6 (part), 2012).
21.37.040 Accessory land uses in the MUO district.
The following accessory uses are permitted in the mixed use overlay (MUO)
district:
   (a)   Accessory structures meeting the construction, yard, setback, height,
and area limitations applicable to accessory buildings as set forth in
Chapter 21.60 of this code.
   (b)   Home occupations subject to the provisions of
Chapter 21.98 of this code.
   (c)   Other accessory uses and accessory buildings customarily appurtenant
to a permitted use subject to the requirements of
Chapter 21.42 of this code.
   (d)   Accessory dwelling units per Section
21.18.030 of this Code. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 6 (part),
2012).
21.37.050 Conditionally permitted land uses within the MUO district.
The following conditional uses may be permitted in the mixed use overlay
district:
   (a)   Theaters.
   (b)   Commercial or office uses that are conditionally permitted as put
forth in Section
21.20.020.
   (c)   Any use that sells alcoholic beverages for offsite or onsite
consumption.
   (d)   Businesses that include entertainment.
   (e)   Any other retail business, service establishment, or mixed use
involving retail, service or commercial uses not listed in this chapter which
are determined to be consistent with the purposes of this section and which
will not impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties. (Ord. 736,
§ 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 6 (part), 2012).
21.37.060 Mixed use overlay development standards.
   (a)   The following height regulations are applicable:
      1.   Structures shall not exceed three stories in height. A building of
more than two stories must be designed in such a manner so as to avoid the
appearance of excessive bulk.
      2.   Development of parcels within the Imperial Highway Specific Plan
shall be subject to the standards listed within the Imperial Highway Specific
Plan document.
   (b)   The following open space, lot area, and setback requirements are
applicable in the mixed use overlay zone.
      1.   Open space. For mixed or single use buildings, the total usable open
space shall equal twenty-five percent (25%) of gross residential floor area. A
portion of the twenty-five percent (25%) may be above-ground level, in the form
of decks, balconies, or similar features.
      2.   Front, side, and rear yards. The front, side, and rear yard setbacks
shall correspond to those requirements of the base zone district.
   (c)   The number of parking spaces required shall correspond to those
requirements of the base zone district. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 §
6 (part), 2012).
CHAPTER 21.38
SPECIAL HOUSING OVERLAY (SHO) ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.30.010   General.
   
21.30.020   Purpose and intent.
   
21.30.030   Qualifications for eligibility.
   
21.30.040   Uses.
   
21.30.050   Development standards.
   
21.30.060   Affordable housing incentive.
   
21.30.070   Application procedure.
   
21.30.080   Replacement sites.
   
21.30.090   Residential density.
21.38.010 General.
The Special Housing Overlay Zoning District may be applied to lots within
Housing Opportunity Sites identified in the currently adopted Housing Element
of the General Plan. When the Special Housing Overlay (SHO) zone is shown on
the City's Zoning Map, it will be combined with the underlying zone district or
districts. Any lot designated by the SHO zone is subject to the land use and
density provisions of the underlying zone district(s), except as provided
herein. If provisions in the chapter differ from other provisions of this Code,
including the development standards of the underlying zone, the provision of
this chapter supersede and shall be applicable and controlling. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025).
21.38.020 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   Purpose.
      (1)   To encourage the development of housing for high-density mixed use,
and/or residential developments to accommodate the needs identified in the City
of La Mirada's Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
      (2)   To ensure that adequate sites are available to provide housing for
a mix of income levels.
      (3)   To facilitate the development of housing projects which are
superior in functional design, quality of construction, appearance, and
operational standards.
   (b)   Intent. This district is intended to provide a variety of housing
types, costs, and densities based on land eligibility, availability of
infrastructure, provision of adequate services and recognition of environmental
restraint to meet the needs of present and future residents in the City. The
intent of the overlay zone is to carry out the policies and objectives of all
elements of the General Plan and meet the necessary standards for public
health, safety, and general welfare. This includes a by-right, non-
discretionary approval process to streamline housing development in order to
meet housing needs.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.030 Applicability.
Any property within the Housing Opportunity Sites, as listed in the adopted
Housing Element for the current RHNA cycle, is eligible for the Special Housing
Overlay zone.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.040 Uses.
   (a)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use that is permitted in the underlying base zone.
      (2)   Multiple-family development, including apartments and condominiums,
that meet the minimum density set forth in this chapter. This shall include
100% residential projects.
      (3)   Mixed-use development that includes a residential component which
complies with the minimum density set forth in this chapter and at least 50% of
the floor area is residential.
   (b)   Conditionally permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed
subject to obtaining a conditional use permit, as provided by Chapter 21.110:
      (1)   Any use that is conditionally permitted in the underlying base
zone.
      (2)   Any use that requires open or exterior storage.
   (c)   Accessory uses. The following uses are considered to be incidental to
and compatible with permitted and conditionally permitted uses:
      (1)   Family day care: Uses must be consistent with the criteria
contained in Section 21.18.060.
      (2)   Residential care: Uses must be consistent with the criteria
contained in Chapter 21.57.
      (3)   Accessory dwelling units: Uses must be consistent with the criteria
contained in Chapter 21.54.
   (d)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses are allowed consistent with the
criteria contained in Chapter 21.100.
   (e)   Prohibited uses. The following uses shall be prohibited:
      (1)   Detached single-family dwellings.
      (2)   Industrial uses.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.050 Development standards.
Table 21.38.050 sets forth the development standards for lots designated with
the SHO zone. Development standards are provided according to seven sub-areas
of the SHO zone.
Table 21.38.050
Special Housing Overlay Development Standards
 Special Housing Overlay Sub-Area
 SHO-1 SHO-2 SHO-3 SHO-4 SHO-5 SHO-6 SHO-7
Table 21.38.050
Special Housing Overlay Development Standards
                       Special Housing Overlay Sub-Area
                       SHO-1  SHO-2  SHO-3  SHO-4  SHO-5  SHO-6  SHO-7
Minimum Density (du/ac) 16     20     20     30     30     20     45
Maximum Density (du/ac) 20     30     30     40     45     60     60
Minimum Setbacks:
Front                   15 ft  15 ft  15 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft
Side                    5 ft   5 ft   5 ft   5 ft   5 ft   5 ft   5 ft
Street Side             10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft
Rear                    10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft  10 ft
Max. Height             35 ft  45 ft  45 ft  45 ft  55 ft  60 ft  60 ft
Max. FAR                1.0    1.0    1.0    1.2    1.50   1.50   1.50
Building Separation     Per building code
Parking                 Parking shall be provided per Section
                        21.68.050
Min. Open Space         400 sf 400 sf 400 sf 400 sf 400 sf 400 sf 400 sf
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.060 Affordable housing incentive.
Residential or mixed-use projects within the Special Housing Overlay zone that
provide at least 20% of the total units for very-low- and/or low-income
households may request a deviation from the following development standards
without the need for a Variance or Density Bonus application. Projects which
utilize this section shall not exceed the maximum allowed density of the
overlay zone.
   (a)   20% reduction of all setbacks;
   (b)   10% reduction of open space requirements;
   (c)   20% reduction in parking; and
   (d)   30% increase in FAR.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.070 Application procedure.
   (a)   Residential or mixed-use projects within the Special Housing Overlay
zone that provide at least 20% of the total units for very-low- and/or low-
income households, shall require a Zoning Clearance pursuant to
Chapter 21.96. No public hearing or notice shall be required.
   (b)   All other residential or mixed-use projects within the Special Housing
Overlay zone shall require approval of a Site Plan Review, pursuant to
Chapter 21.114.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.080 Replacement sites.
The City shall not approve a project on any property within a commercial or
industrial base zone unless one of the following apply:
   (a)   The project includes residential units that meet or exceed the minimum
density requirements set forth in Table 21.38.050.
   (b)   A replacement housing opportunity site has been identified by the
applicant and the housing element has been amended by the City to include the
replacement site within the opportunity areas. The replacement site shall
comply with the following:
      (1)   The property owner of the replacement site shall agree to have the
property included in the opportunity sites.
      (2)   The replacement housing opportunity site shall accommodate the same
number of units, at the same income level, as identified for the project site
in the Housing Element.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.38.090 Residential density.
Notwithstanding any permitted density within the base zoning, any residential
or mixed-use project shall meet or exceed the minimum density requirements set
forth in Table 21.38.050.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
CHAPTER 21.39
EMERGENCY SHELTER OVERLAY (ESO) ZONING DISTRICT
Sections:
   
21.39.010   Purpose and applicability.
   
21.39.020   Location of emergency shelter overlay zoning district.
   
21.39.025   Application procedure.
   
21.39.030   Development standards.
21.39.010 Purpose and applicability.
The purpose of the emergency shelter overlay zoning district is to provide
opportunities for the development and/or operation of emergency housing for
those persons in need. This section of the La Mirada Zoning Ordinance
implements the state's requirements that govern the establishment of emergency
shelters. For purposes of this section, an emergency shelter refers to a
facility or use, which provides temporary housing (six months or less) for
homeless individuals or families. No individual or household may be denied
emergency shelter because of inability to pay. The term "temporary
accommodations" means that a person or family will be allowed to reside at the
shelter for a time period not to exceed six months. For purpose of this
definition, “emergency shelter” shall include other interim interventions,
including, but not limited to, a navigation center, bridge housing, and respite
or recuperative care, and a "provider" shall mean a government agency or
private non-profit organization that provides or contracts with recognized
community organizations to provide emergency or temporary shelter, and which
may also provide meals, counseling and other services, as well as common areas
for residents of the facility. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 8
(part), 2012).
21.39.020 Location of emergency shelter overlay zoning district.
The emergency shelter overlay zoning district applies to properties identified
on the official zoning map as being within the overlay zone. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 8 (part), 2012).
21.39.025 Application procedure.
The director shall ministerially review, without a hearing, an application for
an emergency shelter development project pursuant to this chapter and
Government Code Section 65583 and shall approve the application if the criteria
in this Chapter are satisfied. (Ord. 736§ , § 5 (part), 2025).
21.39.030 Development standards.
Emergency shelters shall comply with the following development standards:
   (a)   Adequate external lighting shall be provided for security purposes.
The lighting shall be stationary, directed away from adjacent properties and
public rights-of-way, and of intensity compatible with the neighborhood.
   (b)   The development shall provide laundry facilities or services adequate
for the number of residents.
   (c)   The development may provide one or more of the following specific
common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents and staff:
      1.   Central cooking and dining room(s).
      2.   Recreation room.
      3.   Counseling center.
      4.   Child care facilities.
      5.   Other support services.
   (d)   Parking and outdoor facilities shall be designed to provide security
for residents, visitors and employees.
   (e)   On-site parking shall be supplied at a ratio of one space for every
employee.
   (f)   For the purposes of noise abatement, organized outdoor activities may
only be conducted between the hours of eight (8) a.m. and ten (10) p.m.
   (g)   Emergency shelters shall provide a refuse storage area that is
completely enclosed with masonry walls not less than six (6) feet high with a
solid-gated opening and that is large enough to accommodate a standard-sized
trash bin adequate for use on the parcel, or other enclosures as approved by
the community development director or his or her designee. The refuse enclosure
shall be accessible to refuse collection vehicles.
   (h)   The agency or organization operating the shelter shall comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   Temporary shelter shall be available to residents for no more than
six (6) months.
      2.   Staff and services shall be provided to assist residents to obtain
permanent shelter and income.
      3.   The provider shall have a written management plan including, as
applicable, provisions for staff training, neighborhood outreach, security,
screening of residents to insure compatibility with services provided at the
facility, and for training, counseling, and treatment programs for residents.
      4.   The site shall be kept free of rubbish and debris at all times.
      5.   The operator may provide a storage area for the temporary storage of
personal items of the clients. This storage area shall not be visible from the
right-of-way.
   (i)   The shelter shall contain no more than five beds per 1,000 square feet
of lot size, but no greater than a maximum number of 150 beds. Shelters shall
not serve more persons than they have beds. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord.
661 § 8 (part), 2012).
ARTICLE VI: SPECIFIC LAND USE PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 21.41
SMALL LOT OWNERSHIP UNITS
Sections:
   
21.41.010   Purpose.
   
21.41.020   Applicability.
   
21.41.030   Application procedure.
   
21.41.040   Exceptions to the development standards.
   
21.41.050   Findings for denial.
21.41.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of state law as
reflected in Government Code Section 65852.28, Section 65913.4.5, and Section
66499.41 which aims to facilitate the development of the development of small
lot ownership units by streamlining the approval process for residential
development projects with ten or fewer units.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.41.020 Applicability.
    (a)   Within 60 days from the receipt of a complete application, the City
shall determine if the housing development project meets all the following
requirements:
      (1)   The parcel is located within one of the following zoning districts:
R-3, R-4, or MUO.
      (2)   The proposed subdivision will result in ten or fewer parcels and
the housing development project on the lot proposed to be subdivided will
contain ten or fewer residential units.
      (3)   The lot is no larger than five acres and substantially surrounded
by qualified urban uses.
      (4)   The lot is a legal parcel.
      (5)   The lot was not established pursuant to this chapter or through the
process for an urban lot split as established in
Chapter 20.30 of the La Mirada Subdivision Code.
      (6)   The housing units on the lot proposed to be subdivided are one of
the following:
         (A)   Constructed on fee simple ownership lots;
         (B)   Part of a common interest development;
         (C)   Part of a housing cooperative, as defined in Civil Code Section
817; or
         (D)   Owned by a community land trust meeting the requirements of
Government Code Section 66499.41.
      (7)   The lot being subdivided is not located on a site that is any of
the following:
         (A)   Prime farmland or farmland of statewide importance, or land
zoned or designated for agricultural protection or preservation by local ballot
measure;
         (B)   Wetlands, as defined in the United States Fish and Wildlife
Manual;
         (C)   Within a high or very high fire hazard severity zone as
indicated on maps adopted by the Department of Forestry and Fire Protection;
         (D)   A hazardous waste site listed pursuant to California Government
Code Section 65962.5 or a hazardous waste site designated by the Department of
Toxic Substances Control pursuant to Section 25356 of the Health and Safety
Code, unless the project sponsor has secured a letter from the State Department
of Public Health, State Water Resources Control Board, or the Department of
Toxic Substance Control stating that the site is suitable for residential uses;
         (E)   Within a delineated earthquake fault zone as determined by the
State Geologist in any official maps published by the State Geologist, unless
the development complies with applicable seismic protection building code
standards adopted by the California Building Standards Commission under the
California Building Standards Law (Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of
Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code), and by any local building
department under Chapter 12.2 (commencing with Section 8875) of Division 1 of
Title 2; within a special flood hazard area subject to inundation by the 1%
annual chance flood (100-year flood), unless the site meets the criteria of
California Government Code section 66499.41 (a)(9)(F);
         (F)   Within a regulatory floodway;
         (G)   Land identified for conservation;
         (H)   Habitat for protected species; or
         (I)   Land under conservation easement.
   (b)   Housing development not eligible. A housing development shall not be
eligible for provisions of this chapter if it would result in the demolition of
any of the following types of housing:
      (1)   Housing that is subject to a recorded covenant, ordinance, or law
that restricts rent to levels affordable to persons and families of low, very
low, or extremely low income.
      (2)   Housing that is subject to any form of rent or price control
through a local public entity's valid exercise of its police power.
      (3)   Housing occupied by tenants within the five years preceding the
date of the application, including housing that has been demolished or that
tenants have vacated prior to the submission of the application for a
development permit.
      (4)   A parcel on which an owner of residential real property has
exercised the owner's rights under Chapter 12.75 (commencing with Section 7060)
of Division 7 of Title 1 to withdraw accommodations from rent or lease within
15 years before the date that the development proponent submits an application.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.41.030 Exceptions to the development standards.
The development standards prescribed in the applicable individual zone
regulations shall be subject to the following exceptions:
   (a)   The resulting parcels shall have a minimum lot size of 600 square
feet, and the minimum lot width and minimum lot frontage dimensional
requirements shall not apply.
   (b)   Interior side setbacks are not required between units, except as
required by the building code.
   (c)   A minimum rear setback of four feet is required; and a minimum street
side setback of four feet or the setback for the underlying zone, whichever is
less, is required between lots and adjacent streets.
   (d)   A minimum side yard setback of four feet or the setback for the
underlying zone, whichever is less, is required between lots and adjacent lots
not part of the SB 684 subdivision.
   (e)   Projects with three to seven units shall have a maximum floor area
ratio (FAR) of 1.0. Projects between eight and ten units shall have a maximum
of 1.25.
   (f)   One parking space which may be uncovered or not enclosed, shall be
required per unit constructed on a parcel created pursuant to the procedures in
this section, except that no parking may be required where the parcel is
located within one-half mile walking distance of either a stop located in a
high-quality transit corridor or a major transit stop, as defined in Chapter
21.200.
   (g)   The average total area of floorspace for the proposed housing units on
the lot proposed to be subdivided does not exceed 1,750 square feet.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.41.040 Application procedure.
The Director shall ministerially review, without a hearing, an application for
a housing development project on a lot that is subdivided pursuant to this
Chapter and Government Code Section 66499.41, and shall approve the application
if the criteria in Government Code Section 65852.28 and this section are
satisfied.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.41.050 Finding for denial.
A proposed housing development under this chapter may only be denied if the
building official makes a written finding, based on a preponderance of the
evidence, that the proposed housing development project would have a specific,
adverse impact upon public health and safety or the physical environment, for
which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the
specific, adverse impact. For purposes of this section, a "specific adverse
impact" is a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based
on objective, identified written public health or safety standards, policies,
or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.
Inconsistency with the zoning ordinance or general plan land use designation
and eligibility to claim a welfare exemption are not specific health or safety
impacts.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
Chapter 21.42
ACCESSORY USES
Sections:
   
21.42.010   Purpose.
   
21.42.020   Permitted accessory uses.
21.42.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to identify and regulate accessory uses of
property in all zoning districts to ensure such uses are developed and
conducted in a manner that does not create any public safety or nuisance
concerns.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.42.020 Permitted accessory uses.
   (a)   Residential Zoning Districts. The following accessory uses are
permitted in all residential zoning districts. Uses are subject to compliance
with listed conditions and other provisions of this title.
      (1)   Antennas, cables, and wireless telecommunication facilities in
accordance with provisions of
Chapter 21.46.
      (2)   Home occupations in accordance with provisions of
Chapter 21.98.
      (3)   Rental of rooms. Except as otherwise provided by law, the number of
rental agreements permitted for any one dwelling at any one point in time shall
be limited to two such agreements, written or oral.
      (4)   Rental and sales offices for the leasing and/or sales of units
located in the same apartment or condominium complex.
      (5)   Homeowner association and/or clubhouse buildings for resident and
guest use with approval of a conditional use permit pursuant to
Chapter 21.110.
      (6)   Guest houses and cabañas, provided no kitchen facilities exist
within the structure.
      (7)   Swimming pools and spas, provided that no swimming pool or spa is
located in a required front yard, is no nearer than three feet to any fence or
building wall, and conforms to all building code and health and safety code
requirements.
   (b)   Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts. The following accessory
uses are permitted in all commercial and industrial zoning districts. Uses are
subject to compliance with listed conditions and other provisions of this
title.
      (1)   A dwelling unit within a business building, provided such unit is
occupied solely by a caretaker or watchman of the building or business.
      (2)   Pharmacies, the sale of retail merchandise, and similar small-scale
accessory uses are allowed subordinate to a primary use, provided there is no
external evidence of any commercial activity other than the primary use of the
site (e.g. signs, products).
      (3)   Antennas, cables, and wireless telecommunication facilities in
accordance with provisions of
Chapter 21.46.
      (4)   Automatic teller or cash machine(s).
      (5)   Outdoor sales, display, storage and seating in compliance with
provisions of the applicable zoning district.
      (6)   Recreation facilities (indoor and outdoor) for use by employees.
      (7)   Recycling collection facilities in compliance with provisions of
Chapter 21.50.
      (8)   Automatic vending machines.
      (9)   Swimming pools and spas, provided that no swimming pool or spa is
located in a required front yard, is no nearer than three feet to any fence or
building wall, and conforms to all building code and health and safety code
requirements.
   (c)   Open Space Zoning District. The following accessory uses are permitted
in the open space zoning district. Uses are subject to compliance with listed
conditions and other provisions of this title.
      (1)   Antennas, cables, and wireless telecommunication facilities in
accordance with provisions of
Chapter 21.46.
      (2)   Bus shelters and park-and-ride lots.
      (3)   Recreation, refreshment, and service buildings in public parks.
      (4)   Swimming pools and spas, provided that no swimming pool or spa is
located in a required front yard, is no nearer than three feet to any fence or
building wall, and conforms to all building code and health and safety code
requirements.
      (5)   Recycling collection facilities in compliance with provisions of
Chapter 21.50.
      (6)   Automatic vending machines.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.43
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY
Sections:
   
21.43.010   Purpose.
   
21.43.020   Applicability.
   
21.43.030   Development standards.
   
21.43.040   Application procedure.
21.43.010 Purpose.
This chapter sets forth regulations for single room occupancy (SRO) units as
defined in Section 21.200.200. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.43.020 Applicability.
Single room occupancy developments are permitted by-right in the Mixed Use
Overlay zone and in zoning districts that allow multi-family residential
development, subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025).
21.43.030 Development standards.
Single room occupancy (SRO) residential developments shall be subject to and
comply with the development standards of the zoning district in which they are
located and the following standards and regulations:
   (a)   SROs are only permitted on second floors and above.
   (b)   The minimum size for the individual units is 200 square feet of floor
area.
   (c)   The minimum number of SROs in a single building shall be 35 units, and
shall include the following amenities:
      (1)   One laundry room facility per floor.
      (2)   An on-site manager's apartment.
      (3)   Secured bicycle racks or motorcycle spaces shall be provided at a
minimum ratio of one for each ten tenants.
   (d)   Each SRO unit shall include the following:
      (1)   Bathroom with shower in separate room from main living quarters.
      (2)   A minimum of one closet no less than six square feet in size.
      (3)   Adequate heating and air conditioning. Air conditioning units may
be installed for each SRO unit as long as they are flush with the exterior wall
surface (window air conditioning units are not permitted).
      (4)   Kitchen counter top with a minimum depth of 12 inches and width of
24 inches.
      (5)   Space and proper wiring for microwave and refrigerator.
      (6)   Kitchen sink with garbage disposal.
   (e)   SRO occupancy shall be limited as follows:
      (1)   A maximum of one adult person, with a maximum occupancy of three
persons per unit. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.43.040 Application Procedure.
Approval of projects pursuant to this chapter shall require a Zoning Clearance
pursuant to
Chapter 21.96. No public hearing or notice shall be required.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
Chapter 21.44
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Sections:
   
21.44.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.44.020   Definitions.
   
21.44.030   Zoning clearance required.
   
21.44.040   Exceptions.
   
21.44.050   Location of adult businesses.
   
21.44.060   Development and operational standards.
21.44.010 Purpose and intent.
The intent of these regulations is to prevent problems of blight and
deterioration which can be brought about by the concentration of adult
entertainment businesses in close proximity to incompatible uses such as
schools, churches, parks, recreational centers, and residentially zoned
districts or in proximity to other adult uses. The city council finds that it
has been demonstrated in various communities that the concentration of adult
entertainment businesses causes an increase in the number of transients in the
area, and an increase in crime, and can cause other businesses and residents to
move elsewhere. It is, therefore, the purpose of these regulations to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult
business establishments or their proximity to incompatible uses, while
permitting such adult business establishments in certain areas.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.44.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section.
   (1)   "Adult entertainment business" means those businesses defined as
follows:
      (A)   "Adult bookstore" means any establishment which has as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade:
         (i)   Books, films, magazines or other periodicals or other forms of
audio or visual representation which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, or
         (ii)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for
use in connection with specified sexual activities.
      (B)   "Adult cabaret" means any nightclub, theater, bar or other
establishment which features live or media representations of performances by
topless or bottomless dancers, go-go-dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or
similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      (C)   "Adult entertainment establishment" means any establishment which
is customarily open only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any
minor under the age of eighteen years by reason of age.
      (D)   "Adult mini motion picture theater" means any enclosed or
unenclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty persons used for
presenting any form of audio or visual material and in which a substantial
portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material
which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (E)   "Adult model studio" means any place where, for any form of
consideration of gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas
are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed
or similarly depicted by persons paying such consideration or gratuity.
      (F)   "Adult motel" means any motel or similar establishment offering
public accommodations for any consideration, which provides patrons with
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (G)   "Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public
is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (H)   "Adult motion picture theater" means any enclosed or unenclosed
building with a capacity of fifty or more persons used for presenting any form
of audio or visual material and in which substantial portion of the total
presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished
or characterized by an emphasis on depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (I)   "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or other
similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which regularly
features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons.
      (J)   "Body painting studio" means any establishment or business which
provides the service of applying paint or other substance whether transparent
or nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially
nude or where specified anatomical areas are exposed.
      (K)   "Other adult entertainment businesses" means any other business or
commercial establishment not defined in this section:
         (i)   Wherein, for any form of consideration, the establishment
provides entertainment to patrons in which a substantial portion of the total
presentation time is characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or
         (ii)   Which devotes more than fifty percent of the total area used
for display of its stock in trade to items, instruments and paraphernalia which
are characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities.
   (2)   "Sexual encounter center" means any business, agency, or person who,
for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more
persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or
associate for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activity or exposing
specified anatomical areas.
   (3)   "Establish" means and includes any of the following:
      (A)   The opening or commencement of operation of any adult entertainment
business; or
      (B)   The conversion of any existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment business, to any adult entertainment business; or
      (C)   The relocation of any adult business; or
      (D)   The addition of any adult entertainment business to any existing
adult entertainment business if the addition results in an enlargement of the
place of business. For the purpose of this section, enlargement shall mean an
increase in the size of the building within which the business is conducted by
either construction or use of an adjacent building or portion thereof, which is
located on the same or an adjacent lot or parcel of land.
   (4)   "Specified anatomical areas" means and includes any of the following:
      (A)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; or
      (B)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   (5)   "Specified sexual activities" include the following:
      (A)   Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal
intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of
unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual
relationship and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or
conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio,
necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism.
      (B)   Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation,
arousal or tumescence.
      (C)   Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation,
coitus, ejaculation.
      (D)   Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, public region,
buttocks or female breast.
      (E)   Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain.
      (F)   Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal
by a human being.
      (G)   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal
irrigation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.44.030 Zoning clearance required.
   (a)   The establishment of an adult entertainment business requires zoning
clearance approval in accordance with the standard application review
procedures in
Chapter 21.96. In addition to the findings required by Section
21.110.030 for the granting of a conditional use permit, the planning
commission shall have the authority to deny a conditional use permit for an
adult entertainment business if any of the following findings can be made:
      (1)   That information contained in the application or supplemental
information requested from the applicant is false in any material detail.
      (2)   That the proposed location of the business would not comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   That the operation of the business is or would be in violation of
any of the provisions herein.
      (4)   That the premises where the adult entertainment business is or will
be located does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited
to, the city's building, health, zoning, fire and property maintenance
ordinances.
      (5)   That a permit to operate the adult entertainment establishment has
been issued to the applicant, a partner of the applicant, or a stockholder of
the applicant which stockholder owns more than ten percent of the applicant's
corporate stock, which permit has been suspended and the period of suspension
has not yet ended.
   (b)   The planning commission may place conditions on a conditional use
permit to ensure compliance with these provisions and other sections of the
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.44.040 Exceptions.
An adult entertainment business shall not include:
   (1)   Establishment where sexual therapy is being conducted by a
practitioner properly licensed by the state to conduct such activities.
   (2)   Figure studio or school of art, or similar establishment which meets
the requirements established in the Education Code of the State of California
for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder, to
issue and confer a diploma.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.44.050 Location of adult businesses.
To fulfill the purposes of this chapter and to avoid a concentration of adult
entertainment business uses, adult entertainment businesses are permitted in
the industrial (M-2) zoning district located south of Stage Road, east of
Valley View Avenue, north of Artesia, and west of the Orange County border,
subject to the following location restrictions. For the purposes of this
section, distance shall be measured as the shortest distance between two adult
entertainment business structures or an adult entertainment business structure
and the nearest property line of a residence, school, church, or community/
public use site as specified herein.
    (1)   No adult entertainment business shall be located within five hundred
feet of any existing residential zoning district or residential use.
   (2)   No adult entertainment business shall be located within five hundred
feet of any church or similar place of worship, school or day care facility
(public or private), park or playground, recreation facility, hospital, or
public building (e.g., government office, sheriff station, courthouse,
library).
   (3)   No adult entertainment business shall be located within five hundred
feet of any other existing adult entertainment business.
   (4)   No adult entertainment businesses shall be established in a building
in which the primary building face fronts on the following streets:
      (A)   Alondra Boulevard, east of Valley View Avenue and west of La Mirada
Boulevard.
      (B)   Valley View Avenue, south of Stage Road and north of Artesia
Boulevard.
      (C)   Rosecrans Avenue, west of Valley View Avenue and east of the city
limits.
      (D)   Valley View Avenue north of Rosecrans Avenue.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.44.060 Development and operational standards.
In addition to the development standards in the underlying M-2 zoning district,
the following development and operational standards apply to adult
entertainment business uses. In the event of conflict between these standards
and the underlying zoning district regulations, the provisions of this section
shall apply.
   (1)   Signs. Signs, advertisements, displays, or other promotional materials
depicting or describing specific anatomical areas or specific sexual activities
or displaying instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use
in connection with specified sexual activities shall not be shown or exhibited
so as to be discernible by the public beyond the walls of the building or
portion thereof in which the adult entertainment business is conducted.
   (2)   Noise. No loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used by adult
entertainment businesses for amplification of sound to a level discernible by
the public beyond the walls of the building or portion thereof in which the
adult entertainment business is conducted.
   (3)   Parking lot lighting. All off-street parking areas and premise entries
of the adult entertainment business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing
hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on parking surfaces and
walkways.
   (4)   Landscaping. No landscaping shall exceed thirty inches in height,
except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the ground.
   (5)   Trash enclosures. All trash receptacles and other refuse or waste
storage shall be kept in an enclosed building or within a trash enclosure area.
Any such trash enclosure area shall consist, at a minimum, of a three-sided,
six-foot-high decorative block or similar wall structure, with the fourth side
comprised of a closable, latchable solid gate.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4313.jpg]
 
   (6)   Access. Each adult entertainment business shall have a business
entrance separate from any other non-adult business located in the same
building. All building openings, entries, and windows for an adult business
shall be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view
into the interior of an adult entertainment business from any area open to the
general public.
   (7)   Posting age restrictions. The building entrance to the adult
entertainment business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice
indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises.
   (8)   Manager stations. All indoor areas of the adult entertainment business
within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by
the management at all times.
   (9)   Individual viewing areas. No individual viewing area may be occupied
by more than one person at any one time.
Individual viewing area shall mean a viewing area designed for occupancy by one
person. Individual viewing areas of the adult business shall be operated and
maintained without any hole or other opening or means of direct communication
or visual or physical access between the interior space of two or more
individual viewing areas.
   (10)   No closed areas. No adult use or adult entertainment business shall
maintain closed areas, booths, cubicles rooms or other areas within its place
of business that are used, designed or furnished for private sexual activity.
   (11)   Nudity by customers prohibited. No nudity or sexual activities by
customers shall be allowed on the premises.
   (12)   Inspection. All portions of the premises shall be available by access
and visual inspection at all times by any city inspector standing at the front
door.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.45
CHECK CASHING ESTABLISHMENTS
Sections:
   
21.45.010   Purpose.
   
21.45.020   Distancing requirements.
   
21.45.030   Restrictions on operations.
21.45.010 Purpose.
The city hereby finds that the operation of businesses whose primary function
is to provide cash to patrons in exchange for personal and business checks and
money orders and to perform similar financial transactions for a service fee,
require restrictions on the operations of such businesses to guard against
potential threats to public safety. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
regulations that provide such safeguards, and to create and maintain business
districts that offer patrons suitable and safe environments for conducting
financial transactions that they may choose not to pursue at standard financial
institutions such as banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, or
brokerage houses.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.45.020 Distancing requirements.
The following regulations shall apply to the siting of check cashing
establishments:
   (1)   A minimum distance of one thousand feet, as measured from property
line to property line, shall be maintained between any two check cashing
establishments.
   (2)   No check cashing establishment shall be located within five hundred
feet, as measured from property line to property line, of any school, church,
state- or federal-chartered bank, loan institution, savings association, credit
union, or brokerage house.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.45.030 Restrictions on operations.
The following restrictions and requirements shall apply to the operation of
check cashing establishments:
   (1)   Prior to the issuance of occupancy permits, a lighting plan shall be
approved by the community development director.
   (2)   All store fronts shall contain transparent glass windows that allow
from views into the establishment from the nearest public right-of-way.
   (3)   The hours of operation shall be limited to 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
   (4)   At least one "no loitering" sign shall be maintained on the premises
in plain view of patrons.
   (5)   Graffiti shall be removed within seventy-two hours of application.
   (6)   The site must be kept free of litter.
   (7)   No exterior pay telephones shall be permitted.
   (8)   A least one certified security guard, with licensing approved by the
city, shall be on duty during all hours that the business is open for
operations.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.46
RADIO AND TELEVISION ANTENNAS AND
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA FACILITIES
Sections:
   
21.46.010   Purpose.
Division I. Regulation of Antenna and Telecommunications Facilities
   
21.46.020   Mandatory compliance with code requirements.
   
21.46.030   Permit requirements by zoning district.
   
21.46.040   Devices measuring one meter or less in diameter.
   
21.46.050   Devices measuring greater than one meter in diameter.
   
21.46.060   Safety-related development standards for antenna and
telecommunications facilities.
   
21.46.070   Development standards for antenna and telecommunications
facilities.
   
21.46.080   Administrative adjustment required.
   
21.46.090   Placement guidelines.
Division II. Regulation of Wireless Antenna Facilities
   
21.46.100   Facilities within public rights-of-way.
   
21.46.110   City-owned land, buildings, and rights-of-way.
   
21.46.120   Review required.
   
21.46.130   Development standards for wireless facilities.
   
21.46.140   Maintenance and cessation of use.
   
21.46.150   Local emergency or disaster situations; temporary installations.
Division III. Regulation of Amateur Radio Station Antennas
   
21.46.160   Building permit required.
   
21.46.170   Reasonable accommodation.
Division IV. General Provisions
   
21.46.180   Nonconforming antennas.
   
21.46.190   Enforcement.
21.46.010 Purpose.
   (a)   The purpose of the regulatory provisions set forth in this chapter is
to establish development standards for the installation and maintenance of
antennas and wireless antenna facilities within specified areas of the city.
These standards are intended to ensure that the design and location of those
antennas and facilities are consistent with previously adopted policies of the
city, to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare of the city's residents, and to enhance the aesthetic quality and
appearance of the city by maintaining architectural and structural integrity
and by protecting views and vistas from obtrusive and unsightly accessory uses
and facilities.
   (b)   In adopting and implementing the regulatory provisions of this
chapter, it is the intent of the city council to further the objectives
specified above in subsection (a) without unnecessarily burdening the federal
interests in ensuring access to satellite services, in promoting fair and
effective competition among competing communications service providers, and in
eliminating local restrictions and regulations that, with regard to antennas,
preclude reception of an acceptable signal quality or unreasonably delay,
prevent, or increase the cost of installation, maintenance, or use of those
antennas.
   (c)   With regard to the regulatory requirements set forth herein, the city
council expressly finds and determines that they are necessary, desirable, and
in the best interests of the community to protect public safety. The city
council further finds and determines that these regulatory requirements are
applicable to the proposed installation of satellite earth station antennas or
fixed wireless antenna facilities that are not permitted accessory uses and
that, because of legitimate safety-related concerns, do not meet the criteria
for exemption from local regulation established by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) under the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
   (d)   The regulatory provisions set forth in this chapter are not applicable
to any of the following:
      (1)   City-owned antennas or antenna facilities, including those used for
emergency communications and public safety purposes, that are located or
proposed to be located on either publicly owned or privately owned property.
      (2)   Privately owned antenna or antenna facilities that are located or
proposed to be located on city-owned property or within the public rights-of-
way; provided, however, that owners of such devices must obtain a right-of-way
use permit pursuant to the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION I. REGULATION OF ANTENNA AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
21.46.020 Mandatory compliance with code requirements.
In addition to complying with all applicable safety-related development
standards set forth in this chapter, the installation of all antenna and
telecommunications facilities must comply with all applicable building codes,
fire codes, and electrical codes. In particular, electrical service must be
properly grounded and rated fire walls may not be penetrated.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.030 Permit requirements by zoning district.
   (a)   Permit Required. Unless otherwise exempt from permit requirements
pursuant to Section
21.46.040, each wireless communication facility requires a permit in accordance
with Table 21.46.030.
   (b)   Permit Processing. Permits shall be processed in accordance with
applicable provisions of Article VIII for each of the specific permits listed
in Table 21.46.030.
   (c)   Conditions. The designated approving authority for each of the listed
permits may impose conditions on any permit or approval for a wireless
communication facility to ensure compliance with all provisions and purposes of
this chapter.
Table 21.46.030
Permit Requirements for Wireless Communication Facilities
Wireless      Residential Zoning Commercial Zoning Industrial Zoning Open Space
Communication Districts          Districts         District          District
Facility
Table 21.46.030
Permit Requirements for Wireless Communication Facilities
Wireless         Residential      Commercial       Industrial Zoning Open Space
Communication    Zoning Districts Zoning Districts District          District
Facility
Antenna (all
types), ground-  ZC               ZC               ZC                ZC
mounted
Antenna (all
types),          ZC               ZC               ZC                ZC
building-mounted
Antenna (all
types), roof-    ZC               ZC               ZC                ZC
mounted
Co-located
wireless
communication
facility which   ZC/CUP(1)        ZC/CUP(1)        ZC/CUP(1)         ZC/CUP(1)
is co-located on
a permitted
major or minor
facility
Satellite earth  CUP              ZC               ZC                CUP
station
Wireless
communication    CUP              ZC               ZC                CUP
facility, minor
Wireless
communication    CUP              CUP              CUP               CUP
facility, major
 
Abbreviations:
ZC = Permitted use subject to zoning clearance/plan check (
Chapter 21.96 of this title)
CUP = Conditional use permit required pursuant to
Chapter 21.110 of this title
(1)   See provisions of subsection (d) below.
    (d)   The collocation of a new wireless communication facility on an
existing, approved minor or major wireless communication facility that: (i) was
approved after January 1, 2007 by discretionary permit; (ii) was approved
subject to an environmental impact report, negative declaration, or mitigated
negative declaration; and (iii) otherwise complies with the requirements of
Government Code Section 65850.6 (b) for wireless telecommunications collocation
facilities, shall only require zoning clearance/plan check pursuant to
Chapter 21.96, provided such collocation does not increase the height or
location of the existing permitted tower/structure, or otherwise change the
bulk, size, or other physical attributes of the existing permitted wireless
communication facility, except as follows:
      (1)   The collocation facility may include: (i) equipment boxes that are
colored and/or disguised to match the existing facility and that do not exceed
the total volume of equipment boxes utilized by the existing wireless
telecommunications collocation facility; (ii) no more antenna panels than are
being utilized by the existing wireless telecommunications collocation
facility, provided all antennas are colored or disguised to match the existing
facility; (iii) no additional tower, and no more support structure than is
shown in plans and specifications to be reasonably necessary to collocate the
permitted antenna panels on the existing wireless facility.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided above, a conditional use permit shall
be required if otherwise required by this title and the proposed collocation:
         (A)   Increases the height of the existing permitted tower/structure
or otherwise changes the bulk, size, location, or any other physical attributes
of the existing permitted wireless communication facility; or
         (B)   Adds any microwave dish or other antennas not expressly
permitted to be included in a collocation facility by this section;
         (C)   The existing permitted wireless communication facility was
approved on or prior to January 1, 2007; or
         (D)   The proposed collocation facility will serve or be operated by
more than one wireless services provider, unless an additional provider is
authorized in writing by the Planning Director after consideration of the
factors applicable to administrative approval of collocation facilities set
forth above in this section, the size of the additional, proposed facility, and
the potential visual or other impact of the proposed facility.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.040 Devices measuring one meter or less in diameter.
The following antennas and telecommunications facilities may be installed as
permitted accessory uses in land use zones where residential and nonresidential
uses are authorized without zoning clearance/plan check and without obtaining a
building permit:
   (1)   An antenna located in any zoning district that is designed for the
following purposes and that meets the specified dimensions and height
limitations:
      (A)   An antenna that is designed to receive direct broadcast satellite
service, including direct-to-home satellite services, provided that such
antenna is one meter (39.37 inches) or less in diameter and is either building-
mounted or ground- mounted and elevated by a mast.
      (B)   An antenna that is designed to receive video programming services
by means of multipoint distribution services, including multi-channel
multipoint distribution services, and such antenna is one meter (39.37 inches)
or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and is either building-mounted or
ground-mounted and elevated by a mast.
      (C)   Antennas referenced above in subsections (A) and (B) above may not
exceed the following height limitations:
         (i)   The height limit for ground-mounted antenna is ten feet.
         (ii)   Building-mounted antenna may not project above the eave of the
pitched roof or top of the parapet wall or cornice.
         (iii)   Roof-mounted antenna shall not extend more than five feet
above the highest (peak) point of the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof
screen.
         (iv)   Exceptions to these height limits may be granted by the city
planner where the applicant can demonstrate that additional height is necessary
to obtain a useable quality signal.
   (2)   An antenna, located in any zoning district, which is designed solely
to receive television broadcast signals, and such antenna, whether building-
mounted or ground-mounted, is limited to that height which is reasonably
necessary to ensure the reception of television broadcast signals of an
acceptable quality.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.050 Devices measuring greater than one meter in diameter.
   (a)   The following antenna and telecommunications facilities may be
installed in any zoning district where commercial or industrial uses are
generally permitted, provided that a building permit is first obtained, that
the antenna/facility receives required zoning clearance/plan check or
conditional use permit approval pursuant this title, and that the installation
complies with all applicable safety-related development standards set forth in
this chapter.
      (1)   A satellite earth station antenna that is designed to receive video
programming services, and the diameter or diagonal measurement of that antenna
exceeds one meter (39.37 inches) but does not exceed two meters (78.74 inches).
Such antenna may be either building-mounted or ground-mounted and elevated by a
mast, but it may not exceed the following height limitations:
         (A)   The height limit for ground-mounted antenna is ten feet.
         (B)   Building-mounted antenna may not project above the eave of the
pitched roof or top of the parapet wall or cornice.
         (C)   Roof-mounted antenna shall not extend more than five feet above
the highest (peak) point of the roofline, parapet wall, or other roof screen.
   (b)   A fee may be imposed by the city for the issuance of any building
permit that is required under this section.
   (c)   The city council finds and determines that the building permit
requirement imposed by this section is in the public interest and is justified
by the following facts and circumstances:
      (1)   Satellite earth station antennas that exceed one meter in diameter
or diagonal measurement but do not exceed two meters may reasonably be expected
to be of a size, weight, and bulk substantially in excess of the smaller
satellite earth station antennas that are permitted accessory uses and
therefore generate legitimate safety concerns of a greater magnitude.
      (2)   Satellite earth station antennas having a diameter or diagonal
measurement between one meter and two meters that are proposed to be located in
commercial or industrial zoning districts have the potential to adversely
affect the public safety due to the concentration of substantial numbers of
employees and customers in commercial and industrial buildings.
   (d)   The city council further finds and determines that the building permit
requirement imposed by this section is no more burdensome than is necessary to
enable the city to achieve the following safety-related objectives and thereby
reduce the potential for bodily injury, death, and property damage:
      (1)   To verify the proper mounting of these larger antennas on buildings
or masts within commercial and industrial land use zones in order to reduce
potential safety hazards resulting from faulty installations, including
detachments attributable to windstorms, earthquakes, or other natural causes.
      (2)   To minimize the potential for fire-related hazards by verifying
compliance with all applicable requirements of the city's electrical code,
including those pertaining to wiring and electrical connections, grounding, and
clearance from adjacent power lines.
      (3)   To ensure that the installation is completed in compliance with all
applicable building code and fire code requirements, particularly in those
circumstances where fire-rated walls or the roof of a structure will be subject
to drilling or alteration.
      (4)   To ensure that no antenna, nor any of its component parts or
accessory facilities, encroaches into the public rights-of-way, thereby
compromising public safety.
      (5)   To ensure that a licensed structural or civil engineer certifies
engineering calculations for all footings that may be required for the
installation of a ground-mounted antenna.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.060 Safety-related development standards for antenna and
telecommunications facilities.
   (a)   The safety-related development standards set forth in this section
apply in all zoning districts to the siting, construction, and operation of the
following antenna and telecommunications facilities:
      (1)   Satellite earth station antennas that are permitted accessory uses.
      (2)   Satellite earth station antennas that are subject to a building
permit.
      (3)   Satellite earth station antennas that require conditional use
permit approval and the issuance of building permits.
   (b)   The safety-related development standards are as follows:
      (1)   No satellite earth station antenna may be installed in any zoning
district if it will impede normal vehicular or pedestrian circulation, ingress
to, or egress from any building, structure, or parking facility.
      (2)   Any mast that will be used to elevate a satellite earth station
antenna must be constructed of noncombustible and corrosive-resistant
materials.
      (3)   All satellite earth station antennas must be installed with
adequate ground wire to protect against a direct strike of lightning. The
ground wire must be of a type approved by the electrical code for grounding
masts and lightning arrestors.
      (4)   All satellite earth station antennas must be separated from
adjacent power lines by such vertical and horizontal distance as is required by
the electrical code and by other applicable laws and regulations.
      (5)   Any mast that will be used to elevate a satellite earth station
antenna must be secured by a separate safety wire in a direction away from
adjacent power lines or other potential hazards.
      (6)   To the extent feasible, all cables, wires, or similar electrical
transmission devices that connect with a satellite earth station antenna must
be placed underground.
      (7)   All connectors on a satellite earth station antenna, and on any
mast to be used for elevation, must be capable of sustaining a wind load of the
magnitude specified in the building code.
      (8)   No satellite earth station antenna, nor any of its component parts
or accessory facilities, may encroach into the public rights-of-way.
      (9)   All satellite earth station antennas must be maintained in good
repair, in a neat and clean condition, and in compliance with all applicable
building, fire, and electrical codes.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.070 Development standards for antenna and telecommunications facilities.
   (a)   Residential Zoning Districts. The following development standards
apply to the siting, construction, and operation of satellite earth station
antennas in residential zoning districts:
      (1)   A ground-mounted satellite earth station antenna that must be
located in the rear yard and in compliance with the setback requirement that is
applicable to the primary structure.
      (2)   A building-mounted satellite earth station antenna that requires
zoning clearance/plan check or a conditional use permit must be located on that
building so as not to be visible from the street.
   (b)   All Other Zoning Districts. The following development standards apply
to the siting, construction, and operation of satellite earth station antennas
in all nonresidential zoning districts:
      (1)   A ground-mounted satellite earth station antenna that requires
zoning clearance/plan check or a conditional use permit must be located in
compliance with any applicable setback requirement.
      (2)   No ground-mounted satellite earth station antenna that requires
zoning clearance/plan check or a conditional use permit may be located in the
area between the front property line and the main building or structure.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.080 Administrative adjustment required.
   (a)   Administrative Adjustment Required. Under any of the following
circumstances, an application for an administrative adjustment must be
submitted in accordance with
Chapter 21.102 and, if the application is approved, a building permit must be
obtained:
      (1)   The proposed satellite earth station antenna will exceed the
applicable height limitation(s).
      (2)   The diameter or diagonal measurement of the proposed satellite
earth station antenna will exceed the maximum limitations specified in this
chapter.
      (3)   The proposed satellite earth station antenna will not comply with
the applicable setback or locational requirements set forth Section
21.46.070.
   (b)   Review Criteria. In considering an application for an administrative
adjustment relating to the siting of a satellite earth station antenna, the
approving authority will consider the following factors, as may be applicable:
      (1)   Whether the requested administrative adjustment is necessary to
enable the applicant to receive signals of an acceptable quality.
      (2)   Whether the satellite earth station antenna will have a substantial
adverse impact on the scale and massing of the streetscape.
      (3)   Whether the satellite earth station antenna will have a substantial
adverse impact on an adjacent property owner's access to light and air or on
the adjacent property owner's privacy.
   (c)   Application. In addition to the requirements for an administrative
adjustment set forth in
Chapter 21.102, the application must include the following:
      (1)   Construction drawings that show the proposed method of installation
and the manufacturer's specifications, including equipment specifications that
are mandated by the FCC.
      (2)   A plot plan showing the proposed location on the site of the
satellite earth station antenna, its distance from other structures on the
site, and its distance from the closest structures on adjacent properties.
      (3)   Engineering data evidencing that the satellite earth station
antenna will be in compliance with all structural requirements of the building
code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.090 Placement guidelines.
The community development director or his or her designee may prepare and
disseminate information concerning the placement and installation of satellite
earth station antennas in accordance with voluntary guidelines that will help
to achieve the city's safety-related objectives and to promote reasonable
aesthetic objectives in order to maintain property values. This information may
include, without limitation, the following:
   (1)   Installers of satellite earth station antennas licensed to conduct
business within the city.
   (2)   Federal regulations promulgated by the FCC that preempt governmental
and nongovernmental restrictions on antenna users who occupy residential units,
including residential units subject to homeowner association CC&Rs and
residential units within multiple-dwelling complexes, whether owner occupied or
tenant occupied.
   (3)   The availability to existing or prospective antenna users of "no fee"
safety-related inspections by the city.
   (4)   Guidelines relating to the preferred placement of satellite earth
station antennas in order to reduce or eliminate their visibility from adjacent
public streets, including the use of screening materials, such as walls,
fences, earth berms, or landscaping, or the addition of new architectural
elements that are compatible with the design of adjacent buildings.
   (5)   Guidelines relating to preferred neutral finished colors of satellite
earth station antennas, which colors are determined to blend with surrounding
dominant colors, or to camouflage an antenna, and are neither bright,
reflective, nor metallic.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION II. REGULATION OF WIRELESS ANTENNA FACILITIES
21.46.100 Facilities within public rights-of-way.
All wireless antenna facilities proposed in the public rights-of-way in any
zoning district must, unless exempt under paramount state or federal law,
comply with all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code pertaining to
encroachments into or on public property or rights-of-way.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.110 City-owned land, buildings, and rights-of-way.
   (a)   The regulatory provisions of this Division II do not apply to the
siting of wireless antenna facilities on or within city-owned land or
buildings. The proposed siting of these facilities on all city-owned property
will require a license or lease agreement with the city, which license or lease
agreement must be approved by the city council.
   (b)   Except as noted in Section
21.46.100, the regulatory provisions of this section do not apply to the siting
of wireless antenna facilities, or to the siting of radio equipment, used by a
telecommunications service provider in operating a wireless, microcellular
digital radio communications network, upon existing above-ground poles or
similar appurtenances located within the public rights-of-way. Applications for
the placement of such antenna facilities or radio equipment upon existing
above-ground poles or similar structures located within the public rights-of-
way will be submitted to the public works director on a form provided by the
director, along with an application fee in an amount established by resolution
of the city council. Unless exempt under paramount state or federal law, any
authorized use of existing poles or similar structures located within the
public rights-of-way will be subject to a permit to be issued by the city
manager, or the city manager's designee.
   (c)   Except as provided in Section
21.46.100, the regulatory provisions of this section do not apply to the siting
of wireless antenna facilities, or to the siting of radio equipment, used by a
telecommunications service provider in operating a wireless, microcellular
digital radio communications network, upon new above-ground poles or similar
structures that are proposed to be installed within the public rights-of-way.
Applications for the placement of such antenna facilities or radio equipment
upon new above-ground poles or similar structures that are proposed to be
installed within the public rights-of-way will be submitted to the public works
director on a form provided by the director, along with an application fee in
an amount established by resolution of the city council. Authorization for the
installation of any new above-ground pole or similar structure for the
operation of an antenna facility or radio equipment must comply with the
provisions of the Municipal Code pertaining to encroachments into or on public
property or rights-of-way, and will be subject to a license, lease, or
franchise agreement with the city that is approved by the city council.
   (d)   Every permit, license, lease, or franchise agreement that is
authorized by the city under the provisions of this section may contain a
requirement that the telecommunications service provider, or the property
owner, submit documentation that the electromagnetic fields (EMFs) from the
proposed antenna facilities or radio equipment will be within the limits
approved by the FCC, and that a report be submitted annually evidencing the
fact that the EMFs continue to be within approved FCC limits.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.120 Review required.
   (a)   Type of Review. Unless otherwise exempt from permit requirements
pursuant to Section
21.46.040, each wireless communication facility requires a permit in accordance
with Table 21.46.030.
   (b)   Application Requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in
Chapters 21.96 and
21.110, the application for zone clearance/plan check or for a conditional use
permit must include the following:
      (1)   A site plan, drawn to scale, showing all existing improvements on
the site, the proposed location of the wireless antenna facility, the height of
any existing or proposed new support structure, accessory equipment facility,
guy-wires, above and below ground wiring and connection cables, existing or
proposed easements on the property, the height above ground of any panels,
microwave dishes, or whip antennas, and the distance between the antenna
facility and any existing or proposed accessory equipment facility.
      (2)   A description of the maximum potential of the proposed wireless
antenna site to accommodate the installation of additional antennas.
      (3)   A location map showing existing wireless antenna sites within the
city that are owned or operated by the applicant and any proposed sites in the
city that may be required for future area coverage.
      (4)   Documentation that the electromagnetic fields (EMFs) from the
proposed wireless facility, both individually and cumulatively, will be within
the limits approved by the FCC. As a condition of approval of any permit or
other entitlement, the approving authority may require the annual submission of
a report prepared by a qualified person evidencing the fact that EMFs continue
to be within approved FCC limits.
      (5)   A statement concerning the minimum distance from the proposed
wireless antenna facility that is required to ensure that no person will be
exposed to any harmful effects attributable to EMFs.
      (6)   Evidence of any required licenses and approvals to provide wireless
services in the city.
      (7)   The property owner's written consent to the proposed siting of the
wireless antenna facility and acknowledgment of its obligations under this
zoning ordinance.
      (8)   A radio coverage map of the area proposed to be served. If the
applicant is proposing a new support structure, then a written statement,
including all facts in support thereof, from a licensed radio engineer
attesting to the need for such structure, as described in the application, to
be located at the applied for location.
   (c)   Review Criteria. In addition to consideration of the criteria for zone
clearance/plan check or conditional use permit in
Chapters 21.96 and
21.110, respectively, the approving authority must consider the following
factors in determining whether to issue a permit or other entitlement for a
wireless antenna facility:
      (1)   Height of the proposed facility.
      (2)   The nature and proximity of existing uses on adjacent properties.
      (3)   Surrounding topography.
      (4)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
      (5)   Design of the proposed facility, with particular reference to
design features that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness, such as a camouflaged facility, a facility screened by natural
or artificial vegetation, or a facility located or co-located on an existing
building or an existing support structure.
      (6)   Proposed ingress and egress.
      (7)   Availability of suitable existing buildings or support structures.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.130 Development standards for wireless facilities.
All wireless facilities subject to the provisions of this chapter shall comply
with the following development standards:
   (1)   Antenna arrays on wireless antenna facilities that are proposed to be
sited on an existing building or support structure must be integrated with the
architectural design and coloring of that existing building or support
structure.
   (2)   New major wireless facilities shall not be permitted to locate within
five hundred feet of any existing, legally established major wireless facility,
except when co-located on the same building, structure, or wireless facility.
   (3)   All major wireless facilities shall be set back a minimum distance of
two hundred feet from any property zoned for residential use.
   (4)   The siting of new support structures is subject to the following
additional requirement:
      (A)   No new support structure in a residential land use zone will be
permitted unless the approving authority makes the additional finding that,
based upon evidence submitted by the applicant, no existing non-residential
building or support structure can reasonably accommodate the proposed wireless
antenna facility. Evidence supporting this finding will be reviewed by the
reviewing authority and may consist of any of the following:
         (i)   No existing non-residential buildings or support structures are
located within the geographic area proposed to be served by the applicant's
facility.
         (ii)   Existing non-residential buildings or support structures are
not of sufficient height or structural strength to meet the applicant's
operational or engineering requirements.
         (iii)   The applicant's proposed facility in a nonresidential zoning
district would create electromagnetic interference with another facility on an
existing structure, or the existing antenna array on an existing building or
support structure would create interference with the applicant's proposed
antenna array.
         (iv)   The costs, fees, or contractual provisions required by a
property owner, or by an incumbent wireless service provider, in order to co-
locate a new antenna array on an existing non-residential building or support
structure, or to adapt an existing non-residential building or support
structure for the location of the new antenna array, are unreasonable.
         (v)   There are other limiting factors that render existing
nonresidential buildings and support structures unsuitable for use by the
applicant.
   (5)   If a new support structure for a facility will be visible from
adjacent residential properties or from major arterial streets, the approving
authority may require that the support structure be screened or camouflaged to
mitigate adverse visual impacts.
   (6)   Protective structures housing accessory equipment must comply with all
applicable requirements of the zoning code that relate to accessory structures.
   (7)   If a proposed facility will be visible from a residential area or an
arterial street, any required fencing must be of wrought iron or similar
decorative materials satisfactory to the community development director.
   (8)   A new, freestanding support structure must be separated from a
building on the same site by a distance that is at least equal to the height of
that support structure, unless that building houses equipment accessory to that
support structure.
   (9)   The exterior of a new support structure must have a non-corrosive,
non-metallic finish that is not conducive to reflection or glare. The support
structure, the antenna array, and the accessory equipment facility must all be
of a neutral color.
   (10)   Buildings and support structures may not be illuminated unless
specifically required by the federal aviation administration or other
governmental agencies.
   (11)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no off-premises or on-premises
signs may be placed by a wireless service provider on a building or support
structure to which a wireless antenna facility is attached.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.140 Maintenance and cessation of use.
The following requirements apply to wireless antenna facilities that are
authorized by permit or other entitlement and that are located on existing
buildings or support structures and on new support structures:
   (1)   The site must be maintained in a condition free of trash, debris, and
refuse in accordance with
Chapter 21.72.
   (2)   If a support structure, or an antenna array affixed to a building or
to a support structure, becomes inoperable or ceases to be used for a period of
six consecutive months, the permittee or the property owner must give written
notice of such inoperability or nonuse to the public works director. The
antenna array and, if applicable, the support structure, must be removed within
a ninety-day period. If that removal does not occur, the city may remove the
antenna array and, if applicable, the support structure, at the expense of the
permittee or the owner; provided, however, that if other antenna arrays owned
or operated by other service providers are affixed to the same support
structure, then only the antenna array that has become inoperable or has ceased
to be used is required to be removed, and the support structure may remain in
place until all service providers cease to use it.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.150 Local emergency or disaster situations; temporary installations.
The city manager, as the director of the office of emergency services, is
authorized in the event of a local emergency or disaster to employ all
providers of wireless services whose antenna facilities can be deployed
immediately within the city for the purpose of implementing the emergency
services plan, coordinating the emergency and disaster functions of the city,
and protecting life and property. The temporary deployment of such wireless
antenna facilities may be authorized at such locations, and for such period of
time, as will afford maximum protection for the public health, welfare, and
safety.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION III. REGULATION OF AMATEUR RADIO STATION ANTENNAS
21.46.160 Building permit required.
Nothing contained in this Division III may be deemed to exempt from the
requirement of a building permit the installation of an amateur radio station
antenna that, because of its limited height, is not required to obtain a minor
variance pursuant to Section
21.46.080.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.170 Reasonable accommodation.
   (a)   Administrative Adjustment Required. The proposed installation of an
amateur radio station antenna, whether ground-mounted or building- mounted, in
any zoning district, which antenna will extend more than fifteen feet above the
highest point of the roofline of a building or structure on the proposed site,
must be preceded by an application for an administrative adjustment in
accordance with
Chapter 21.102 and, if the application is approved, a building permit must be
obtained.
   (b)   Application Requirements. In addition to the requirements set forth in
Chapter 21.102, the application for an administrative adjustment must include
the following:
      (1)   Construction drawings that show the proposed method of installation
and the manufacturer's specifications.
      (2)   A plot plan showing the proposed location and dimensions of the
amateur radio station antenna.
      (3)   Engineering data evidencing that the amateur radio station antenna
will be in compliance with all structural requirements of the building code.
      (4)   Copies of all licenses issued to the applicant by the FCC to engage
in amateur radio service operations and to use the site as an amateur radio
station.
   (c)   Review Criteria. In considering the application for a minor variance
for a proposed amateur radio station antenna, the approving authority must
consider the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the proposed height of the amateur radio station antenna is
the minimum height that is technically required to enable the applicant to
engage in amateur radio service operations of the nature contemplated.
      (2)   Proximity of the proposed amateur radio station antenna to
inhabited buildings and structures.
      (3)   The nature of existing uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
      (4)   Surrounding topography, tree coverage, and foliage, and their
effect on the proposed height of the amateur radio station antenna.
      (5)   Design of the proposed amateur radio station antenna, with
particular reference to design features that provide for retraction of the
antenna when not in use and design features that may reduce or eliminate visual
obtrusiveness, particularly in residential zones.
   (d)   Guidelines for Denial or Conditioning Application. In making any
determination during the administrative adjustment approval process to deny or
to condition the application for an amateur radio station antenna, the
approving authority must adhere to the following guidelines:
      (1)   The imposition of conditions or restrictions relating to the
placement, screening, or height of a proposed amateur radio station antenna,
which conditions or restrictions are based upon protection of the public
health, welfare, and safety, aesthetic considerations, or the preservation of
property values, must be considered on a case-by-case basis, taking into
account the unique features of the proposed site, the factors specified above
in subsection (c), and the reasonable accommodation considerations of
subsection (2) below.
      (2)   The administrative adjustment approval process must be conducted so
as to:
         (A)   Reasonably accommodate the paramount federal interest in
promoting amateur radio communications as voluntary, noncommercial
communications services, particularly with respect to emergency communications;
and
         (B)    Impose the minimum practical restrictions, limitations, and
conditions in order to achieve the city's legitimate regulatory objectives.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION IV. GENERAL PROVISIONS
21.46.180 Nonconforming antennas.
Any antenna constructed in violation of this chapter, or in violation of any
prior ordinance or regulation, is subject to immediate abatement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.46.190 Enforcement.
   (a)   All satellite earth station antennas, amateur radio station antennas,
and wireless antenna facilities are subject to periodic inspection by the city
to determine whether they are in compliance with all applicable provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   If any condition is discovered that may result in a danger to life or
property, the city will give written notice to the permittee or to the property
owner, or both, at their last known address, describing the dangerous condition
and demanding that the same be corrected within the period of time specified in
that notice.
   (c)   Failure to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter, or
with conditions that may be imposed in connection with an administrative
adjustment, zoning clearance/plan check, or a conditional use permit, will
constitute a public nuisance as well as grounds for revocation of the permit or
other entitlement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.47
RESERVED
CHAPTER 21.48
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS USES AND CULTIVATION
Sections:
   
21.48.010   Definitions.
   
21.48.020   Prohibited uses.
   
21.48.030   Indoor cannabis cultivation.
   
21.48.040   Exceptions.
   
21.48.050   Violation and penalty.
21.48.010 Definitions.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings set forth in the MAUCRSA and as set forth below:
   “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa linnaeus, Cannabis
indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the
resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether
crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis that is
used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes. “Cannabis” does not include
the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake
made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin
extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant
which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” also does not include industrial
hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.
   “Cannabis product” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the
plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not
limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing
cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.
   “Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession,
manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging,
labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of cannabis and cannabis product
for medical, non-medical, or any other purpose and includes the activities of
any business licensed by the state or other government entity under Division 10
of the California Business and Professions Code, or any provision of state law
that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses. Commercial cannabis
activity does not include the cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing,
or transportation of cannabis by a qualified patient for his or her personal
medical use so long as the qualified patient does not provide, donate, sell, or
distribute cannabis to any other person. Commercial cannabis activity also does
not include the cultivation, possession, storage, manufacturing,
transportation, donation, or provision of cannabis by a primary caregiver,
exclusively for the personal medical purposes of no more than five specified
qualified patients for whom he or she is the primary caregiver, but who does
not receive remuneration for these activities except for compensation in full
compliance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.765.
   “Commercial cannabis use” means the use of any property for commercial
cannabis activity.
   “Compassionate Use Act” means the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition
215), codified as California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5.
   “Concentrated cannabis” means manufactured cannabis that has undergone a
process to concentrate one or more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the
product’s potency. Resin from granular trichomes from a cannabis plant is a
concentrate.
   “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing,
harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.
   “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to
a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology
platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
   “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and
cannabis products between entities licensed under Division 10 of the California
Business and Professions Code, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   “Fully enclosed and secure structure” means a space within a building,
greenhouse, or other structure which has a complete roof enclosure supported by
connecting walls extending from the ground to the roof, which is secure against
unauthorized entry, provides complete visual screening, and which is accessible
only through one or more lockable doors and inaccessible to minors.
   “Indoor” means within a fully enclosed and secure structure.
   “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make
or prepare a cannabis product.
   “MAUCRSA” means the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety
Act as codified in Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code, and any
successor provisions thereto, as the same may be amended from time to time.
   “Medical Marijuana Program” means California Health and Safety Code Sections
11362.7 through 11362.83, as such statutes may be amended from time to time.
   “Outdoors” means any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure
structure.
   “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, association, club,
society, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, sole
proprietorship, collective, cooperative, coop, non-profit, estate, trust,
receiver, syndicate, or any other organization, group, or entity or combination
of organizations or entities of any kind whatsoever, however formed, as well as
trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and/or assigns, and shall also
include any owner, operator, manager, proprietor, employee, agent, officer,
volunteer, salesperson, trustees, heirs, executors, administrators, and
assigns. The term “person” shall also include all persons who have an ownership
or leasehold interest in any real property, premises, and/or structures in
which commercial cannabis activity is occurring.
   “Primary caregiver” means the individual, designated by a qualified patient
or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed
responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person
pursuant to the requirements of the Compassionate Use Act and the Medical
Marijuana Program.
   “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, condominium, or other
similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.
   “Qualified patient” means a person who is entitled to the protections of
California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5, as the same may be amended
from time to time, but who does not have an identification card.
   “Primary caregiver” shall have the same meaning as is defined in California
Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), as the same may be amended from time
to time.
   “Private residence” means a house, an apartment unit, a mobile unit, or
other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.
(Ord. 700 § 4, 2017).
21.48.020 Prohibited uses.
   A.   Commercial cannabis uses are expressly prohibited in all zones and
overlay districts in the city. No person shall establish, operate, maintain,
conduct, or allow commercial cannabis uses anywhere within the city. The city
shall not approve any application for a building permit, conditional use
permit, variance, or any other entitlement authorizing the establishment,
operation, maintenance, development, or construction of any commercial cannabis
use.
   B.   Outdoor cannabis cultivation is expressly prohibited everywhere in the
city. No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying, or having charge or
possession of any parcel shall cause or allow such parcel to be used for
cultivating cannabis outdoors.
   C.   Indoor cannabis cultivation, including cultivation by a qualified
patient and primary caregiver, is prohibited except in strict compliance with
Section
21.48.030.
(Ord. 700 § 4, 2017).
21.48.030 Indoor cannabis cultivation.
   It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance for any person owning,
leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any real property in the
city to cause or allow such real property to be used for the cultivation of
cannabis except in strict compliance with the requirements set forth below.
   A.   Cannabis cultivation shall only occur indoors at a private residence,
or inside an enclosed accessory structure located upon the grounds of a private
residence.
   B.   Only persons twenty-one years of age or older may cultivate cannabis.
Any cannabis cultivation must comply with the requirements set forth in
California Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2.
   C.   Cannabis cultivation is permitted only within fully enclosed and secure
structures.
   D.   Cannabis cultivation is limited to six plants total.
(Ord. 700 § 4, 2017).
21.48.040 Exceptions.
   A.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from transporting
cannabis through the jurisdictional limits of the city for delivery or
distribution to a person located outside the city, where such transport does
not involve delivery or distribution within the jurisdictional limits of the
city.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a person 21 years of age or
older from engaging in any activities authorized under California Health and
Safety Code Section 11362.1.
   C.   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any commercial cannabis activity
that the city is required by state law to permit within its jurisdiction
pursuant to Business and Profession Code Section 26054(c) and (d), as the same
may be amended from time to time, or any other provision of the MAUCRSA.
(Ord. 700 § 4, 2017).
21.48.050 Violation and penalty.
   In addition to any other enforcement permitted by this
Chapter 21.48  of this municipal code, the city attorney or city prosecutor may
bring a civil action for injunctive relief and civil penalties against any
person or entity that violates this chapter. In any civil action brought
pursuant to this article, a court of competent jurisdiction may award
reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs to the prevailing party. Notwithstanding
the penalties set forth in
Chapter 1.08  of this municipal code, no provision of this chapter authorizes a
criminal prosecution, arrest, or penalty inconsistent with or prohibited by
Health and Safety Code Section 11362.71, et seq., or Section 11362.1, et seq.,
as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict
between the penalties enumerated under
Chapter 1.08  of this municipal code and any penalties set forth in state law,
the maximum penalties allowable under state law shall govern.
(Ord. 700 § 4, 2017).
CHAPTER 21.49
DENSITY BONUS
Sections:
   
21.49.010   Purpose.
   
21.49.020   Definitions.
   
21.49.030   Eligibility for density bonus and incentives.
   
21.49.040   General requirements.
   
21.49.050   Determining allowed base density.
   
21.49.060   Allowed density bonuses.
   
21.49.070   Additional density bonus.
   
21.49.080   Density bonus for commercial development.
   
21.49.090   Parking requirements in density bonus projects.
   
21.49.100   Allowed incentives or concessions.
   
21.49.110   Waivers or reductions of development standards.
   
21.49.120   Incentives for housing with childcare facilities.
   
21.49.130   Condominium conversions.
   
21.49.140   Design and distribution of affordable units.
   
21.49.150   Replacement units.
   
21.49.160   Continued availability.
   
21.49.170   Occupancy and resale of ownership units.
   
21.49.180   Affordable Housing Agreement.
21.49.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for granting density bonuses
and incentives as required by state law. This chapter provides regulations for
considering density bonus and incentive requests for the development of housing
that is affordable to extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income
households, foster youth, disabled veterans, homeless persons, lower-income
students, senior citizens, and childcare. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
   (a)   "Affordable housing" means housing for which the allowable housing
expenses paid by a qualifying household shall not exceed a specified fraction
of the county median income, adjusted for household size. This includes housing
designated for extremely low-, very low-, low-, and moderate-income households.
   (b)   "Base density" means the greatest number of units allowed under the
zoning ordinance, specific plan, or land use element of the general plan, or,
if a range of density is permitted, means the greatest number of units allowed
by the specific zoning range, specific plan, or land use element of the general
plan applicable to the project.
   (c)   "Childcare facility" means a child day care facility, other than a
family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers,
preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age childcare center.
"Childcare facility" does not include public or private primary or secondary
education facilities.
   (d)   "Condominium conversion" means the conversion of apartments, or other
rental units, into ownership property that consists of an undivided interest in
common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest within
the boundaries of the dwelling unit.
   (e)   "Density bonus" means a density increase over the maximum allowable
residential density under applicable zoning and Land Use Element of the General
Plan as of the date of application.
   (f)   "Development standard" means a site or construction condition,
including, but not limited to, a height limitation, setback requirement, floor
area ratio, an on-site open-space requirement, a minimum lot area per unit
requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a housing development pursuant
to any ordinance, General Plan policy, specific plan, or other local condition,
law, policy, resolution, or regulation that is adopted by City of La Mirada or
that is enacted by the citizens of the City of La Mirada through a local
initiative or referendum power, whether that power is derived from the
California Constitution, statute, or the charter or ordinance. Development
standard shall not mean an impact fee, inclusionary housing requirement, or
dedication of land.
   (g)   "Disabled veteran" means any veteran who is currently declared by the
United States Veterans Administration to be 10% or more disabled as a result of
service in the armed forces. Proof of such disability shall be deemed
conclusive if it is of record in the United States Veterans Administration.
   (h)   "Equivalent financial value" means an incentive that would result in a
reduction in cost to the developer/property owner based upon the land cost per
dwelling unit and shall be calculated based upon the difference in the value of
the land with and without the density bonus.
   (i)   "Equivalent size" means that the replacement units specified in
Section
21.49.120 contain at least the same total number of bedrooms as the units being
replaced.
   (j)   "Foster youth" means a person in California whose dependency was
established or continued by a court of competent jurisdiction, including a
tribal court, on or after the youth's thirteenth birthday and who is no older
than 25 years of age at the commencement of the academic year.
   (k)   "Homeless person" shall have the same meaning as that phrase is
defined in Section 11302 of the Federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act
(42 U.S.C. Ch. 119).
   (l)   "Lower-income student" means a student who has a household income and
asset level that does not exceed the level for Cal Grant A or Cal Grant B award
recipients as set forth in Education Code Section 69432.7(k)(1). The
eligibility of a student to occupy a unit for lower-income students under this
section shall be verified by an affidavit, award letter, or letter of
eligibility provided by the institution of higher education in which the
student is enrolled or by the California Student Aid Commission that the
student receives or is eligible for financial aid, including an institutional
grant or fee waiver from the college or university, the California Student Aid
Commission, or the Federal government.
   (m)   "Maximum allowable residential density" see "Base density."
   (n)   "Natural or constructed impediments" means a hindrance or obstruction
that prevents pedestrian or bicycle access to a major transit stop. Natural or
constructed impediments include, but are not limited to, freeways, rivers,
mountains, harbors, and bodies of water, but do not include residential
structures, shopping centers, parking lots, or rails used for transit.
   (o)   "Partner housing developer" means an affordable housing developer who
enters into a partnership with the commercial developer to provide affordable
dwelling units. A partnership can include a contract or written agreement,
formation of a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity recognized by the state in which the commercial developer and affordable
housing developer are each partners, members, shareholders or other
participants.
   (p)   "Qualified nonprofit housing corporation" means a nonprofit
corporation whose primary activity is the development and preservation of
affordable home ownership housing in California and meets all of the following:
      (1)   The nonprofit corporation has a determination letter from the
Internal Revenue Service affirming its tax-exempt status pursuant to Section
501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and is not a private foundation as that
term is defined in Section 509 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   The nonprofit corporation is based in California.
      (3)   All of the board members of the nonprofit corporation have their
primary residence in California.
   (q)   "Shared housing building" means a residential or mixed-use structure,
with five or more shared housing units and one or more common kitchens and
dining areas designed for permanent residence of more than 30 days by its
tenants. The kitchens and dining areas within the shared housing building shall
be able to adequately accommodate all residents. A shared housing building may
include other dwelling units that are not shared housing units, provided that
those dwelling units do not occupy more than 25% of the floor area of the
shared housing building. A shared housing building may include 100% shared
housing units.
   (r)   "Shared housing unit" means one or more habitable rooms, not within
another dwelling unit, that includes a bathroom, sink, refrigerator, and
microwave, is used for permanent residence, that meets the "minimum room area"
specified in Section R304 of the California Residential Code (Part 2.5 of Title
24 of the California Code of Regulations) and complies with the definition of
"guestroom" in Section R202 of the California Residential Code.
   (s)   "Specific adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct,
and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete. The following shall not constitute a specific,
adverse impact upon the public health or safety: (1) inconsistency with the
zoning or General Plan land use designation; or (2) the eligibility to claim a
welfare exemption under subdivision (g) of Section 214 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code.
   (t)   "Unobstructed access" means that the income qualified resident of the
housing development is able to walk or bike to or from the residence without
trespassing or otherwise encountering natural or constructed impediments.
   (u)   "Very low vehicle travel area" means an urbanized area, as designated
by the United States Census Bureau, where the existing residential development
generates vehicle miles traveled per capita that is below 85% of either
regional vehicle miles traveled per capita, as determined by SCAG, or city
vehicle miles traveled per capita. For purposes of this definition, "area" may
include a travel analysis zone, hexagon, or grid.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.030 Eligibility for density bonus and incentives.
   (a)   To be eligible for a density bonus, incentive(s) or concession(s), or
waiver or reduction of development standard(s) as provided by this chapter, a
housing development or condominium conversion shall include only one of the
following requirements and satisfy all other applicable provisions of this
Zoning Code:
      (1)   A minimum of 5% of the total number of units of a housing
development, including a shared housing building development, shall be
restricted and affordable to very low-income households.
      (2)   A minimum of 10% of the total number of units of a housing
development, including a shared housing building development, shall be
restricted and affordable to low-income households.
      (3)   A minimum of 10% of the total units in a for-sale housing
development shall be restricted and affordable to moderate-income households,
provided that all units in the housing development are offered to the public
for purchase.
      (4)   One hundred (100) percent of all units in a housing development,
exclusive of a manager's unit or units, shall be restricted and affordable to
lower-income households, except that no more than 20% of the units in the
housing development, including total units and density bonus units, may be
affordable to moderate-income households.
      (5)   A minimum of 10% of the total units of a housing development for
transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or homeless persons shall be
provided at the same affordability level as very low-income units.
      (6)   A minimum of 20% of the total units of a housing development shall
be affordable to lower-income college students.
      (7)   A condominium conversion project where either 33% of the units
converted are affordable to low- or moderate-income households, or 15% of the
units converted are affordable to very low- or extremely low-income households.
      (8)   A senior citizen housing development, including a senior-citizen
shared housing building development, as defined in Civil Code Sections 51.3 and
51.12, that has at least 35 dwelling units or a mobile home park that limits
residency based on age requirements for housing older persons in compliance
with Civil Code Section 798.76 or 799.5.
      (9)   The applicant for a housing development donates at least one acre
of land to the city for very low-income units, provided the land has the
appropriate General Plan designation, zoning, permits and approvals, and access
to public facilities needed for such housing.
      (10)   A commercial development which has entered into an agreement with
a partner housing developer to provide at least 30% of the total units of a
partner housing development for low-income households or at least 15% of the
total units of a partner housing development for very low-income households.
   (b)   Housing development not eligible for a density bonus, concession,
incentive, or waiver. A housing development shall not be eligible for a density
bonus, or any incentive, concession, or waiver of a development standard under
this chapter on a parcel containing existing affordable housing unless:
      (1)   The housing development replaces the existing affordable units in
accordance with all of the requirements set forth in Section
21.49.120; and
      (2)   The housing development, inclusive of the units replaced pursuant
to this section, contains affordable units at one of the percentage levels set
forth in subsection (A) of this section.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.040 General requirements.
   (a)   Fractional units. The calculation of a density bonus in compliance
with this section that results in fractional units, including base density and
bonus density, shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
   (b)   Mixed income development. If a housing development qualifies for a
density bonus under more than one income category, as senior housing, or as
housing intended to serve transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or
homeless persons, the applicant shall select only one of the above categories
in the application. Density bonuses from more than one category may not be
combined.
   (c)   General Plan and zoning consistency. The granting of a density bonus,
in and of itself, shall not be interpreted as requiring a General Plan
amendment, Zoning Map amendment, or other discretionary approval.
   (d)   Financial incentives. The provisions of this chapter shall not be
interpreted to require or limit the city from providing direct financial
incentives, including the provision of publicly owned land or the waiver of
fees or dedication requirements.
   (e)   Increased density limit. A housing development shall not exceed the
cumulative total of base units allowed by the underlying zone and the density
bonus units allowed by Sections 21.49.050 and 21.49.052. Incentives,
concessions, or development standard waivers shall not be used to increase
density.
   (f)   Reduced density. An applicant for a density bonus may elect to provide
a lesser percentage of density increase than what is authorized by Section
21.49.050 including, but not limited to, no increase in density, but shall
remain eligible for concessions or incentives, waivers of development
standards, and eligible parking requirements provided the project meets the
eligibility requirements of this section.
   (g)   When calculating a density bonus granted that includes shared housing
building, "unit" means one shared housing unit and its pro rata share of
associated common area facilities. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.050 Determining allowed base density.
Density shall be determined using dwelling units per acre and shall be the
maximum number of units allowed by the zoning code, specific plan, or general
plan that is applicable to the project site. However, if the applicable zoning
ordinance, specific plan, or land use element of the general plan does not
provide a dwelling-units-per-acre standard for density, then the local agency
shall calculate the number of units using both of the following:
   (a)   Estimating the realistic development capacity of the site based on the
objective development standards applicable to the project, including, but not
limited to, floor area ratio, site coverage, maximum building height and number
of stories, building setbacks and step-backs, open space requirements, minimum
percentage or square footage of any nonresidential component, and parking
requirements. Parking requirements shall include considerations regarding
number of spaces, location, design, type, and circulation.
   (b)   Maintaining the same average unit size and other project details
relevant to the base density study, excepting those that may be modified by
waiver or concession to accommodate the bonus units, in the proposed project as
in the study.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.060 Allowed density bonuses.
A housing development that meets one of the eligibility levels in Section
21.49.030 is entitled to a density bonus as provided herein.
   (a)   Density bonus for very low-, low-, and moderate-income households. A
housing development that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section
21.49.030(a)(1) through (a)(4) is entitled to a density bonus calculated as
follows:
Table 21.49.040-A
VERY LOW, LOW, AND MODERATE-INCOME
                                     Density Bonus Percentage
Percentage of Base Units Proposed Very Low Income Low Income Moderate Income
                                     Density Bonus Percentage
Percentage of Base Units Proposed Very Low Income Low Income Moderate Income
5%                                20%             -          -
6%                                22.5%           -          -
7%                                25%             -          -
8%                                27.5%           -          -
9%                                30%             -          -
10%                               32.5%           20%        5%
11%                               35%             21.5%      6%
12%                               38.75%          23%        7%
13%                               42.5%           24.5%      8%
14%                               46.25%          26%        9%
15%                               50%             27.5%      10%
16%                               50%             29%        11%
17%                               50%             30.5%      12%
18%                               50%             32%        13%
19%                               50%             33.5%      14%
20%                               50%             35%        15%
21%                               50%             38.75%     16%
22%                               50%             42.5%      17%
23%                               50%             46.25%     18%
24%                               50%             50%        19%
25%                               50%             50%        20%
26%                               50%             50%        21%
27%                               50%             50%        22%
28%                               50%             50%        23%
29%                               50%             50%        24%
30%                               50%             50%        25%
31%                               50%             50%        26%
32%                               50%             50%        27%
33%                               50%             50%        28%
34%                               50%             50%        29%
35%                               50%             50%        30%
36%                               50%             50%        31%
37%                               50%             50%        32%
38%                               50%             50%        33%
39%                               50%             50%        34%
40%                               50%             50%        35%
41%                               50%             50%        38.75%
42%                               50%             50%        42.5%
43%                               50%             50%        46.25%
44%                               50%             50%        50%
100%                              80%             80%        80%
 
   (b)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a cap on density will not apply if both
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   One hundred (100) percent of the units in a housing development
exclusive of a manager's unit or units, are restricted and affordable to very
low- and low-income households, except that no more than 20% of the total units
(including density bonus units) in the housing development are restricted and
affordable to moderate-income households.
      (2)   The housing development is located within one-half mile of a major
transit stop with unobstructed access or is located in a very low vehicle
travel area.
   (c)   Density bonus for transitional foster youth, disabled veterans, or
homeless persons. A housing development that is eligible for a density bonus at
the level set forth in Section 21.49.030(a)(5) shall be entitled to a density
bonus of 20%.
   (d)   Density bonus for lower-income college students. A student housing
development that is eligible for a density bonus at the level set forth in
Section
21.49.030(a)(6) shall be entitled to a density bonus of 35%.
      (1)   All units in the student housing development shall be used
exclusively for undergraduate, graduate, or professional students enrolled
full-time at an institution of higher education accredited by the Western
Association of Schools and Colleges or the Accrediting Commission for Community
and Junior Colleges.
      (2)   The applicant or property owner shall provide evidence to the city
that the housing development shall be subject to an operating agreement or
lease with one or more institution of higher education that all units shall be
exclusively occupied by the students of the institution(s).
      (3)   The rent for affordable units shall be calculated at 30% of 65% of
the area median income for a single-room occupancy unit.
      (4)   Priority for the affordable units shall be given to lower-income
students experiencing homelessness. A homeless service provider, as defined in
paragraph (3) of subdivision (e) of Section 103577 of the Health and Safety
Code, or institution of higher education that has knowledge of a person's
homeless status may verify a person's status as homeless for purposes of this
subsection.
      (5)   For purposes of calculating a density bonus granted pursuant to
this section, the term "unit" shall mean one rental bed and its pro rata share
of associated common area facilities.
   (e)   Density bonus for condominium conversion. A condominium conversion
that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 21.49.030(a)(7) shall
be entitled to a density bonus of 25% provided the condominium conversion meets
all of the requirements in Section
21.49.130.
   (f)   Density bonus for senior housing. A senior housing development that is
eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section 21.49.030(a)(8) shall be
entitled to a density bonus of 20%.
   (g)   Density bonus for donating land for very low-income units. A housing
development that includes the donation of land for the development of very low-
income housing pursuant to Section
21.49.030(a)(9) shall be entitled to a density bonus calculated as follows:
Table 21.49.040-B
LAND DEDICATED TO ACCOMMODATE VERY LOW-INCOME
Percentage of Base Units Proposed Density Bonus Percentage
Percentage of Base Units Proposed Density Bonus Percentage
10%                               15%
11%                               16%
12%                               17%
13%                               18%
14%                               19%
15%                               20%
16%                               21%
17%                               22%
18%                               23%
19%                               24%
20%                               25%
21%                               26%
22%                               27%
23%                               28%
24%                               29%
25%                               30%
26%                               31%
27%                               32%
28%                               33%
29%                               34%
30%                               35%
 
      (1)   Any increase authorized by this subsection may be approved in
addition to any increase in density allowed by Section 21.49.030 up to a
maximum combined density increase of 35%.
      (2)   The donated land shall be the greater of:
         (A)   One acre;
         (B)   Sufficient square-footage or acreage to permit development of
the percentage of base units proposed; or
         (C)   Sufficient square-footage or acreage to permit development of 40
units under the existing general plan and zoning designation.
      (3)   The existing General Plan and zoning designation of the donated
land shall be zoned to accommodate at least 30 dwelling units per acre, and is,
or will be, served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure through the
construction of the housing development.
      (4)   The land shall be donated and transferred to the city or a housing
developer that is approved by the city. The applicant shall donate and transfer
the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, or
issuance of building permits for the housing development where no subdivision
is required.
      (5)   The city shall not approve the final subdivision map or issue
building permits for the housing development unless and until all permits,
other than building permits, for the development of very low-income housing
have been issued for the donated and transferred land.
      (6)   The donated and transferred land shall be within the boundary of
the housing development, or upon approval of the review authority, within one-
quarter mile of the housing development.
      (7)   The source of funding for the development of very low-income
housing on the donated and transferred land shall be identified not later than
the date of approval of the final subdivision map or issuance of building
permits for the housing development.
      (8)   The donated and transferred land and the affordable units shall be
subject to a deed restriction recorded on the property at the time of transfer
ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with Section
21.49.130.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.070 Additional density bonus.
    (a)   Applicability. A housing development that meets one of the following
eligibility requirements is entitled to an additional density bonus as provided
herein:
      (1)   A minimum of 15% of the total number of units of a housing
development, including a shared housing building development, which are
restricted and affordable to very low-income households.
      (2)   A minimum of 24% of the total number of units of a housing
development, including a shared housing building development, which are
restricted and affordable to low-income households.
      (3)   A minimum of 44% of the total units of a housing development, which
are restricted and affordable to moderate-income households.
   (b)   Additional density bonus. A housing development that meets one of the
eligibility requirements listed in Section
21.49.070(a) is entitled to a density bonus calculated as listed in Table
21.49.070.
Table 21.49.070
ADDITIONAL DENSITY BONUS
                                  Density Bonus Percentage
Percentage of Base Units Proposed Very Low Income Moderate-Income
                                  Density Bonus Percentage
Percentage of Base Units Proposed Very Low Income Moderate-Income
5%                                20%             20%
6%                                23.75%          22.5%
7%                                27.5%           25%
8%                                31.25%          27.5%
9%                                35%             30%
10%                               38.75%          32.5%
11%                               -               35%
12%                               -               38.75%
13%                               -               42.5%
14%                               -               46.25%
15%                               -               50%
 
   (b)   Additional requirement.
      (1)   The density bonus provided in this section shall be in addition to
any density bonus provided in Section
21.49.060.
      (2)   The additional density bonus required under this section shall be
calculated using the base density, excluding any other density bonus awarded by
this chapter.
      (3)   The housing development which utilizes the additional density bonus
provided by this section shall not restrict more than 50% of the total units to
moderate-income, low-income, or very low-income households.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.080 Density bonus for commercial development.
   (a)   Density bonus for commercial developments. A commercial development
that is eligible for a density bonus pursuant to Section
21.49.030(a)(10) may obtain one or more of the following incentives upon mutual
agreement between the developer and the city:
      (1)   Up to a 20% increase in the maximum allowable intensity in the
General Plan.
      (2)   Up to a 20% increase in maximum allowable floor area ratio.
      (3)   Up to a 20% increase in maximum height requirements.
      (4)   Up to a 20% reduction in minimum parking requirements.
      (5)   Use of a limited-use/limited-application elevator for upper floor
accessibility.
      (6)   An exception to a development standard or other land use
regulation.
   (b)   Any incentives allowed pursuant to this subsection shall not include a
waiver of an inclusionary housing requirement.
   (c)   Additional requirements. The following provisions shall apply to all
commercial density bonus projects:
      (1)   The partner agreement between the commercial developer and the
housing developer shall identify how the commercial developer will contribute
affordable housing. The commercial developer's contribution to the affordable
housing shall be in one of the following methods:
         (A)   The commercial developer may directly build the units.
         (B)   The commercial developer may donate a portion of the site or
property elsewhere to the affordable housing developer for use as a site for
affordable housing.
         (C)   The commercial developer may make a cash payment to the
affordable housing developer that shall be used towards the costs of
constructing the affordable housing project.
      (2)   The partner agreement shall specify the timeline for development of
the affordable housing project. Should the affordable housing developer fail to
commence construction within the specified timelines, the city may withhold
issuance of certificates of occupancy from the commercial development.
      (3)   The affordable housing site shall either be constructed on the
commercial site or on an alternative site that meets all the following
requirements:
         (A)   The affordable housing site is within the City of La Mirada.
         (B)    In close proximity to public amenities including schools and
employment centers.
         (C)   The affordable housing site is located within one-half (1/2)
mile of a major transit stop.
   (d)   Housing development eligibility for density bonus. Notwithstanding any
density bonus, or concession approved by this section, the housing development
shall be eligible for all benefits afforded pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.090 Parking requirements in density bonus projects.
   (a)   Applicability. For a housing development that meets one of the
eligibility levels in Section
21.49.030, the applicant may request application of the parking requirements
set forth below. An applicant may request additional parking incentives beyond
those provided in this section in compliance with Sections
21.49.060 and
21.49.070.
   (b)   Number of parking spaces required.
      (1)   Parking ratios. At the request of the applicant, the following
minimum parking ratios may apply to the housing development:
 
Dwelling Unit Size  Onsite Parking per Unit
Studio to 1 bedroom 1 space
2 to 3 bedrooms     1.5 spaces
4 or more bedrooms  2.5 spaces
 
      (2)   Within one-half mile of major transit stop. Notwithstanding
subsection (b)(1) of this section, if a housing development provides at least
20% low-income units or 11% very low-income units and is located within one-
half mile of a major transit stop with unobstructed access, then, upon the
request of the developer, the city may not impose a vehicular parking ratio,
inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, that exceeds 0.5 spaces per
bedroom.
      (3)   Zero parking. Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1) of this section, if
a housing development consists solely of rental units affordable to lower-
income families, then upon the request of the developer, the city may not
impose a vehicular parking ratio, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking,
if either of the following criteria are met:
         (A)   The housing development is located within one-half mile of a
major transit stop with unobstructed access from the housing development;
         (B)   The housing development is a for-rent housing development for
individuals who are 62 years of age or older that meet the definition in
Sections 51.2 and 51.3 of the Civil Code and the housing development has either
paratransit service or unobstructed access within one-half mile of a fixed bus
route that operates at least eight times per day; or
         (C)   The housing development is either a special needs housing
development, as defined in Section 51312 of the Health and Safety Code, or
supportive housing development as defined in Section 50675.14 of the Health and
Safety Code, and the housing development has either paratransit service or
unobstructed access within one-half mile of a fixed bus route that operates at
least eight times per day.
      (4)   Notwithstanding subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section, the
city may impose the parking ratio set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this
section, if the city or an independent consultant has conducted an areawide or
jurisdiction-wide parking study within the past seven years that demonstrates a
higher parking ratio is necessary based upon an analysis of parking
availability, differing levels of transit access, walkability access to transit
services, the potential for shared parking, the effect of parking requirements
on the cost of market-rate and subsidized developments, and the lower rates of
car ownership for low-income and very low-income individuals, including seniors
and special needs individuals.
      (5)   Location of parking. For purposes of this section, a housing
development may provide on-site parking through uncovered or tandem on-site
parking.
      (6)   Rounding of partial parking spaces. If the total number of parking
spaces required for a housing development is other than a whole number, the
number shall be rounded up to the next whole number.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.100 Allowed incentives or concessions.
   (a)   Applicant request and city approval. The applicant shall include any
request for incentive(s) or concession(s) listed in subsection (c) of this
section concurrently with the application for project approval. The applicant
shall provide documentation establishing that an incentive or concession is
necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. When an applicant
makes a request for an incentive or concession, the review authority shall
grant the request unless one or more of the following findings is made:
      (1)   The incentive or concession is not required in order to provide
affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units to be set as
specified in Section
21.49.130(b);
      (2)   The incentive or concession would have a specific adverse impact
upon public health and safety, or on any real property listed in the California
Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering
the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or
      (3)   The incentive would be contrary to State or Federal law.
   (b)   Number of incentives or concessions. Except as provided in subsection
(a) of this section, the review authority shall grant the following number of
incentives or concessions:
      (1)   One incentive or concession for a housing development that includes
at least 10% of the total units for low-income households, at least 5% of the
total units for very low-income households, at least 20% of the total units for
low-income students in a student housing development, or at least 10% of the
total units for moderate-income households in a for-sale housing development.
      (2)   Two incentives or concessions for a housing development that
includes at least 17% of the total units for low-income households, at least
10% of the total units for very low-income households, or at least 20% of the
total units for moderate-income households in a for-sale housing development.
      (3)   Three incentives or concessions for a housing development that
includes at least 24% of the total units for low-income households, at least
15% of the total units for very low-income households, or at least 30% of the
total units for moderate-income households in a for-sale housing development.
      (4)   Four incentives or concessions for housing development that include
at least 16% of the units for very low-income households or at least 45% for
persons and families of moderate income in a housing development in which the
units are for sale.
      (5)   Five incentives or concessions for projects that meet the criteria
of Section
21.49.030(a)(4). If the housing development is located within one-half mile of
a major transit stop with unobstructed access or is located in a very low
vehicle travel area, the housing development is eligible for a height increase
of up to three additional stories, or 33 feet.
   (c)   Type of incentive or concession. For the purposes of this chapter,
"incentive" or "concession" means any of the following:
      (1)   A reduction in the development standard(s) as that term is defined
in Section
21.49.020, that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual
cost reductions;
      (2)   A mixed-use project in conjunction with the housing development, if
the nonresidential portion of the mixed-use project will reduce the cost of the
housing development, is compatible with the residential portion of the housing
development, and is compatible with adjacent existing or planned development;
      (3)   A reduction or waiver of any city imposed fee or dedication of
land, which shall be at the sole discretion of the City Council; and/or
      (4)   Other regulatory incentives that will result in identifiable,
financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.110 Waivers or reductions of development standards.
In addition to requesting an incentive or concession, an applicant for a
density bonus may also submit a proposal to the city to waive or reduce an
unlimited number of development standards that would otherwise preclude or
inhibit construction of the housing development at the densities or with the
incentives permitted by this chapter.
   (a)   When an applicant makes a request for a waiver, the review authority
shall grant the request unless any of the following findings are made:
      (1)   The waiver or reduction of development standards would have a
specific adverse impact upon public health or safety, and for which there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse
impact.
      (2)   The waiver or reduction of development standards would have an
adverse impact on any real property listed in the California Register of
Historical Resources.
      (3)   The waiver or reduction of development standards would be contrary
to State or Federal law.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a housing development
that is eligible for no cap on density pursuant to Section 21.49.060(a) shall
only be eligible for a waiver or reduction of development standards as provided
in Section
21.49.030(a)(4).
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.120 Incentives for housing with childcare facilities.
   (a)   Incentives. A housing development that complies with the income
requirements of Section
21.49.030(a) and includes a childcare facility, other than a large or small
family day care home, that will be located on the same site as the development,
shall be eligible for either of the following additional incentives:
      (1)   An amount of residential floor area equal to or greater than the
floor area of the childcare facility; or
      (2)   An incentive that contributes to the economic feasibility of the
childcare facility as provided in Section
21.49.100(c).
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall not be required to
provide a density bonus for a childcare facility if it finds that the community
has adequate childcare facilities.
   (b)   Requirements to qualify for incentives. The city shall require, as a
condition of approval of the housing development, that:
      (1)   The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of
time that is as long as, or longer than, the period of time during which the
density bonus units are required to remain affordable in compliance with
Section
21.49.130; and
      (2)   Of the children who attend the childcare facility, the children of
very low-income, low-income, or moderate-income households shall equal a
percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units
that are required for very low-income, lower-income, or moderate-income
households in compliance with Section
21.49.130(a). (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.130 Condominium conversions.
   (a)   Density bonus. When an applicant proposes to convert apartments to
condominiums, which meet the eligibility level in Section
21.49.030(a)(7), the city shall grant either a density bonus of up to 25%
pursuant to Section
21.49.050(e) to create additional units on the project site or other incentive
of equivalent financial value provided:
      (1)   The applicant agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary
administrative costs, including, but not limited to, staff costs, consultant
fees, photocopy costs, and mailing fees, incurred by the city; and
      (2)   The city places such reasonable conditions on the granting of a
density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial value as it finds
appropriate, including, but not limited to, conditions which assure continued
affordability of units to subsequent very low-, low- and moderate-income
households.
   (b)   Replacement units. All units within the condominium conversion shall
meet the replacement requirements in Section
21.49.150.
   (c)   Ineligible requests. Apartments which are proposed for conversion to
condominiums shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentive under
this section if the apartments were previously granted a density bonus,
concession, incentive, or waiver or reduction of development standards. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.140 Design and distribution of affordable units.
Affordable units shall be designed and distributed within the housing
development as follows:
   (a)   Number of bedrooms. Affordable units shall reflect the range of
numbers of bedrooms provided in the residential development project as a whole;
   (b)   Comparable quality and facilities. Affordable units shall be
constructed to the same quality and exterior design as the market-rate housing
units. Additionally, the affordable units shall include the same laundry,
recreation, and other facilities that are made available to the market-rate
housing units;
   (c)   Access. In mixed-income multi-unit structures, the occupants of the
affordable units shall have the same access to common entrances and any common
areas including parking areas in that structure as the occupants of the market-
rate housing units;
   (d)   Size. Affordable units may be smaller and have different interior
finishes and features than the market-rate units; and
   (e)   Location. Affordable units shall be distributed within the residential
development, unless clustering is allowed by the review authority.
Notwithstanding, in a mixed-income multi-unit structure, affordable units shall
not be isolated to a specific floor or an area of a specific floor.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.150 Replacement units.
An application for a density bonus on any property with existing rental
dwelling units or rental dwelling units that were vacated or demolished within
the five years preceding the application; and are, or were, subject to a
recorded covenant that restricts rents to very low- or low-income households;
or are, or were, occupied by very low- or low-income household(s) shall be
subject to all of the following requirements:
   (a)   Occupied units. For rental dwelling units that are occupied on the
date of the application, the housing development shall provide at least the
same number of affordable units of equivalent size at affordable rent or
affordable housing cost to, and occupied by, persons or families in the same or
lower-income category as the existing occupants.
   (b)   Vacant or demolished units. For rental dwelling units that have been
vacated or demolished within the five years preceding the application, the
housing development shall provide at least the same number of affordable units
of equivalent size as existed at the highest occupancy point for those units in
the five years preceding the application at affordable rent or affordable
housing cost to, and occupied by, persons and families in the same or lower-
income category as the persons or families that occupied the units immediately
preceding the vacancy or demolition.
   (c)   Unknown household income. If the income of the existing occupants or
occupants within the past five years is unknown to the city or the applicant,
it shall be rebuttably presumed that the rental dwellings units were occupied
by low-income and very low-income renter households as determined by the most
recently available data from the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development's Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy database. (Ord. 736,
§ 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.160 Continued availability.
The units that qualified the housing development for a density bonus and other
incentives shall continue to be available as affordable and/or senior units in
compliance with the following requirements:
   (a)   Duration of availability. The applicant shall record a covenant on the
property that the units that qualified the housing development for a density
bonus and other incentives are restricted as affordable units for at least 55
years, or a longer time if required by the construction or mortgage financing
assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.
   (b)   Affordable costs. The rents and owner-occupied costs charged for the
housing units shall not exceed the following amounts during the period of
continued availability required by this section:
      (1)   Rental units. Rents for density bonus units shall be set at an
affordable rent as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50053; and
      (2)   Owner-occupied units. Owner-occupied units shall be available at an
affordable housing cost as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.170 Occupancy and resale of ownership units.
A housing development that includes for-sale units that are restricted and
affordable to moderate-income households shall limit the occupancy and resale
of the units as set forth in this section.
   (a)   Initial occupancy. A for-sale unit, which qualified the applicant for
the award of the density bonus, shall meet either of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The unit is initially sold to and occupied by a very low-, low-, or
moderate-income household, offered at an affordable housing cost as defined in
Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, and subject to an equity sharing
agreement.
      (2)   If the unit is not purchased by an income-qualified buyer within
180 days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, the unit may be
purchased by a qualified nonprofit housing corporation pursuant to a contract
that is recorded on the property, and all of the following are satisfied:
         (A)   The qualified nonprofit housing corporation is organized
pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3); and has received a welfare
exemption under Revenue and Taxation Code Section 214.15 for properties
intended to be sold to low-income households who participate in a special no-
interest loan program;
         (B)   A contract is included in the initial purchase that includes a
repurchase option that requires a subsequent purchaser of the property that
desires to sell or convey the property to offer the qualified nonprofit
corporation the right to repurchase the property prior to selling or conveying
that property to any other purchaser; and
         (C)   Affordability restrictions on the sale and conveyance of the
property that ensure that the property will be preserved for lower-income
housing for at least 45 years for owner-occupied housing units and will be sold
or resold only to very low-, low-, or moderate-income households.
   (b)   Resale. As part of the affordable housing agreement required pursuant
to Section
21.49.180, the applicant shall enter into an equity sharing agreement with the
city for the resale of affordable common interest units, unless it would be in
conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. In lieu
of an equity sharing agreement, the housing project could sell the units to a
nonprofit housing corporation pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section.
The following requirements apply to the equity sharing agreement:
      (1)   Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any
improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of
appreciation; and
      (2)   The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate
share of appreciation, which shall then be used within five years for any of
the purposes described in Health and Safety Code Section 33334.2(e) that
promote home ownership. For the purposes of this section:
         (A)   The city's initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market
value of the home at the time of initial sale, minus the initial sale price,
plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon
resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value
at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value;
         (B)   The city's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to
the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the
time of initial sale; and
         (C)   The initial subsidy shall include any incentives granted by the
city and shall be equal to the monetary equivalent of the incentives. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.49.180 Affordable housing agreement.
The applicant approved for a density bonus, concession, incentive, or waiver
under this chapter shall agree to construct, operate and maintain the
affordable units in accordance with an affordable housing agreement. The
affordable housing agreement shall be executed in a recordable form prior to
the issuance of a building permit for any portion of a housing development
subject to the requirements of this chapter. The affordable housing agreement
shall be binding upon all future owners and successors in interest.
   (a)   Review. The terms of the affordable housing agreement shall be
reviewed and revised as appropriate by the Director and City Attorney.
   (b)   Fees. The city may establish fees associated with the setting up and
monitoring of the affordable units.
   (c)   Contents. The affordable housing agreement shall include at least the
following:
      (1)   Identification of affordable units. Affordable units shall be
identified by address and legal description, type (floor area, number of
bedrooms/baths, unit size, etc.), and designated household income category. The
affordable housing agreement shall also identify the total number of affordable
units and total number of units approved for the housing development.
      (2)   Term of affordability. Unless specified elsewhere in this chapter,
a minimum term of 55 years of the specified affordability shall be required.
Such reservation period shall begin on the date a certificate of occupancy is
granted for the affordable units.
      (3)   Maximum allowable rent or sales price.
         (A)   Rental housing developments. In the case of rental housing
developments, the affordable housing agreement shall provide for the following
conditions governing the use of the affordable housing units during the use
restriction period:
            i.   The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing
affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining the affordable units for
qualified tenants.
            ii.   Provisions requiring owners to verify tenant incomes and
maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
            iii.   Provisions requiring owners to submit an annual report to
the city, which includes the name, address and income of each person occupying
each affordable unit, and which identifies the bedroom size and monthly rent or
cost of each affordable unit.
            iv.   A maximum rent schedule shall be submitted to the city prior
to the issuance of an occupancy permit for the affordable units, and updated
annually on the anniversary date of occupancy.
            v.   Total move-in costs for eligible tenants occupying affordable
units shall be limited to first month's rent plus a security/cleaning deposit
not to exceed one month's rent.
            vi.   When a tenant occupying an affordable unit no longer
qualifies under the income requirements, verified through the monitoring
program required as part of the affordable housing agreement, that tenant may
then be charged market rate rent. If this occurs, any currently vacant unit of
similar type to the affordable unit in question shall then be designated as an
affordable unit, and the owner shall immediately attempt to secure tenants in
accordance with this chapter. The owner is required to maintain at all times
during the use restriction the minimum number of affordable units identified in
the affordable housing agreement.
            vii.   No subletting or short-term occupancy of designated
affordable units shall be allowed.
         (B)   Ownership projects. In the case of for-sale housing
developments, as a condition of approval of the housing development, the city
shall require an affordable housing agreement that includes the following
conditions governing the initial sale and use of affordable units during the
applicable use period:
            i.   Affordable units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible
very low- and low-income households at an affordable sales price and housing
cost, or to qualifying residents in the case of a senior citizen housing
development.
            ii.   Affordable units shall be initially owner-occupied by
eligible very low- or low-income households, or by qualifying residents in the
case of a senior citizen housing development.
            iii.   The initial purchaser of each affordable housing unit shall
execute an instrument or agreement approved by the city restricting the sale of
the affordable housing unit in accordance with this chapter during the
applicable use restriction period. Such instrument or agreement shall be
recorded against the parcel containing the affordable housing unit and shall
contain such provisions as the city may require to ensure continued compliance
with this chapter and State Density Bonus Law.
            iv.   The affordable housing agreement shall stipulate that, when
the terms of affordability expire on an affordable unit, the city and/or a
nonprofit housing organization shall have a first right of purchase option 60
days prior to the affordable unit being advertised on the market.
            v.   Rental of affordable units shall not be allowed.
            vi.   When an equity sharing agreement is required by this chapter,
the affordable housing agreement shall specify the equity sharing agreement
comply with Section 21.49.170.
      (4)   Monitoring of compliance to agreement. A monitoring program shall
be required, specifying the party responsible for certifying tenant incomes and
sales price, maintaining the required number of affordable units for the
property, marketing and filling unit vacancies.
      (5)   Remedies. Description of remedies for breach of the affordable
housing agreement by either party (the city may identify tenants or qualified
purchasers as third-party beneficiaries under the agreement).
      (6)   Description of density bonus. A description of the incentives and/
or concessions, if any, being provided by the city.
      (7)   Schedule. A schedule for completion and occupancy of the affordable
units.
      (8)   Other provisions. Other provisions to ensure implementation and
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
Chapter 21.50
RECYCLING FACILITIES
Sections:
   
21.50.010   Purpose.
   
21.50.020   Permit requirements.
   
21.50.030   Exemptions.
   
21.50.040   Development and operational standards.
21.50.010 Purpose.
This chapter implements the provisions of the California Beverage Container and
Recycling and Litter Reduction Act set forth in Public Resources Code Section
14500, et seq. to allow the establishment of recycling facilities, and to set
forth permit requirements and development standards to authorize such uses.
Development and operational standards are intended to ensure minimal impact of
such uses surrounding property.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.50.020 Permit requirements.
Table 21.50.020 lists permit requirements by zoning district for recycling
facilities that are not otherwise exempt from permit requirements in accordance
with Section
21.50.030. Recycling facilities are not permitted in those zoning districts not
represented in the table.
Table 21.50.020
Permit Requirements for Recycling Facilities
Recycling Facilities Commercial Zoning Districts Industrial Zoning District
                     C-O C-1 C-4 C-F             M-2
Table 21.50.020
Permit Requirements for Recycling Facilities
                          Commercial Zoning Districts Industrial Zoning
Recycling Facilities                                  District
                          C-O C-1 C-4 C-F             M-2
Large collection facility X   X   X   X               CUP
Processing facility       X   X   X   X               X
Reverse-vending machine   ZC  ZC  ZC  ZC              ZC
Scrap and dismantling     X   X   X   X               X
facility
Small collection facility ZC  ZC  ZC  ZC              ZC
 
Abbreviations:
ZC = Permitted use subject to zoning clearance (
Chapter 21.96)
CUP = Conditional use permit required pursuant to
Chapter 21.106
X = Not permitted
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.50.030 Exemptions.
The following uses are exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided
the use complies with all other provisions of this title.
   (1)   Small collection facilities and/or reverse vending machines placed on
the premises of a community service facility for the collection and storage of
recyclable material generated solely by the host use.
   (2)   Small collection facilities and/or reverse vending machines in city
parks and open spaces areas subject to authorization by the community
development director for location of such facilities.
   (3)   Small collection facilities and/or reverse-vending machines used by
occupants of single-family homes, duplex units, and multi-family housing
projects for the sole collection and storage of recyclable material generated
by on-site residents. Storage containers shall be enclosed or placed out of
view of any public right-of-way.
   (4)   Small collection facilities and/or reverse vending machines located on
the premises of a commercial, office, or industrial property and used solely
for the recycling of material generated by that business or use where the
recyclable materials are deposited solely by employees of the business.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.50.040 Development and operational standards.
   (a)   Reverse-Vending Machines. Unless otherwise exempt, the following
development and operational standards apply to reverse-vending machines:
      (1)   Location. Reverse-vending machines shall only be located in
conjunction with an existing commercial, office, industrial, or community
service uses of a site. If exterior to a building, machines shall not occupy
required parking or landscaping for the host use and shall not obstruct
pedestrian or vehicular circulation.
      (2)   Maximum area and height. The machines shall not occupy more than
fifty square feet per installation (including any protective enclosure) and
shall not exceed eight feet in height.
      (3)   Operations. Reverse-vending machines shall be constructed of
durable water-proof/rust-proof materials and shall be maintained in a clean,
litter-free condition on a daily basis. Hours of operation shall coincide with
the host use and may be emptied only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. The machines shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation
if operating hours occur between dusk and dawn.
      (4)   Signs. Reverse-vending machines shall be clearly marked with the
type of recyclable material to be deposited, operating instructions, and
contact person/number if inoperative. All signs shall not exceed a total of
four square feet per machine and shall be attached to the machine, wall, or
shelter. Freestanding signs for such machines shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Design. The design, color, and materials to be used for the machine
shall be approved by the community development director.
   (b)   Small Collection Facilities. Unless otherwise exempt, the following
development standards shall apply to small collection facilities.
      (1)   Location. Small collection facilities shall only be located in
conjunction with an existing commercial, office, industrial, community service,
or open space use of a site. The use shall not occupy more than five required
parking spaces for the host use and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular
circulation on the site. Facilities shall not impair any required landscaping
on the site. Small collection facilities shall be set back a minimum of ten
feet from any street. Containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of materials
shall be at least fifty feet from any residential property line, unless there
is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the
containers and the residential use.
      (2)   Maximum number and area. The maximum number of small collection
facilities shall be one per site or development, in a single location, with a
maximum area of five hundred square feet.
      (3)   Parking. If the facility includes an attendant, one parking space
shall be provided for such person.
      (4)   Screening. Small collection facilities shall be screened with a
structural shelter, fencing, and/or landscaping to minimize the visual impact
from the public rights-of-way.
      (5)   Operations. Small collection facilities shall accept only glass,
metals, plastic containers, papers, and reusable items. Used motor oil may be
accepted with permission of the local public health officials, except for
reverse-vending machines. Recyclable materials shall be stored in durable
water-proof/rust-proof containers with a sufficient capacity to accommodate
materials collected. Power-driven processing equipment shall be prohibited,
except for reverse-vending machines. Operations shall not exceed noise levels
of sixty dBA as measured at any residential property, otherwise shall not
exceed seventy dBA. Hours of operation shall coincide with the host use, and
the facilities may be emptied only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
Attended facilities located within one hundred feet of a residential property
shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily.
      (6)   Maintenance. Facilities shall be secure from unauthorized entry or
removal of materials, and shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition
on a daily basis. All recyclable material shall be stored in containers or in
the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not be left outside of containers when
attendants are not present.
      (7)   Signs. Small collection facilities shall be clearly marked with the
type of recyclable material to be deposited, operating instructions, and
contact person/number if inoperative, along with a notice stating that no
material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or container. Facilities
may include identification signs with a maximum of twenty percent per side or
sixteen square feet, whichever is larger. Signs must be consistent with the
character of the location. Directional signs may be installed with the approval
of the community development director if necessary to facilitate traffic
circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.
      (8)   Design. The design, color, materials, and quality of all collection
facilities shall be approved by the community development director.
   (c)   Large Collection Facilities. The following development and operational
standards apply to the development of all large collection facilities in the
city.
      (1)   Location. Large collection facilities may be an independent or
combined use on a site in compliance with permit requirements in this section
and all other corresponding zoning district provisions in this title. Large
collection facilities shall operate entirely within an enclosed building or
area enclosed on all sides by a solid fence/wall not less than six feet in
height. Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be pursuant to the provisions
of the underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Operations. The exterior storage of material shall be limited to
sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition.
Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable
material. Oil storage shall be in containers approved by the fire marshal. No
storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, shall be visible
above the height of the fencing. The site shall be secure from unauthorized
entry or removal of materials, and shall be maintained free of litter and any
other undesirable materials on a daily basis. Operations shall not exceed noise
levels of sixty dBA as measured at any residential property, otherwise shall
not exceed seventy dBA. If located within five hundred feet of residential
property, the hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
7:00 p.m. daily.
      (3)   Processing. Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and
can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities
necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be
approved by the community development director if noise and other conditions
are met.
      (4)   Parking. A minimum of six vehicle parking spaces shall be provided
for customer use. Additional spaces may be required to accommodate the
anticipated peak customer load to circulate and deposit recyclable materials.
One additional parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle
operated by the recycling facility.
      (5)   Signs. The facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone
number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. Identification and
informational signs shall comply with the sign standards for the underlying
zoning district. The community development director may approve directional
signs to facilitate traffic circulation and visibility from the public right-
of-way.
   (d)   Processing Facilities. The following development and operational
standards shall apply to the development of all processing facilities in the
city.
      (1)   Location. Processing facilities shall operate entirely within an
enclosed building, except for incidental storage, which shall either be
enclosed on all sides by a solid fence/wall not less than six feet in height or
shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty feet from any residential
property. Setbacks and landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the
underlying zoning district.
      (2)   Operations.
         (A)   All power-driven processing equipment shall comply with the La
Mirada Noise Ordinance. Operations shall not exceed noise levels of sixty dBA
as measured at any residential property, otherwise shall not exceed seventy
dBA. If located within five hundred feet of residential property, the hours of
operation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. daily.
         (B)   Operations shall not distribute dust, fumes, smoke, vibration,
or odor detectable above ambient levels on abutting property.
         (C)   All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers
which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage
containers for flammable material shall be constructed of non-flammable
material. Oil storage shall be in containers approved by the fire marshal.
         (D)   No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers,
shall be visible above the height of the fencing.
         (E)   The site shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of
materials, and shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable
materials on a daily basis.
      (3)   Parking. Parking shall be provided to accommodate the anticipated
peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If
the facility is open to the public, parking spaces shall be provided for a
minimum of ten customers or the peak load, whichever is higher. One additional
parking space shall be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the
processing center.
      (4)   Signs. Signs shall comply with the sign standards of the underlying
zoning district. Facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone
number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Chapter 21.52
TRANSITIONAL AND SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
Sections:
   
21.52.010   Purpose.
   
21.52.020   Applicability.
   
21.52.030   Eligibility for supportive housing.
   
21.52.040   Development standards.
   
21.52.050   Operational standards.
   
21.52.060   Annual report required.
   
21.52.070   Changes to the management plan.
   
21.52.080   Application procedure.
21.52.010 Purpose.
The city hereby finds that the provision of housing for persons who may have
special housing needs due to circumstances involving adverse health, financial,
or other conditions is essential to creating a community responsive to the
needs of all its residents. The city also finds that such housing should be
located, operated, and managed in a manner that serves the special needs of
such residents with respect to safety, child care, access to mental and
physical health services, hygiene, and job training. The city therefore
establishes these regulations for the operation of transitional and similar
housing facilities. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.52.020 Applicability.
Transitional and permanent supportive housing that complies with the provisions
of this chapter shall be permitted where multifamily and mixed uses are. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.52.030 Eligibility for supportive housing.
   (a)   One hundred percent of units (excluding managers' units) are
affordable to lower income households and are or will be receiving public
funding to ensure affordability of the housing to lower income Californians.
   (b)   At least 25% of the units in the development or 12 units, whichever is
greater, are restricted to residents in supportive housing who meet criteria of
the target population. If the development consists of fewer than 12 units, then
100% of the units, excluding managers' units, shall be restricted to residents
in supportive housing.
   (c)   This amount can be reduced at the request of the project owner if
rental assistance or operating subsidy for the supportive housing units is
terminated through no fault of the project owner; and: 1) the owner has
demonstrated a good-faith effort to find other financial support; 2) the
reduction in supportive housing units is the minimum necessary to maintain
financial feasibility; and 3) any change in occupancy minimizes tenant
disruption and is only made following unit vacancy.
   (d)   If the project has more than 20 units, 3% of nonresidential floor area
is for onsite supportive services (including, but not limited to, community
rooms, case management offices, computer rooms, and community kitchens). If the
project has up to 20 units, at least 90 square feet is for onsite services.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025)
21.52.040 Development standards.
The following standards regarding the design, location, and development shall
apply to all transitional and supportive housing:
   (a)   All such facilities shall maintain a scale, character, and design
consistent with buildings in the vicinity.
   (b)   A single controlled pedestrian entryway for routine ingress/egress for
the site shall be located adjacent to and in full view of the manager's office.
   (c)   Laundry facilities shall be provided in a location accessible to all
residents of the facility. Washers and dryers may be coin operated.
   (d)   Manager(s) of the transitional or supportive housing facility must
reside on-site.
   (e)   Permanent supportive housing excluding managers’ units must include at
least one bathroom and kitchen or other cooking facilities, including, at a
minimum, a stovetop, sink, and refrigerator.
   (f)   No minimum parking shall be required for a permanent supportive
housing if the housing development is located within one-half mile of a public
transit stop.(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 13, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit
A (part), 2008).
21.52.050 Operational standards.
   (a)   A minimum of two pay telephones or other similar devices acceptable to
the community development director shall be provided in the facility.
   (b)   A twenty-four-hour on-site manager shall be provided.
   (c)   A management plan shall be submitted for review and approval, and
shall contain provisions acceptable to the community development director and
city public safety personnel. At a minimum, the management plan shall address:
      (1)   Child care facilities, as applicable.
      (2)   Emergency procedures.
      (3)   Facility maintenance.
      (4)   Funding sources.
      (5)   Management policies.
      (6)   Rental procedures and policies.
      (7)   Residency requirements and regulations.
      (8)   Screening of residents to ensure compatibility with services
provided at the facility.
      (9)   Security programs and features.
      (10)   Services, training, counseling, and treatment programs for
residents of the facility, including services to assist residents obtain
permanent shelter.
      (11)   Staffing needs.
      (12)   Staff training.
      (13)   Tenant responsibilities.
      (14)   Facility rules. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A
(part), 2008).
21.52.060 Annual report required.
Each approved transitional housing or similar facility shall be subject to
annual review by the city, including a review of management services. The
permit grantee shall be responsible for filing an annual report to the city
which includes the range of monthly rents, average length of tenancy, range of
monthly income of residents, occupancy rates, number of families served, the
number of vehicles owned by residents, and services provided at the facility.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.52.070 Changes to the management plan.
Any proposed revisions to the management plan shall be subject to the review
and approval of the community development director. Substantive changes to the
plan, as defined by the director, shall be referred to the planning commission
for consideration and action. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A
(part), 2008).
21.52.080 Application procedure.
An application for a transitional or permanent supportive housing permit shall
be filed with the Director of Community Development. The Director shall approve
an application that meets the development standards set forth in this chapter
without discretionary review or a public hearing, no more than 60 days after
the application has been deemed complete. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025)
CHAPTER 21.53
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT ON HIGHER EDUCATION- OR FAITH-BASED PROPERTIES
Sections:
   
21.53.010   Purpose.
   
21.53.020   Applicability.
   
21.53.030   Development standards.
   
21.53.040   Application procedure.
   
21.53.050   Sunset clause.
21.53.010 Purpose.
This chapter sets forth regulations for housing development projects on land
owned by independent institutions of higher education or religious institutions
consistent with State law (California Government Code Sections 65913.16 and
65913.6). (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.53.020 Applicability.
Notwithstanding the General Plan Land Use designation and zoning, any property
that is improved with an independent institution of higher education or a
religious institution, including ownership through an affiliated or associated
nonprofit public benefit corporation organized pursuant to the Nonprofit
Corporation Law (Part 2 (commencing with Section 5110) of Division 2 of Title 1
of the Corporations Code), shall be permitted to construct dwelling units as
outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.53.030 Development standards.
   (a)   Site requirements.
      (1)   Land ownership. The proposed development must be located on land
owned on or before January 1, 2024, by an independent institution of higher
education or by a religious institution.
      (2)   Location. The development must be located on a property that is not
located on prime farmland, wetlands, a high fire hazard severity zone, a
delineated earthquake fault zone, a flood plain, a floodway, a community
conservation plan area, a habitat for protected species, or under a
conservation easement.
      (3)   Hazardous waste site. The development is not located on a property
that is classified as a hazardous waste site as defined under Government Code
Section 65912.111(e) (see 65913.4(a)(6)(e)), unless the project sponsor has
secured a letter from the State Department of Public Health, State Water
Resources Control Board, or the Department of Toxic Substance Control stating
that the site is suitable for residential uses.
      (4)   Demolition of residential units. A proposed housing development
project must not require demolition of any of the following types of housing:
units that have been occupied by tenants in the last ten years; units subject
to any form of rent or price control, or units subject to a recorded covenant,
ordinance, or law that restricts rents to levels affordable to persons and
families of moderate, low, or very low incomes.
      (5)   Historic buildings. Projects may not demolish historic structures
that are on a national, state, or local historic register.
      (6)   Proximity to industrial uses. A project must meet all of the
following criteria:
         (A)   A project may not be adjacent to a site in which 1/3 of the uses
or more are dedicated to light industrial use, meaning that the current use is
light industrial, has been most recently permitted as light industrial, or has
been identified as a light industrial site by the General Plan.
         (B)   A project site may not be located within 1,200 feet of an
existing heavy industrial use, or a site that has been most recently permitted
as a heavy industrial use.
         (C)   A project site may not be located within 1,600 feet of an
existing Title V industrial use, or a site that was most recently permitted as
a Title V industrial use.
         (D)   If multifamily uses are not a permitted use within the zoning
district of the project site, then the housing development project may not be
located within 3,200 feet of a facility that actively extracts or refines oil
or natural gas.
         (7)   Proximity to freeway. If the project is within 500 feet of a
freeway, regularly occupied areas of the building shall provide air filtration
media for outside and return air that provide a minimum efficiency reporting
value (MERV) of 13.
   (b)   Project requirements.
      (1)   Affordability. One hundred (100) percent of the total units,
excluding manager's unit(s), must be for lower-income households as defined by
Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code (80% AMI), except that up to 20%
of the total units in the development may be for moderate-income households as
defined in Section 50053 of the Health and Safety Code (120% AMI), and 5% of
the units may be for staff of the independent institution of higher education
or religious institution that owns the land. Units must be subject to a
recorded deed restriction of 55 years for rental units, and 45 years for owner-
occupied units.
      (2)   Replacement units. If a project requires the demolition of
residential units or is located on a site where residential units have been
demolished within the past five years, the project sponsor shall comply with
the replacement provisions of California Government Code Section 66300(d).
      (3)   Consistent with objective standards. The project must meet all
objective standards of the Zoning Code at the time of application submittal.
      (4)   Density.
         (A)   In zones that allow for residential uses, including single-
family zones, a minimum density of 30 units per acre shall be applied at the
project site. If the zoning allows for a higher density on the project site or
a site adjacent to the project site, then the highest density shall apply.
         (B)   In zones that do not allow for residential uses, a minimum
density of 40 units per acre shall be applied at the project site. A project
may be eligible for a density bonus, waivers, and incentives/ concessions under
the State Density Bonus Law, except as described below for building height.
      (5)   Height.
         (A)   In zones that allow for residential uses, including single-
family zones, a minimum height of one story above the zoned height shall be
applied at the project site. If the zoning allows for a higher height limit on
a site adjacent to the project site, then the higher height limit shall apply.
         (B)   In zones that do not allow for residential uses, a minimum
height of one story above the zoned height shall be applied at the project
site. A project may not seek a State Density Bonus incentive, concession, or
waiver to increase the height above the height allowed by this chapter.
      (6)   Prevailing wage. A project that includes more than ten units that
is not in its entirety a public work shall comply with the prevailing wage
requirements set forth in California Government Code Section 65913.16(c)(12).
      (7)   Craft construction. In addition to the Labor Standards set forth in
California Government Code Section 65912.130, a project with 50 or more units
shall employ construction craft employees and provide for health care
expenditures as set forth in California Government Code Section 65913.16(g).
      (8)   Environmental assessment. The development proponent must complete a
Phase I environmental assessment, as defined in Section 25319.1 of the Health
and Safety Code, and a Phase II environmental assessment, as defined in
subdivision (o) of Section 25403 of the Health and Safety Code, if warranted.
      (9)   Tribal resources. For a Housing Development Project proposed on a
site that is vacant at the time that the application is submitted, the site
shall not contain tribal resources, as defined in California Public Resources
Code Section 21074, that could be affected by the Housing Development Project
that were found pursuant to a consultation as described in Public Resources
Code Section 21080.1 and the effects of which cannot be mitigated pursuant to
the process in Public Resources Code Section 21080.3.2.
   (c)   Residential parking. A minimum one space per unit shall be provided.
In cases where the housing development project is located on property owned by
a religious institution, no parking shall be required if either of the
following applies:
      (1)   The parcel is located within one-half mile walking distance of
public transit; or
      (2)   There is a car share vehicle located within one block of the
parcel.
   (d)   Non-residential parking. Parking required for the higher education or
religious uses on the site shall be as follows:
      (1)   Parking for the independent institution of higher education uses
shall be provided pursuant to
Chapter 21.68. In cases where existing parking is nonconforming, the
deficiencies are not required to be fixed.
      (2)   Parking required for religious land uses shall be as approved as
outlined in a previously approved Conditional Use Permit for said use. In cases
where there is no Conditional Use Permit, parking shall be required as the
number of parking spaces provided at such time the use was built.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.53.040 Application procedure.
Approval of projects pursuant to this chapter shall require a Zoning Clearance
pursuant to
Chapter 21.96. No public hearing or notice shall be required.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.53.050 Sunset clause.
This chapter shall only remain in effect until January 1, 2036 and on that date
is repealed, unless the Legislature of the State of California extends Chapter
4.2 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code to a later date.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
CHAPTER 21.54
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS*
*   Chapter 21.54 was suspended for 45 days by Interim Ordinance 697-U, § 2,
adopted August 22, 2017. Interim Ordinance 699-U, § 2, extended the suspension
for ten months and 15 days.
Sections:
   
21.54.010   Purpose.
   
21.54.020   Permitted by right with compliance with standards.
21.54.010 Purpose.
This section sets forth regulations for accessory dwelling units (ADU) in
residential zoning districts consistent with state law (California Government
Code Sections 65852.1 through 65852.2). Implementation of this section is
intended to expand housing opportunities within existing neighborhoods while
maintaining the primarily single- family residential character of the area.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008; Ord. 705, § 7 (part), 2018).
21.54.020 Permitted by right with compliance with standards.
   (a) An application (Site Plan Review Application) for an ADU shall be
subject to ministerial review and shall only be approved by the Community
Development Department if the ADU satisfies all the standards below.
      (1)   The ADU is developed on a lot within the single-family residential
(R-1) zoning district that contains only one existing single-family dwelling or
is developed in conjunction with a new single-family residence on a vacant lot
within the single-family residential (R-1) zoning district.
      (2)   The ADU is the only ADU located, or proposed to be located, on the
residential lot.
      (3)   The ADU is not located on a lot, or adjacent to a lot, with real
property that is listed on the California Register of Historic Places.
      (4)   The ADU is built using conventional construction methods or is a
manufactured home built on a permanent foundation or chassis and designed to be
used as a single-family dwelling when connected to the required utilities,
including plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
      (5)   Before obtaining a building permit for an ADU, the owner of the lot
or parcel shall file with the County Recorder a declaration of restrictions,
which has been approved by the City Attorney as to its form and content,
containing a reference to the deed under which the property was acquired by the
owner and placing the following restrictions on the property, the property
owner, and all successors in interest:
         (A)   The property owner must occupy either the primary dwelling unit
or ADU as his or her primary principal residence;
         (B)   The unit is not being occupied by the property owner shall be
rented only for terms longer than thirty days;
         (C)   The ADU is not to be sold or conveyed separately from the
primary residence;
         (D)   The property owner and all successors in interest shall maintain
the ADU and the property in accordance with all applicable ADU requirements and
standards, including all city building, safety, health and fire codes;
         (E)   Any violation will be subject to penalties as provided in
Chapter 1.08, “Penalties, Administrative and Civil Remedies, and General
Provisions.”
      (6)   An ADU shall only be provided a separate address if it includes
independent exterior access without any interior access to the interior living
area of the primary residence.
      (7)   The height of attached and detached ADUs shall not exceed one story
and fifteen feet at the peak of the roof or twelve feet for a flat-roofed
structure. The roof pitch shall match that of the existing single-family
residence. This one-story height restriction shall not apply to an ADU
constructed above an existing garage, which shall not exceed a maximum height
of thirty-five feet.
      (8)   If attached to the primary residence, the ADU shall comply with all
the setback requirements of the applicable zone in which the primary residence
and ADU are located and shall maintain a minimum distance of six feet from
other on-site structures.
      (9)   If detached from the primary residence, the minimum side and rear
yard setbacks for an ADU shall be five feet; the front yard setback shall
comply with the requirement of the applicable zone in which the primary
residence and ADU are located, and the ADU shall maintain a minimum distance of
six feet from other on-site structures.
      (10)   Notwithstanding paragraphs (8) and (9) above, the following
setback exceptions apply where applicable:
         (A)   An ADU constructed above an existing garage, shall maintain the
same setbacks as the existing garage. The minimum side and rear yard setback
for exterior stairs to a second floor ADU above a garage shall be five feet.
Exterior stairs to a second floor ADU above a garage shall not be permitted
along the front of the subject property. Interior stairs to a second floor ADU
above a garage shall not encroach into the required two vehicle parking area
within the garage. An ADU constructed above an existing garage shall not
include a balcony, and any second-story window that faces a neighboring
property shall be provided with translucent glazing or be placed at least six
feet above the interior finished floor to protect the privacy of adjacent
neighbors.
         (B)   For an ADU that is converted from an existing garage, no
additional setbacks beyond the existing garage setback are required beyond
those required by the local building and fire codes.
      (11)   The combined total lot coverage for both the primary residence and
ADU shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage requirement of the applicable
zone in which the primary residence and ADU are located.
      (12)   The design, materials, colors, architectural details and finish of
an ADU shall match the primary residence.
      (13)   The minimum and maximum living area of an attached or detached ADU
shall comply with the following:
         (A)   The minimum living area shall be one hundred fifty square feet
with a minimum living/bedroom area of seventy square feet; and a minimum
bathroom area of thirty square feet. The bathroom shall include a toilet,
lavatory, and bathtub or shower. The remaining square footage shall include a
kitchen, which shall include a sink, stove and refrigerator.
         (B)   The maximum living area shall be eight hundred square feet.
      (14)   An ADU shall have no more than one bedroom or any similar room
that could reasonably function as a bedroom.
      (15)   In addition to the parking required for the primary residence, a
minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for an ADU. The
parking space required for the ADU must satisfy all the following:
         (A)   Parking shall not be in the front setback except on an approved
paved driveway. Required yards and open space shall not be used for parking.
         (B)   The ADU's parking space may be tandem, covered, or uncovered,
but must be paved.
         (C)   The ADU's parking space may be side-by-side on an expanded paved
driveway with a maximum width of thirty feet provided the driveway apron is
also expanded to align with the new driveway width.
         (D)   The dimensions of all parking spaces and driveways shall comply
with
Chapter 21.68, "Parking and Loading.” The minimum parking space size for all
parking shall be equal to a "standard" parking stall.
         (E)   If an existing garage, carport or other covered parking is
converted, demolished or displaced in conjunction with the construction of an
ADU, the conversion or displacement shall not eliminate the off-street parking
required for the primary residence which shall be replaced on-site. The
replacement parking may be covered spaces, uncovered spaces or tandem spaces.
Mechanical automobile parking lifts may also be used to replace the parking
spaces provided they are located within a fully enclosed building.
Additionally, if no additional parking is provided for the ADU, as a result of
the parking exemptions listed in paragraph (16) below, then any existing
garage, carport or other covered parking converted, demolished or displaced in
conjunction with the construction of an ADU shall be replaced with the type
(Fully Enclosed) and number of parking required for the primary residence.
      (16)   Notwithstanding paragraph (15) above, no additional parking space
is required for an ADU that satisfies any of the following:
         (A)   The ADU is located within one-half mile of public transit as
measured via the pedestrian path of travel starting at the property line of the
subject lot;
         (B)   The accessory dwelling unit is entirely located within an
architecturally and historically significant historic district;
         (C)   The ADU is part of the proposed or existing primary residence;
or
         (D)   The ADU is located within one block of a car share vehicle.
      (17)   All sewer, water, gas, and electrical utility connections of the
ADU must be a part of the primary dwelling unit's system.
      (18)   If an automatic sprinkler system is required for the primary
residence, the ADU must also provide an automatic sprinkler system.
      (19)   Deviations from the above prescribed ADU development standards may
be considered via the Administrative Adjustment or Variance process when
applicable.
      (20)   Junior ADUs as listed within Government Code Section 65852.22 are
prohibited within the city.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008; Ord. 705, § 7 (part), 2018).
CHAPTER 21.56
SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Sections:
   
21.56.010   Intent and purpose.
   
21.56.020   Definitions.
   
21.56.030   Prohibition.
   
21.56.040   Hosting platform responsibilities.
   
21.56.050   Violations and penalties.
21.56.010 Intent and purpose.  
The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the operation and/or establishment
of short-term residential rentals in all zones of the city that expressly or
conditionally permit residential uses, excluding rental of dwelling units
located within city-approved hotels and motels.
(Ord. 710, § 5 (part), 2019).
21.56.020 Definitions.
The following terms and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed as defined in this section:
   (1)   "Advertisement" means any printed or lettered announcement, whether in
a magazine, newspaper, handbill, notice, display, billboard, poster, email,
Internet website or application, or any other form.
   (2)   "Hosting platform" means a person who participates in the short-term
rental business by collecting or receiving a fee, directly or indirectly
through an agent or intermediary, for conducting a booking transaction using
any medium of facilitation.
   (3)   "Person" means any natural person, joint venture, joint stock company,
partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business trust, or
organization or business entity of any kind.
   (4)   "Short-term rental" means the renting of, or offering to make
available (by way of a rental agreement, lease, license or any other means,
whether oral or written) for compensation or consideration of any kind, any
dwelling of any kind, or room or rooms in a dwelling, or any dwelling unit, or
a portion thereof, within the city, for a period of less than thirty
consecutive days. Rental of any dwelling unit, or room or rooms, located within
or that are part of any city-approved hotel and motel shall not be considered a
short term rental.
(Ord. 710, § 5 (part), 2019).
21.56.030 Prohibition.  
It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or make available for rent or to
rent (by way of a rental agreement, lease, license or any other means, whether
oral or written), for compensation or consideration of any kind, any dwelling
of any kind, or room or rooms in a dwelling, or any dwelling unit, or a portion
thereof, within the city, for less than thirty consecutive days. No person or
entity shall place or maintain any advertisement for a short-term rental
prohibited by this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy a
dwelling, a dwelling unit or a room in a dwelling for less than thirty
consecutive days pursuant to a rental agreement, lease, license or any other
means, whether oral or written, for compensation or any consideration of any
kind. This prohibition shall not apply to the rental of any dwelling unit, or
room or rooms, located within or that are part of any city-permitted hotel and
motel.
(Ord. 710, § 5 (part), 2019).
21.56.040 Hosting platform responsibilities.
    (a)   Subject to applicable laws, hosting platforms shall identify and
disclose to the city on a regular basis, but not less than quarterly, each
short-term rental property listing located in the city, the names of the
persons responsible for each such listing, the address of each such listing,
the length of stay for each such listing and the price paid for each stay.
   (b)   Hosting platforms shall not complete any booking transaction for any
short-term rental at the time the hosting platform receives a fee for the
booking transaction.
   (c)   Hosting platforms shall not collect or receive a fee, directly or
indirectly through an agent or intermediary, for facilitating or providing
services ancillary to a short-term rental, including, but not limited to,
insurance, concierge services, catering, restaurant bookings, tours, guide
services, entertainment, cleaning, property management, or maintenance of the
short-term rental property.
   (d)   Safe Harbor. A hosting platform operating exclusively on the Internet,
which operates in compliance with subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, shall be
presumed to be in compliance with this chapter, except that the hosting
platform remains responsible for compliance with any administrative subpoena
issued by the city.
   (e)   The provisions of this section shall be interpreted in accordance with
otherwise applicable state and federal law(s) and will not apply if, or to the
extent, determined by the city to be in violation of, or preempted by, any such
law(s).
(Ord. 710, § 5 (part), 2019).
21.56.050 Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an
infraction punishable through an administrative citation and subject to those
fines listed in La Mirada Municipal Code Section 1.08.090.
(Ord. 710, § 5 (part), 2019).
CHAPTER 21.57
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
Sections:
   
21.57.010   Purpose.
   
21.57.020   Applicability.
   
21.57.030   Development standards.
   
21.57.040   Application procedure.
21.57.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards for review of residential
care facilities in compliance with State law. This chapter shall be interpreted
and applied consistent with the requirements of the California Government Code,
including but not limited to Section 65580 et seq., and the requirements of the
California Health and Safety Code Section 1500 et seq. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part),
2025).
21.57.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Small residential care facilities (serving six or fewer persons) shall
be permitted by right in any residential zone.
   (b)   Large residential care facilities (serving seven or more persons) are
permitted in residential zones, subject to issuance of a conditional use
permit. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.57.030 Development standards.
In addition to the development standards of the underlying zoning district,
residential care facilities shall comply with the following standards:
   (a)   Licensed. Residential care facilities shall be licensed by the
appropriate state or county agency and shall comply with all licensing
requirements thereof.
   (b)   Separation. The proposed large residential care facility shall be
located no less than 1,000 feet in distance from any other large residential
care facility, as measured property line to property line.
   (c)   Parking. Off-street parking requirements for residential care
facilities shall be applied pursuant to Table 21.68.050.
   (d)   Entry door. No more than one entry door shall be located on a street
facing façade.
   (e)   Exceptions to development standards. Development standards shall be
applied per the underlying zoning district unless reasonable accommodation is
granted per
Chapter 21.126.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.57.040 Application procedure.
   (a)   Approval of small residential care facilities (serving six or fewer
persons) shall require a Zoning Clearance pursuant to Chapter 21.96. No public
hearing or notice shall be required.
   (b)   Approval of large residential care facilities (serving seven or more
persons) shall require a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 21.110.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
CHAPTER 21.58
LOW-BARRIER NAVIGATION CENTERS
Sections:
   
21.58.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.58.020   Applicability.
   
21.58.030   Operational standards.
   
21.58.040   Monitoring and reporting.
   
21.58.050   Application procedure.
   
21.58.060   Sunset clause.
21.58.010 Purpose and intent.
These regulations are intended to facilitate the development of low-barrier
navigation centers (LBNC) as set forth in California Government Code Section
65660 to 65663. A low-barrier navigation center provides essential housing-
first, low-barrier, service-enriched shelters that are designed to help
individuals experiencing homelessness transition into permanent housing. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.58.020 Applicability.
A low barrier navigation center that complies with the provisions of this
chapter shall be permitted within the R-3 and R-4 zones, as well as the MUO and
ESO overlays. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.58.030 Operational standards.
The operation of low barrier navigation center must adhere to the following:
   (a)   Connected services. It offers services to connect people to permanent
housing through a services plan that identifies services staffing.
   (b)   Coordinated entry system. It is linked to a coordinated entry system,
so that staff in the interim facility or staff who co-locate in the facility
may conduct assessments and provide services to connect people to permanent
housing.
   (c)   Homeless management information system. It has a system for entering
information regarding client stays, client demographics, client income, and
exit destination through the local Homeless Management Information System as
defined by Section 578.3 of Title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations as may
be amended from time to time.
   (d)   A clear and enforceable code of conduct must be established for
residents to ensure a safe and respectful living environment.
   (e)   Daily operations. Must operate 24 hours a day, seven days a week, to
provide continuous support to residents.
   (f)   Code compliant. It complies with Chapter 6.5 (commencing with Section
8255) of Division 8 of the Welfare and Institutions Code as may be amended from
time to time.(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.58.040 Monitoring and reporting.
   (a)   Annual report. Each approved low barrier navigation center shall be
subject to annual review by the city, including a review of management
services. The permit grantee shall be responsible for filing an annual report
to the city which includes the number of individuals served, outcome related to
permanent housing placements, compliance with operation standards, and services
provided at the facility.
   (b)   Inspections. The city reserves the right to conduct periodic
inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and applicable health and
safety regulations. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.58.050 Application procedure.
An application for a zoning clearance for a low barrier navigation center
permit shall be filed pursuant to
Chapter 21.96 . The Director shall approve an application that meets the
development standards set forth in this chapter without discretionary review or
a public hearing, no more than 60 days after the application has been deemed
complete. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.58.060 Sunset clause.
This chapter shall only remain in effect until January 1, 2027 and on that date
is repealed, unless the Legislature of the State of California extends Article
12 of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code to a later
date. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
ARTICLE VII: SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
Chapter 21.60
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Sections:
   
21.60.010   Purpose and applicability.
   
21.60.020   Permit requirements.
   
21.60.030   Exemptions.
   
21.60.040   Development standards.
   
21.60.050   Canopy structures.
21.60.010 Purpose and applicability.
   (a)   This chapter establishes standards for the construction and
maintenance of detached accessory structures to ensure that such structures do
not create public safety or nuisance issues, do not create adverse aesthetic
effects, and do not adversely affect surrounding properties.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter apply to those structures which require
a building permit and/or extend two feet or more above a standard six-foot-high
privacy fence.
   (c)   
Chapter 21.42 identifies permitted accessory uses and the operation of such
uses.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.60.020 Permit requirements.
Except for an exempt structure, as defined in Section
21.60.030, an accessory structure shall require zoning clearance approval
pursuant to the provisions of
Chapter 21.96 to ensure compliance with applicable regulations of this chapter
and title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.60.030 Exemptions.
The following accessory structures shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter but are subject to compliance with all other provisions of this
title:
   (1)   Enclosed and/or solid-roofed structures that contain less than one
hundred twenty square feet of enclosed floor area and where no portion of the
structure is equal to or greater than eight feet in height. Such structures
shall not be located in a required front yard.
   (2)   Play equipment that covers an area no greater than one hundred twenty
square feet and with no portion of the structure equal to or greater than eight
feet in height. Play equipment shall not be located in the required front yard.
   (3)   Decks and patios that are less than thirty inches above natural grade,
are not over any basement or story below, and are unenclosed except for a
safety railing with a maximum height of forty-two inches.
   (4)   Pools and fish ponds that cover an area no greater than one hundred
twenty square feet (including related equipment), contain less than two
thousand gallons of water, and are less than three feet in depth.
   (5)   Mechanical and HVAC equipment (including pool equipment) in
residential side and rear yards, provided that a minimum three-foot clearance
is maintained for pedestrian access from the rear door(s) of the residence to
the street.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.60.040 Development standards.
(a) Table 21.60.040 sets forth development standards for accessory structures.
These standards supplement the standards for the applicable zoning district. If
an accessory structure is attached to the main building, such structure shall
comply with the development standards for the main building.
   (b)   To maintain necessary fire clearance, all combustible accessory
structures shall be set back a minimum of three feet from side and rear
property lines, with a minimum six-foot separation between structures. For the
purpose of compliance with minimum structural fire breaks, minimum setback
distances for accessory structures from property lines and between accessory
structures shall include all portions of the structure(s) (e.g., overhangs,
projections, railings).
Table 21.60.040
Development Standards for Accessory Structures
          Minimum Setback Distance From Property Line Minimum
Accessory                                             Distance
Structure Front1 Street Side1 Interior Side Rear      Between    Maximum Height
                                                      Structures
Table 21.60.040
Development Standards for Accessory Structures
              Minimum Setback Distance From Property Line Minimum
Accessory                                                 Distance   Maximum
Structure     Front1 Street Side1 Interior Side Rear      Between    Height
                                                          Structures

Enclosed and/
or solid-     3      5 ft.4       5 ft.         5 ft.5    6 ft.      15 ft.
roofed
structure2
Landscape     6      3 ft.6       3 ft.         3 ft.     6 ft.      15 ft.
features
Play          3      3 ft.        3 ft.         3 ft.     6 ft.7     15 ft.
equipment
Deck/patio    3 ft.  3 ft.        3 ft.         3 ft.     6 ft.7     N/A
Pool/spa,
including any
filter,       3      5 ft.        5 ft.         5 ft.     5 ft.8     N/A
heater, or
similar
equipment
 
Notes:
1.   If a permanent structure is located within a utility easement community
development director authorization is required prior to issuance of a building
permit.
2.   Accessory structures which are enclosed and solid-roofed shall be included
in the calculation of maximum lot coverage.
3.   The minimum setback distance shall be consistent with the minimum setback
distance for the main structure in the applicable zoning district. Structures
are not permitted in the required front yard area.
4.   If located within the street-side yard of a corner lot abutting a key lot,
the setback distance from the street shall be equal to the minimum front yard
setback for the key lot.
5.   Detached garage structures with access from an adjacent alley shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from the opposite side of the alley.
6.   Minor structures that are part of a landscape plan may be located in the
required front yard area if otherwise in compliance with the minimum landscape
requirements of this title.
7.   The minimum distance between structures is required if one or both
structures are combustible.
8.   In accordance with uniform code requirements adopted by the city, pools
shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any sliding glass door opening.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.60.050 Canopy structures.
   (a)   Reasons for Regulating Canopy Structures. The use of temporary
canopies, carports, and similar, portable and pre-manufactured structures has
proliferated throughout the city. Such structures are inherently lightweight
and unstable, rendering them capable of causing injury or damage during high
winds. These structures are often placed in required setback areas or areas
required to be unobstructed. Furthermore, these structures are often allowed to
deteriorate and become unsightly, thereby detracting from the overall
appearance of residential properties within the city. For these reasons, the
city has deemed it appropriate to regulate the placement and use of canopy
structures.
   (b)   Use and Maintenance of Portable Canopy or Tarp. No portable canopy or
tarp shall be placed, maintained, installed, or located in or upon any parcel
used for residential purposes, in any residential district of the city, except
within an "approved area". For purposes of this section, "approved area" means
and includes an area that is enclosed by a solid fence or other permanent
structure on all sides, that is not less than six feet high, and not located
within any required setback or other area of a parcel required to be
unobstructed. Each portable canopy or tarp permitted by this section shall be
securely anchored to the ground or other structure, in conformance with the
building code of the city, so as to prevent movement during high winds.
   (c)   Penalty for Violation of Provisions. Violation of this section
constitutes a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in
Chapter 1.08 of this Code. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
partnership or corporation to violate any provision, or to fail to comply with
any of the requirements of this section. Any person, firm, partnership, or
corporation violating any provision of this section, or failing to comply with
any of its requirements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand
dollars, or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each such person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion
thereof during which any violation of this section is committed, continued, or
permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed
punishable as provided in this section.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.62
FENCES AND WALLS
Sections:
   
21.62.010   Purpose.
   
21.62.015   Definitions.
   
21.62.020   Permit requirements.
   
21.62.030   Exemptions.
   
21.62.040   Height and location provisions.
   
21.62.050   Sight clearance requirements.
   
21.62.060   Special design provisions for arterial highways.
   
21.62.070   Design criteria for interior fence and block walls.
   
21.62.075   Electrified fence standards.
   
21.62.080   Prohibited fencing material.
21.62.010 Purpose.
This chapter sets forth standards for the construction and maintenance of
fences and walls to ensure that such features can provide for privacy and
safety without obstructing views, and without creating a public safety hazard
or nuisance.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.62.015 Definitions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of
Chapter 21.200 of this code, for purposes of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply:
   (1)   “Arterial wall” is any fence or wall, including retaining wall, which
is immediately adjacent to or abuts a major/minor arterial roadway.
   (2)   “Electrified fence” means a fence or similar barrier that has
electricity running through it to deter animals and people from crossing a
boundary.
   (3)   “Fence” means a solid or open barrier, other than a wall, located
above ground and intended to enclose or mark a boundary.
   (4)   “Major/minor arterial roadways” means a roadway designated a major or
minor roadway on the city's General Plan.
   (5)   “Retaining wall” means a wall designed to resist lateral earth and/or
fluid pressures, including any surcharge, in accordance with accepted
engineering practice.
   (6)   “Slope” means an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.
   (7)   “Structural compromise” is when a building or structure has been
potentially compromised. The owner shall cause a structural inspection of the
building or structure to be performed by a certified engineer when a structure
is deemed to be compromised.
   (8)   “Structural failure” refers to loss of the load-carrying capacity of a
component or member within a structure or of the structure itself. Structural
failure is initiated when the material is stressed to its strength limit, thus
causing fracture or excessive deformations. A licensed engineer shall review
and determine when a retaining wall or wall show signs of structural failure.
   (9)   “Surcharge” is a vertical load imposed on the retained soil that may
impose a lateral force in addition to the lateral earth pressure of the
retained soil.
   (10)   “Wall” means a physical barrier constructed largely of masonry,
brick, concrete, stucco, concrete block, or any combination thereof and
intended to mark a boundary.
(Ord. 710, § 6, 2019; Ord. 650, § 6, 2012).
21.62.020 Permit requirements.
   Unless otherwise exempt per Section
21.62.030, the construction, installation, or modification of any fence or wall
shall require planning approval and a building permit to ensure compliance with
applicable regulations of this chapter and title.
(Ord. 650, § 7, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.62.030 Exemptions.
The following fences and walls are exempt from obtaining a building permit.
   (1)   Fences and walls less than thirty-six inches in height.
   (2)   Retaining walls less than four feet in height, as measured from the
bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge.
(Ord. 710, § 7, 2019).
21.62.040 Height and location provisions.
   (a)   Fence and Wall Height. Table 21.62.040 sets forth the maximum
permitted heights for fences and walls in required areas.
 
Table 21.62.040
Maximum Height for Fences and Walls in Required Yard Areas
Location                    Maximum Height
Front yard                  42 inches
Interior yard and rear yard 7 feet1, 2
                            42 inches in the required front yard area and 7
Street side yard            feet behind the front yard setback to the rear of
                            the lot
 
Notes:
1.   For commercial and industrial development, the designated approving
authority may approve a fence or wall up to a maximum height of 10 feet in
compliance with location and clear vision requirements of this title.
2.   A protective fence enclosing any public property or an open area for games
or a swimming pool shall not be subject to the limitations if constructed of
wire or steel mesh capable of transmitting at least 90 percent of the light
shining onto it.
   (b)   Measurement of Fence or Wall Height.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, fence and wall height shall be
measured as the vertical distance from the ground elevation or finished grade
of the property on which the fence or wall is erected to the highest point of
the fence or wall. However, the height of retaining walls shall be measured
from the bottom of the footing to the top of the retaining wall. To allow for
variation in topography, the height of a fence or a wall may vary up to six
inches.
      (2)   Where there is a difference in the ground elevation or finished
grade between two adjoining parcels of less than two feet, the height of any
fence or wall constructed along the common property line shall be determined by
using the finished grade of the highest contiguous parcel. When there is a
difference in the ground level between two adjacent parcels of two feet or
more, the height of a fence or wall shall be determined by the community
development director. The community development director shall consider the
physical and visual fence height impact on abutting properties.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4640.jpg]
 
   (c)   Walls Required Between Different Zoning Districts and Uses.
      (1)   Along the common boundary between a residential zoning district or
use and a commercial or industrial zoning district and/or use, a minimum six-
foot-high decorative solid masonry wall shall be constructed to serve as a
visual screen and buffer between uses.
      (2)   Along the common boundary between any single-family zoning district
or use and multi-family residential zoning districts and/or uses, a minimum
six-foot-high decorative solid masonry wall shall be constructed to serve as a
visual screen and buffer between uses.
(Ord. 650, § 9, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.62.050 Sight clearance requirements.
To safeguard against vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian collisions caused by
visual obstructions at street intersections, a clear cross-visibility area
shall be maintained at the intersection of the public rights-of-way,
unobstructed by any fence or wall taller than forty-two inches above the street
grade. See Figure 21.62.050.
   (1)   On any corner lot: a triangular area at the street intersection
measuring fifteen feet along each street property line (or the projections
thereof parallel to the centerlines of the streets) from the point of
intersection of such property lines (or the projections thereof);
   (2)   At the intersection of an alley with a street, or at the intersection
of two alleys: a triangular area measuring fifteen feet along each street or
alley property line from the point of intersection of the property lines;
   (3)   At any driveway entrance from or exit to a street: triangular areas on
each side of the driveway measuring fifteen feet along the street property line
and fifteen feet along the edge of the driveway from the point of intersection
of the edge of the driveway with the street property line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4638.jpg]
 
(Ord. 650, § 10, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.62.060 Special design provisions for arterial highways.
   Any fence or wall, including retaining walls located immediately abutting or
parallel to any major or minor arterial street in the city shall be required to
comply with the following design criteria:
   (1)   All such arterial walls, including retaining walls, shall be
constructed of split-face tan color masonry block. The block wall shall have a
decorative cap as approved by the planning division. At the discretion of the
community development director, the decorative cap may extend beyond the height
limitation.
   (2)   When fifty percent or more of the wall area of an existing wall or
fence is reconstructed, changed, altered, redesigned or added, all the
provisions of this section shall apply to the entire arterial wall.
   (3)   All fences and walls visible from a major or minor arterial roadway,
including such walls or fence which are visible from, but not directly adjacent
to such highways and streets, shall be maintained in good physical and
aesthetic conditions at all times pursuant to Chapter 21.72 of the La Mirada
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 650, § 11, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.62.070 Design criteria for interior fence and block walls.
Notwithstanding the land use regulations and development standards associated
with the design standards regulating walls and fences abutting or parallel to a
major or minor arterial, the following fence and wall design standards shall
apply to all interior neighborhood properties.
   (1)   All such fences or walls shall be constructed of precision block,
slump stone, split face block, construction block with stucco covering, durable
hardwood or vinyl material. The finish, materials, color, and texture, shall
complement the existing main structure and must be approved by the planning
division prior to construction. Masonry block shall have a decorative cap.
   (2)   When fifty percent or more of the wall area of an existing wall or
fence is reconstructed, changed, altered, redesigned, or added, all the
provisions of this section shall apply.
   (3)   All fences and walls shall be maintained in good physical and
aesthetic condition at all times pursuant to Chapter 21.72 of the La Mirada
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 650, § 12, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.62.075 Electrified fence standards.
   (a)   Location. Electrified fences shall be prohibited in all zoning
districts, except for the following:
      (1)   Industrial (M-2) Zoning District, provided the electrified fence is
not located along a property line that abuts property in a residential zone or
property used for residential purposes; and provided the electrified fence is
not located within a required setback.
      (2)   Freeway Commercial (C-F) Zoning District, provided the electrified
fence is only located along the rear and interior side property line that abuts
a railroad right-of-way, flood control channel, waterway, or Industrial (M-2)
zoned property and provided the electrified fence is not located within the
required front yard setback.
      (3)   Temporary Location Exemption. A request for a temporary exemption
from the permitted locations noted in numbers (1) and (2) above may be made via
a zoning clearance/plan check application.
         i.   In addition to the documents/plans required for submittal of a
zoning clearance/plan check application submittal, the application shall also
include the following:
            1.   Clear statement of the condition(s) that exist to warrant the
requested exemption.
            2.   Clear justification for the approval of the requested location
exemption.
            3.   Time period for the temporary exemption, start and end dates.
         ii.   The installation being proposed under an exemption shall comply
with the Development Standards for Electrified Fences listed within the
subsection
21.62.075(c).
         iii.   The following are required when granting a location exemption:
            1.   The property under application is located within the
Industrial (M-2) or Freeway Commercial (C-F) Zoning District.
            2.   The condition(s) that exists for requesting the exemption is
beyond the control of the applicant, business owner and property owner of the
site making the request.
            3.   The condition(s) that exists for requesting the exemption is
temporary.
            4.   The location of the temporary installation does not create a
safety hazard for pedestrians, motorist or others.
            5.   The time period requested for the temporary location exemption
is reasonable.
         iv.   In the event the condition that warranted the approval is cured
prior to the expiration of the approved time period, the installation shall be
removed within 30 days of written notice from the City of La Mirada.
         v.   Appeals shall be subject to the procedures in
Chapter 21.88 of Title 21 of this municipal code.
         vi.   Approval of a location exemption shall not be final until an
agreement between the applicant, business owner, property owner and the City of
La Mirada is executed. The agreement shall be prepared by the city attorney and
executed by the city manager. The fee for preparation of the agreement shall be
established by separate city council resolution.
   (b)   Permit requirement. Electrified fences shall require approval of a
Zoning Clearance Application pursuant to
Chapter 21.96 to ensure compliance with the applicable regulations of this
section, chapter and title. Electrified fences shall also be reviewed and
approved by the County of Los Angeles Fire Department prior to being granted
all necessary Building and Electrical permits.
   (c)   Development Standards. Electrified fences shall comply with the
following standards:
      (1)   Electrified fences shall be installed as to be as minimally
intrusive as possible.
      (2)   Electrified fences should utilize horizontal electrified wires and
minimal vertical post.
      (3)   Height. Electrified fences parallel to a street shall not exceed
eight feet in height and electrified fences along a rear or interior side
property line shall not exceed ten feet in height.
      (4)   Electrified fencing shall be completely surrounded by a non-
electrified perimeter fence or wall that is not less than six feet high. Where
an electrified fence is visible to the public, the perimeter fence or wall
shall be 100% view obscuring. Vehicle access gates along a public right-of-way
may be exempted from this requirement.
      (5)   The spacing between the electrified fence and perimeter fence or
wall shall not be greater than eighteen inches and the area between the two
shall be kept free of trash, debris and overgrown vegetation.
      (6)   No barbed, concertina, or similar wire shall be attached to the
electrified fence or perimeter fence or wall, and any existing barbed,
concertina, or similar wire attached to any fence or structure on the subject
site shall be removed.
      (7)   Electrification. Electrified fences shall be constructed or
installed in conformance with applicable provisions of the Los Angeles County
Electrical Code, California Electrical Code (CEC) and/or International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) standards for electric fence energizers.
      (8)   The energizer for electric fences must be driven by a commercial
storage battery not to exceed 12 volts DC or other system as approved by the
County of Los Angeles, Building and Safety Division.
      (9)   The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact shall not
exceed the energizer limitations imposed by the Los Angeles County Electrical
Code, California Electrical Code (CEC) and/or International Electrotechnical
Commission (IEC) standards for electric fence energizers as approved by the
County of Los Angeles, Building and Safety Division.
      (10)   Warning signs. Electrified fences shall be clearly identified with
legible warning signs that read, "Warning: Electric Fence" and shall include a
universal symbol indicating the presence of an electrified fence. Such signs
shall be installed at each gate and access point, and on the perimeter fence or
wall at intervals not exceeding thirty feet. The warning signs shall be visible
on both sides of the fence and shall be no smaller than twelve inches by
eighteen inches. The warning signs shall be kept in good condition to ensure
visibility and readability.
      (11)   Owner/management company contact. A notice shall be posted at each
pedestrian and vehicle gate indicating a twenty-four-hour contact person's name
and phone number.
   (d)   Emergency Access. A "Knox Box," disconnect switches and/or other
similar approved devices shall be installed for emergency access as may be
required by the County of Los Angeles Sheriff and Fire Departments. When
required, disconnect switches and controls shall be installed in an easily
accessible location on the property, shall not be obscured in any manner from
the street/private driveway access and shall be clearly identified with signs.
In the event of an emergency or urgent circumstance requiring that the County
Sheriff and/or Fire Departments access a property with a permitted electrified
fence, and the Knox Box or other similar approved device is absent or non-
functional, and an owner, manager, employee, custodian, or any other person
with control over the property is not present to disable the electrified fence,
fire and/or Sheriff personnel shall be authorized to disable the electrified
fence in order to gain access to the property. As a condition of permit
issuance, when access is attained under emergency or urgent circumstances, all
permit applicants and, by extension, the subject site's property owner(s),
agree to waive any and all claims for damages to the electrified fence and
associated equipment against the City of La Mirada, County Sheriff, County Fire
Department, their employees and/or others acting at their direction.
   (e)   Indemnification. To the maximum extent permitted by law, all
applicants and, by extension, the subject site's property owner(s) issued
permits to install an electrified fence as provided in this section shall
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers,
agents, contractors, and employees with respect to: any and all claims, damages
and losses whatsoever occurring or resulting to any and all persons, firms, or
corporations furnishing or supplying work, services, materials, or supplies in
connection with or arising out of the exercise of rights granted by the permits
and/or approvals associated with the installation of an electrified fence; and
any and all claims, liabilities, lawsuits or actions, including any and all
claims, liabilities and losses for damage, injury, or death, occurring in
connection with or arising out of the granting of or the exercise of the rights
granted by the permits and/or approvals associated with the installation of an
electrified fence. Applicant's obligation to indemnify, defend, and hold
harmless the city as stated hereinabove shall include, but not be limited to,
paying all fees and costs incurred by legal counsel of the city's choice in
representing the city in connection with any such claims, losses, lawsuits, or
actions, and payment of any award of damages, judgments, verdicts, court costs
and attorneys' fees in any such lawsuit or action." (Ord. 717 § 5, 2021; Ord.
710, § 8, 2019).
21.62.080 Prohibited fencing material.
   (1)   Chain link fencing shall be prohibited in residential, commercial, and
industrial zoned districts. Subject to approval of the community development
director, chain link can be used in the industrial zone to substitute any area
not be visible from the public right-of-way. Any chain link fencing existing as
of the effective date of this provision shall be deemed legal nonconforming and
subject to abatement pursuant to the nonconforming provisions of this title.
   (2)   No razor wire, barbed wire, or similar fencing material shall be
permitted in any Zoning District. Any such fencing materials existing as of the
effective date of this zoning code shall be subject to abatement pursuant to
the nonconforming provisions of this title.
   (3)   The installation of wood, vinyl or similar fencing material shall not
be permitted along major or minor arterial roadways, including the mounting of
screening materials (i.e., wood, lattice, and the like) that either protrudes
over or increases the height of an existing fence or wall. Any such fencing
materials existing as of the effective date of this provision shall be subject
to abatement pursuant to the nonconforming provisions of this title.
(Ord. 650, § 13, 2012)
CHAPTER 21.64
HEIGHT MEASUREMENT AND EXCEPTIONS
Sections:
   
21.64.010   Purpose.
   
21.64.020   Height measurement.
   
21.64.030   Exceptions to height limits.
21.64.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes the method for measuring the height of structures in
compliance with the height limits set forth in this title, and specifies
exceptions to height limits.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.64.020 Height measurement.
   (a)   Structure height shall be measured as the vertical distance between
the lowest ground elevation or finished grade and the highest point of the
subject building or structure. The highest point shall be the coping of a flat
roof, deck line of a mansard roof, or peak of the highest gable of a pitch or
hip roof, exclusive of vents, air conditioners, chimneys, and the like.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4325.jpg]
 
   (b)   For sloped lots or buildings with varied floor elevations, the height
shall be measured as the vertical distance from the average level of the ground
under the building to the top-most point of the roof. The average level of the
ground is determined by adding the elevations of the lowest and highest points
of the part of the lot covered by a building, and dividing by two.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.64.030 Exceptions to height limits.
The following exceptions to height limits are allowed, provided compliance is
achieved with all other applicable permit requirements and development
standards of this title.
   (1)   Uninhabited architectural design features such as towers, spires,
steeples, domes, and cupolas may exceed the specified height limit by a maximum
of ten percent, subject to approval by the appropriate approving authority.
   (2)   Antennas, flagpoles, ventilators, chimneys, water tanks and utility
structures, or other mechanical appurtenances may exceed the specified height
limit by a maximum of twenty percent.
   (3)   Electrical transmission lines and towers are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
   (4)   Additional height exceptions for wireless communications facilities
are set forth in
Chapter 21.46.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.66
LANDSCAPING
Sections:
   
21.66.010   Purpose.
   
21.66.020   Applicability.
   
21.66.030   Landscape plan required; what constitutes landscape materials.
   
21.66.040   Landscape requirements.
   
21.66.050   Planting type, size, and location.
   
21.66.060   Water-efficient landscaping.
   
21.66.070   Landscape irrigation and maintenance.
   
21.66.080   Planting and overhead utility lines.
21.66.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes minimum landscape standards for all uses for the
purpose of enhancing the appearance of developments, reducing heat and glare,
controlling soil erosion, conserving water, establishing a buffer and/or screen
between residential and non-residential land uses, and ensuring the ongoing
maintenance of landscape areas.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.020 Applicability.
The minimum standards of this chapter shall apply to all new construction,
expansion, renovation, conversion, and alteration of existing uses or
structures throughout the city. Landscaping and buffering requirements shall be
provided prior to the issuance of occupancy permits.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.030 Landscape plan required; what constitutes landscape materials.
   (a)   Detailed landscape and irrigation plans shall be required for all
applicable development. Plans shall be prepared by a registered landscape
architect for review and approval by the public works director and community
development director prior to issuance of building permits.
   (b)   Landscaping shall be designed as an integral part of the overall site
plan to enhance building design, public views and spaces, and to provide
buffers, transitions, and screening. Landscape design and construction shall be
compatible with the surrounding urban and natural environment.
   (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, landscape materials shall include
any live plants, tree, shrubs, turf, groundcover, or other vegetation.
Landscape materials do not include concrete or other solid surfaces, fountains,
decorative paving, fences or walls, or other non-living materials.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.040 Landscape requirements.
   (a)   Minimum Landscape Coverage and Perimeter Landscape Area.
      (1)   Table 21.66.040 sets forth landscape coverage and location
requirements by zoning district. In the case of a planned unit development
(PUD), the PUD document shall set forth the standards.
      (2)   The minimum requirements for perimeter landscape areas may include
access driveways and sidewalks required for vehicles and pedestrians. However,
the required perimeter landscaping shall not include any landscaped areas
required for any parking area, as set forth in Section
21.68.120.
Table 21.66.040
Minimum Landscape Requirements by Zoning District
                Minimum                    Minimum Width of  Minimum Width of
                Landscape Minimum Width of Landscape Strip   Landscape Strip
Zoning District Coverage  Landscape Strip  Abutting Interior Abutting
                Required  Abutting Street  Property Line     Residential
                                                             District/Use
Table 21.66.040
Minimum Landscape Requirements by Zoning District
                Minimum                    Minimum Width of  Minimum Width of
                Landscape Minimum Width of Landscape Strip   Landscape Strip
Zoning District Coverage  Landscape Strip  Abutting Interior Abutting
                Required  Abutting Street  Property Line     Residential
                                                             District/Use
Residential:
- R-1           20%1      20 ft.2          N/A               N/A
- R-3 and R-4   20%       10 ft.           5 ft.             10 ft.
C-O, C-1, C-4   15%       10 ft.           5 ft.             10 ft.
C-F             15%       15 ft.           5 ft.             10 ft.
M-2             10%       10 ft.           5 ft.             10 ft.
 
Notes:
1.   No less than 50 percent of the required front yard area of any single-
family lot shall be maintained with a pervious surface.
2.   If a solid 6-foot-high fence encloses the street side yard of a single-
family lot, this requirement shall not apply.
   (b)   Street Trees.
      (1)   Street trees shall be required on all city streets. The number of
street trees shall be determined by dividing the length of property frontage,
including driveway width, by forty, with the resultant number being the
required number of trees. Fractional numbers shall be rounded up to the next
whole number.
      (2)   Additional tree planting may be required as part of a subdivision
or project condition of approval.
   (c)   Landscape of Unused and Undeveloped Portions of a Site. All areas of a
site not intended for a specific use or purpose in conjunction with a current
application, including vacant or undeveloped pad sites in shopping centers held
for future development, shall be fully landscaped and irrigated with an
automatic irrigation system. Landscaping shall include a combination of trees,
shrubs, ground cover, turf, and/or approved decorative landscape materials, as
approved by the community development director and public works director.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.050 Planting type, size, and location.
   (a)   Plant Type. Landscape planting shall emphasize drought-tolerant and
native species (especially along natural or scenic corridors), shall complement
the architectural design of structures on the site, and shall be suitable for
the soil and climatic conditions of the site.
   (b)   Planting Size and Spacing. To achieve an immediate effect of a
landscape installation and to allow sustained growth of planting materials,
minimum plant material sizes and plant spacing shall be as follows:
      (1)   Trees. The minimum plant size for trees shall be fifteen gallons.
Trees planted within ten feet of a street, sidewalk, paved trail, or walkway
shall be a deep-rooted species or shall be separated from paved surfaces by a
root barrier to prevent physical damage to public improvements. A minimum
distance of fifteen feet is required between the center of trees to street
light standards and fire hydrants.
      (2)   Shrubs. The minimum plant size for shrubs shall be five gallons.
      (3)   Ground cover. Ground cover (including turf) shall be planted in a
manner to provide one hundred percent coverage within two years of initial
planting.
   (c)   Clear Sight Distance Maintained. To safeguard against vehicle,
bicycle, and pedestrian collisions caused by visual obstructions at street
intersections, a clear cross-visibility area shall be maintained at the
intersection of the public rights-of-way, unobstructed by any landscape
material taller than forty-two inches above the street grade. At any corner
formed by the intersection of two streets, the required clear cross-visibility
area shall be a triangle having two sides fifteen-feet long extending along the
curb line of each street (see previous Figure
21.62.050).
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.060 Water-efficient landscaping.
   (a)   Consistent with the purposes of California Government Code Section
65591 (Water Conservation in Landscaping Act), all new development shall comply
with the following water-conserving landscape requirements. Exceptions to these
requirements include single-family and duplex residential development and
cemeteries.
   (b)   To the greatest extent possible, landscape material shall consist of
drought-tolerant plants. Low-water-use plants shall be used in at least fifty
percent of the total planted area. Plant material selected shall be suitable
for the given soil and climate conditions. Plant selection shall take into
consideration water conservation through appropriate use and groupings of
plants that are well adapted to particular sites and to particular watering
needs, climatic, geological, and topographical conditions.
   (c)   The maximum area permitted for turf shall be fifty percent of the
total area landscaped on the site. Higher percentages may be permitted when sod
is an essential part of the development such as playing fields for schools or
parks and residential model units. Turf usage shall only be permitted for
highly visual and functional use areas. Turf shall not be permitted in areas
difficult to irrigate, such as sidewalk strips, slopes over fifteen percent, or
narrow pathways.
   (d)   Decorative water features such as pools, ponds, and waterfalls used in
landscaped areas shall incorporate recycling of water, and where, available,
use of reclaimed water. Decorative water features shall be designed to minimize
water loss.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.070 Landscape irrigation and maintenance.
   (a)   Irrigation.
      (1)   All required landscaped areas shall be provided with an approved
irrigation system. Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid runoff,
excessive low-head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water
flows or drifts onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways or
structures.
      (2)   All landscaped areas, with the exception of systems for single-
family residences, shall be provided with an automatically timed-controlled
sprinkler system.
   (b)   Maintenance of Landscaped Areas.
      (1)   All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained by watering,
clearing of debris and litter, weeding, pruning, insect control, and
replacement of plant materials and irrigation equipment as needed to preserve
the health and appearance of plant materials.
      (2)   All trees, shrubs, and plants that due to accident, damage,
disease, or other cause fail to show a healthy growth, shall be replaced, in
kind, pursuant to the approved landscape plan within thirty days from the
identified damage date.
      (3)   All landscaping shall be maintained in such a manner that does not
restrict pedestrian access by overhanging into the public right-of-way or other
designated pedestrian path.
       (4)   Any tree, shrub, or part thereof on private property that
overhangs any street so that it endangers life, safety, or public property
shall be removed, trimmed, or cut off within ten days after written notice from
the city.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.66.080 Planting and overhead utility lines.
In keeping with the purposes of this chapter, the city encourages planting
within overhead utility corridors. However, landscape planting near overhead
utility lines and abutting utility support structures has the potential of
creating a public safety hazard by causing physical damage, disrupting service,
and obstructing access. Therefore, within twenty feet of any overhead utility
lines, planting restrictions are as follows:
   (1)   Tree species at full growth shall not encroach within a ten-foot
radial line clearance of all overhead electric utility distribution or
transmission lines. Unless ground clearance is greater than thirty feet, mature
tree height shall not exceed twenty feet.
   (2)   A minimum ten-foot clearance shall be maintained around all poles and
ground structures to ensure necessary firebreaks and unobstructed access.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.68
PARKING AND LOADING
Sections:
   
21.68.010   Purpose.
   
21.68.020   Applicability.
   
21.68.030   Permit requirements.
   
21.68.040   Exemptions.
   
21.68.050   Off-street parking space requirements.
   
21.68.060   Parking space and drive aisle dimensions.
   
21.68.070   Parking location requirements.
   
21.68.080   Parking and parking lot/structure design considerations.
   
21.68.090   General use provisions for off-street parking spaces.
   
21.68.100   Shared parking.
   
21.68.110   Compact parking spaces.
   
21.68.120   Development standards and maintenance for off-street parking.
   
21.68.130   Prohibition on commercial vehicle parking.
   
21.68.140   Parking lot landscaping.
   
21.68.150   Off-street loading requirements.
   
21.68.160   Bicycle parking requirements.
21.68.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes regulations to:
   (1)   Regulate off-street parking and loading to minimize traffic congestion
and hazards to motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians;
   (2)   Provide off-street parking in proportion to the needs generated by
different land uses;
   (3)   Ensure access to projects by emergency response vehicles; and
   (4)   Ensure that parking areas are designed and operate compatible with
surrounding land uses. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.020 Applicability.
   (a)   Except as otherwise provided, these off-street parking provisions
shall apply to new development and the establishment of a new use.
Specifically, for all buildings or structures erected and all uses of land
established after the effective date of this chapter, parking facilities shall
be provided as required by this section.
   (b)   These off-street parking provisions shall apply to the expanded area
(only) of non-residential uses/structures.
   (c)   Residential properties that do not comply with these off-street
parking provisions shall be required to comply with these provisions when
proposing an expansion/addition of habitable area that increases the original
square footage of the subject residence by more than 300 square feet.
   (d)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the power of the
planning commission, or of the city council on appeal, to require parking of
different numbers, types, and layout as part of the conditions required to be
met for approval of a development or use. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord.
710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.030 Permit requirements.
   (a)   New Parking Lots. New parking lot design not otherwise exempt shall be
reviewed in conjunction with the building permit and any other land use or
development permit required for the project. Wherever four or more spaces are
required for new development, a site plan of the premises shall be required.
The site plan shall be submitted to the community development department and
shall include sufficient detail to determine compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
   (b)   Modification of Existing Lots. Modification or improvement to an
existing parking lot which impacts the parking space layout, configuration, or
number of stalls shall require approval of a Zoning Clearance Application
pursuant to
Chapter 21.96 to authorize the modification.
   (c)   Resurfacing and Restriping. Resurfacing, slurry coating, and/or
restriping of a parking area shall require approval of a Zoning Clearance
Application pursuant to
Chapter 21.96 to authorize the work. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9
(part), 2019)
21.68.040 Exemptions.
The following parking lot improvements shall be considered minor in nature in
that the number or configuration of parking stalls is not altered. Such
improvements shall be exempt from permit requirements.
   (1)   Repair of any defects in the surface of the parking area, including
holes and cracks.
   (2)   Repair or replacement of damaged planters and curbs in the same
location. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.050 Off-street parking space requirements.
   (a)   Off-street Parking Requirements. Table 21.68.050 sets forth off-street
parking requirements for number of spaces. Except as otherwise specifically
stated, the following rules apply to Table 21.68.050:
      (1)   "Square feet" means "gross square feet" and refers to total
building floor area unless otherwise specified.
      (2)   Where parking spaces are required based on a per-employee ratio,
this shall be construed to be the total number of employees on the largest
working shift. A certified list of all employees on each shift shall be
provided to the community development department within ten days of written
request.
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating parking requirements, dens, studies,
or other similar rooms that may be used as bedrooms shall be considered
bedrooms.
      (4)   Where the number of seats is listed to determine required parking,
seats shall be construed to be fixed seats. Where fixed seats provided are
either benches, bleachers or other, each twenty-four linear inches of the
bench, bleacher or other shall be considered a seat.
   (b)   Minimum/Maximum Parking Requirements. Unless off-street parking
reductions are permitted pursuant to provisions herein, the number of off-
street parking spaces required by Table 21.68.050 shall be considered the
minimum necessary for each use. In conjunction with discretionary development
permits, the designated approving authority may increase or decrease these
parking requirements if it is determined that these requirements are inadequate
or unnecessary for a specific project.
   (c)   Uses Not Listed. The number of parking spaces required for uses not
specifically listed in Table 21.68.050 shall be determined by the community
development director based on common functional, product, or compatibility
characteristics and activities. Such determination is considered a formal
interpretation of this title and shall be decided and recorded as such.
   (d)   Calculation/Rounding of Quantities. When the calculation of the
required number of off-street parking spaces results in a fraction of a space,
the total number of spaces shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
   (e)   Mixed-use/Multiple Tenants. Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, for each separate use, a site with multi-tenants, or a combination of
principal uses in any one facility, the development shall provide the aggregate
number of parking spaces required for each separate use. For multiple tenant
development/integrated centers, with no residential component, required parking
shall not be reserved for a specific business or person, unless the reserved
spaces are in excess of the number required by these off-street parking
provisions.
   (f)   The use of valet parking services shall not be grounds for reducing
the number of parking spaces required by these off-street parking provisions.
When valet parking is offered, the service shall be at no charge, shall not
obstruct drive aisles/vehicle circulation with parked vehicles, and valeted
vehicles shall be parked on the subject site only, unless a shared parking
agreement is granted by the city.
   (g)   Designated parking spaces for low-emitting, fuel-efficient and
carpool/van pool vehicles shall be provided and marked as required by the
California Green Building Standards Code.
   (h)   Parking spaces for Electric Vehicles (EV) and/or EV charging equipment
shall be provided as required by the California Green Building Standards Code.
Table 21.68.050
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Number of Spaces Required
Use                                                                             Number of Spaces Required
Adult day care facility                                                         1 space/employee plus 1 space/facility vehicle plus 1 space/8 persons at facility
                                                                                capacity
Artist studio/gallery                                                           1 space/450 square feet
Automotive and equipment sales/service:                                          
a.   Automotive sales/rental/leasing                                         a.   1 space/400 square feet plus 1 space/2,000 square feet site
b.   Automotive repair/installation                                          b.   1 space/250 square feet plus 3 spaces/service bay
c.   Automotive body repair/painting                                         c.   1 space/250 square feet plus 2 spaces/service bay
d.   Automotive storage                                                      d.   1 space/employee
e.   Heavy equipment rental and sales                                        e.   1 space/400 square feet plus 1 space/2,000 square feet site
f.   Large equipment repair/body repair/painting                             f.   1 space/250 square feet plus 2 spaces/service bay
Banks and financial service                                                     1 space/300 square feet
Banquet hall, lodge, meeting hall                                               1 space/3 seats plus 1 space/50 square feet assembly area
Boat sales (new or used)                                                        1 space/400 square feet plus 1 space/2,000 square feet site
Bus/truck terminal                                                              3 spaces/1,000 square feet plus 1 space/bus or truck parked on site based on
                                                                                maximum capacity1
Business support service                                                        1 space/300 square feet
Caretaker housing                                                               1 space/dwelling unit
Child day care facility                                                         1 space/employee plus 1 space/facility vehicle plus 1 space/8 persons at facility
                                                                                capacity
Church, temple, synagogue, or other places of worship                           1 space/3 fixed seats or 1 space/50 square feet for non-fixed seats in main
                                                                                assembly area, plus any spaces required for auxiliary uses
Community center                                                                1 space/3 fixed seats or 1 space/50 square feet for non-fixed seats in main
                                                                                assembly area
Commercial entertainment/recreation:                                             
a.   Theater                                                                 a.   1 space/3 seats
b.   Indoor (health/fitness club)                                            b.   1 space/150 square feet
c.   Indoor (billiard, bowling alley, etc.)                                  c.   1 space/150 square feet
d.   Arcade                                                                  d.   1 space/150 square feet
e.   Outdoor (golf course, driving range)                                    e.   10 spaces/hole, 1.5 spaces/tee
f.   Outdoor (swimming pool)                                                 f.   1 space/100 square feet
g.   Outdoor (other)                                                         g.   1
Drug store/pharmacy                                                             1 space/300 square feet
Dwelling(s):                                                                     
                                                                                a.   2 fully enclosed garage spaces/dwelling unit, plus 0.5 space for each
a.   Single-family                                                           bedroom greater than 2 for each unit. Spaces in addition to the 2 within an
                                                                                enclosed garage may be enclosed, covered, open or in tandem3
b.   Single-family with an Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU)                     b.   See
                                                                                Chapter 21.542
                                                                                c.   0-bedroom unit: 1 fully enclosed garage space, plus .25 spaces
                                                                                1-bedroom unit: 1 fully enclosed garage space, plus .5 spaces
                                                                                2-bedroom unit: 1 fully enclosed garage space, plus 1 space
c.   Multi-family (including Condominium, townhome or similar under separate 3-or-more-bedroom units: 2 fully enclosed garage spaces, plus .5 spaces for each
ownership)                                                                      bedroom over 2
                                                                                Guest parking: 2 spaces per 5 units3
                                                                                Required spaces in addition to the fully enclosed garage spaces may be enclosed,
                                                                                covered, or open. Spaces assigned to a unit may be in tandem.
                                                                                d.   0-bedroom unit: 1.25 spaces
                                                                                1-bedroom unit: 1.5 spaces
d.   Multi-family (including triplex, apartments or similar under single     2-bedroom unit: 2 spaces
ownership)                                                                      3-or-more-bedroom units: 2 spaces, plus .5 spaces for each bedroom over 2
                                                                                Guest parking: 2 space per 5 units3
                                                                                Whole spaces required for each unit must be assigned to the subject unit and may
                                                                                be enclosed, covered, open or in tandem.
Equipment sales, rental, or repair4                                             1 space/300 square feet
Family day care home:                                                            
a.   Small family day care home                                              a.   No requirement beyond standard single-family dwelling
b.   Large family day care home                                              b.   Standard parking required for single- family dwelling plus one on-site
                                                                                parking space for each nonresident employee of the day care home2
Food and beverage sales:                                                         
a.   Grocery store, Speciality food shop                                     a.   1 space/300 square feet
b.   Convenience store, Liquor Store                                         b.   1 space/150 square feet
                                                                                a.   For buildings containing up to 20,000 square feet of gross floor area: 1
                                                                                space/500 square feet
General industrial/manufacturing5,9                                             b.   For buildings containing from 20,001 to 30,000 square feet of gross floor
                                                                                area: 1 space/750 square feet
                                                                                c.   For buildings with 30,001 square feet or more of gross floor area: 1 space/
                                                                                1,000 square feet
Group residential                                                               1 space/bedroom
Home improvement sales and service                                              1 space/300 square feet plus 1 space/1,000 square feet storage/outdoor display
                                                                                area
Horse stable (commercial)                                                       1 space/employee plus 1 space/5 stalls
Hospital/medical service:                                                        
a.   General hospital service                                                a.   1 space/doctor, 1 space/3 employees, plus 1 space/2 beds
b.   Medical/dental office                                                   b.   3 spaces/1,000 square feet
c.   Laboratory, research/development                                        c.   3 spaces/1,000 square feet
d.   Emergency medical service                                               d.   1
e.   Psychiatric hospital service                                            e.   1 space/doctor, 1 space/3 employees, plus 1 space/3 beds
f.   Ambulance service                                                       f.   3 spaces/ambulance plus 1 space/250 square feet office
Hotel/motel                                                                     1 space/guest room plus spaces for other associated uses
Kennel                                                                          1 space/300 square feet
Long-term residential care facility                                             1 space/4 beds plus 1 space/employee
Lumber and building materials yards                                             1 space/300 square feet plus 1 space/1,000 square feet storage/outdoor display
                                                                                area
Mobile home park                                                                2 spaces/mobile home site plus 2 guest spaces/5 sites
Night clubs and discotheques                                                    1 space/3 seats, plus 1 space/50 square feet of dance or assembly area
Nursery and garden center                                                       1 space/300 square feet plus 1 space/1,000 square feet storage/outdoor display
                                                                                area
Offices - business and professional                                             3 spaces/1,000 square feet
Personal service6                                                               1 space/300 square feet
Recycling Facility:                                                              
a.   Large collection facility                                               a.   See
                                                                                Chapter 21.50
b.   Processing facility                                                     b.   See
                                                                                Chapter 21.50
c.   Reverse-vending machine                                                 c.   No additional parking is required
d.   Scrap and dismantling facility                                          d.   1
e.   Small collection facility                                               e.   See
                                                                                Chapter 21.50
Restaurant/bar:7                                                                 
a.   Bar                                                                     a.   1 space/200 square feet
b.   Restaurant                                                              b.   1 space/3 seats, plus spaces required for any bar area
Retail sales/rental facility8                                                   1 space/300 square feet
Retail sales of large consumer goods (home/office furniture, appliances and     1 space/500
similar)
School:                                                                          
a.   College or university                                                   a.   1
b.   Elementary or secondary                                                 b.   1 space/employee plus 1 space/4 seats in main assembly plus 2 bus loading
                                                                                spaces
c.   High school                                                             c.   Greater of 1 space/employee plus 1 space/2 students in 11th and 12th grade
                                                                                or 1 space/3 seats in main auditorium/stadium
d.   Specialized (vocational, trade, dance, martial arts, music or similar)  d.   1 space/250 square feet plus 3 space/1,000 square feet office
Self-storage facility                                                           4 spaces, plus 2 spaces for management and employees
Service station:                                                                (Unmarked spaces at fuel pumps serve fuel sales only)
a.   With accessory retail/ convenience market                               a.   5 spaces for first 1,000 square feet plus 1 space/300 square feet thereafter
b.   With vehicle maintenance/repair                                         b.   2 spaces/service bay
Tutoring                                                                        1 space/maximum number of employees plus 1 space/4 students based on maximum
                                                                                number
Veterinary services (clinic and hospital, may include accessory grooming and    1 space/300 square feet
boarding)
Utility or public service facility                                              1
Warehousing and distribution                                                    Greater of: 1 space/employee on the largest working shift plus 1 space/company
                                                                                operated vehicle, or 1 space/2,000 square feet
Wireless communication facility (Major)                                         1 space1
 
Notes:
1.   An alternative parking requirement ratio may be established by the
community development director in conjunction with required land use or
development permits, based on the impacts of the particular proposal,
information provided by a project applicant, and research that shows an
alternative requirement will not pose adverse impacts on surrounding uses.
2.   Required parking spaces may be in tandem, and the driveway may be used for
the required drop-off and pick-up space.
3.   For expansion of existing single-family residences, excluding ADUs, no
additional parking shall be required beyond the existing permitted parking.
4.   Excludes automotive and large equipment.
5.   For purposes of parking requirements, this category includes machine
shops, tin shops, welding shops, manufacturing, processing, packaging,
treatment, fabrication, woodworking shops, cabinet shops, and carpenter shops
and uses with similar circulation and parking characteristics.
6.   Includes barber shops, beauty salons/spas, massage, tanning, tailors, dry
cleaning, self-service laundry, travel agencies, electrolysis, acupuncture/
acupressure, and tattoo parlors.
7.   If a restaurant use is located within a mixed-use or retail shopping
center, the parking for the restaurant may be provided at a retail parking
ratio, provided there are mutual parking agreements in place and the total
cumulative gross floor area of the eating establishments does not exceed 20
percent of the gross floor area of the center.
8.   For the purposes of parking requirements, this category includes antique
shops, gun shops, pawn shops, pet stores, and second-hand stores.
9.   For the establishment of uses within existing structures, the provided
number of parking spaces may be based on the total number of employees as
follows: 1 space/employee on the largest working shift, plus 1 space/company
operated vehicle, plus 10% of required employee parking for clients/visitor
parking.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 717 § 6, 2021; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019).
21.68.060 Parking space and drive aisle dimensions.
   (a)   Parking Space Dimensions. Table 21.86.060(A) sets forth minimum size
requirements for individual parking spaces. Handicapped parking spaces shall be
provided in compliance with current State and Federal ADA design guidelines/
requirements.
Table 21.68.060(A)
Off-Street Vehicle Parking Space Dimensions
 
Type of                      Size of Parking Stall (minimum)
Parking Stall                Width             Length
Standard                     9 ft.             20 ft.
Compact                      7-1/2 ft.         15 ft.
Parallel                     10 ft.            24 ft.
Motorcycle                   4 ft.             7 ft.
Two Car Garage (Residential) 18 ft. (Interior) 20 ft. (Interior)
 
   (b)   Driveway and Drive Aisle Dimensions.
      (1)   Except as may be permitted for an ADU no more than fifty percent of
the required frontage of any parcel may be occupied by driveways.
      (2)   The maximum width of any one non-residential driveway shall be
fifty feet.
      (3)   The minimum separation distance of any two driveways on the same
property shall be one hundred feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5502.jpg]
      (4)   Driveways providing access to parking spaces shall have a minimum
width of twenty feet, unless movement of vehicles is restricted to one way or
the driveway is accessed by fewer than four parking spaces, in which case the
minimum width shall be ten feet.
      (5)   Driveways serving detached single-family residences shall have a
minimum width of ten feet and a maximum width of twenty-two feet. The director
may approve a thirty-two foot wide driveway when the driveway leads to a three-
vehicle, fully enclosed garage with side-by-side parking. The minimum length/
depth of a driveway, as measured from the property line to a garage/carport,
shall be twenty feet and the minimum vertical clearance shall be eight feet.
      (6)   Drive aisles serving four or more parking spaces shall have the
minimum dimension listed in Table 21.68.060(B). Also see Figure 21.68.060(B).
Table 21.68.060(B)
Drive Aisle Dimensions
 
                      Minimum Width for Drive Aisle Minimum Width for Emergency
Type of Parking Stall with Parking (non-emergency   Access Drive Aisle
                      access)
Standard parallel     15 ft.                        25 ft.
45-degree             18 ft.                        25 ft.
60-degree             18 ft.                        25 ft.
90-degree             20 ft.                        25 ft.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5504.jpg]
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.070 Parking location requirements.
   (a)   Except as otherwise permitted herein, all required off-street parking
spaces shall be independently accessible from a street at all times.
   (b)    All required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same
lot as the use and/or development requiring such spaces.
   (c)    Except as may be permitted for an ADU, required enclosed off-street
parking spaces shall not be located within any required front, side or street-
side side yard setback of any residential parcel.
      (1)   All driveway and parking areas shall be on a permanently paved
surface.
      (2)   Parking within the rear or street-side side yard of a corner
residential parcel shall be located between a minimum six-foot-high solid fence
or block wall.
      (3)   Parking may not occur within any required clear site distance
triangle area. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.080 Parking and parking lot/structure design considerations.
The following shall be considered in the design of all parking and parking
lots/structures:
   (1)   Overhang of vehicles is permitted, provided no vehicle shall overhang
a sidewalk or designated accessibility route. A vehicle is permitted to
overhang into a landscaped area by two feet, provided the required landscape
area is extended by two feet.
   (2)   Motorcycle stalls may be used as an option to utilize areas that would
otherwise not be of adequate size for conventional stalls. Unless otherwise
determined by the designated approving authority for a particular project,
motorcycle stalls shall not count toward the number of required parking spaces.
   (3)   Piers and pillars shall not encroach into parking stalls. Where a
parking stall is located abutting a wall, pillar or similar structure, the
stall width and/or length shall be increased by two feet.
   (4)   Parking spaces shall not preclude direct and free access to stairways,
walkways, elevators, any pedestrian accessway or fire safety equipment. Such
access shall provide a clear minimum width of forty-four inches, no part of
which shall be within a parking space.
   (5)   Where a ninety-degree stall is the last stall on the end of a dead-end
aisle, the aisle shall be extended five feet beyond the end of the stall.
   (6)   Where a sink, appliance (e.g. washer, dryer, water heater, water
softener, HVAC) and/or steps is located within a garage (residential), the
effected minimum width or length shall be increased to ensure the sink,
appliance (including any required post to protect the appliance), or steps are
not within required dimension of the parking.
   (7)   Tandem parking shall not be permitted, except for single-family
residences located in Single-family Zoning Districts and single-family
residences with an ADU. The minimum interior width of a garage for tandem
parking shall be nine feet and the interior length shall be twenty feet per
vehicle.
   (8)   Access to a garage or carport serving a residential use shall be free
and clear of obstructions within a 25 foot radius of the entrance to the garage
or carport as shown in Figure 21.68.080.
   (9)   The minimum garage door opening for a two car wide garage shall be
eight feet tall by sixteen feet wide and the minimum garage door opening for a
one car garage shall be eight feet tall by eight feet wide.
Figure 21.68.080
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5506.jpg]
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.090 General use provisions for off-street parking spaces.
   (a)   Parking facilities shall be used for vehicle parking only. No storage,
repair work, dismantling, servicing or similar use of any kind shall be
permitted. Temporary sales, events and displays may be permitted with the
necessary permits for such use.
   (b)   Living or sleeping in any vehicle, trailer, or vessel is prohibited
when parked or stored on private property.
   (c)   Any vehicle, trailer, or vessel which is inoperable and/or without
current registration shall be stored entirely within an enclosed structure and
shall not be parked or stored in any yard on any residential or non-residential
property.
   (d)   The storage of recreational vehicles, watercraft, trailers or similar
is prohibited within the front yard area (see Figure 21.68.090) and street-side
side yard area of any residential property. However, these vehicles may be
stored on an approved driveway and on surplus parking spaces that complies with
section
21.68.090.
   (e)   Parking in all zoning districts shall be without monetary charge when
the parking is required by these off-street parking provisions.
Figure 21.68.090
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5508.jpg]
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.100 Shared parking.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes criteria for shared parking
agreements by commercial, office, industrial, and other nonresidential uses.
   (b)   Authority. The community development director shall be the designated
approving authority for the review and approval of shared parking agreements.
   (c)   Circumstances for allowing shared parking agreements. Where it can be
demonstrated that two or more land uses can effectively share common parking
facilities due to the nature of the uses (for example, an office building with
largely weekday use and religious facility with predominantly weekend use),
then an application may be filed for consideration by the community development
director for a shared parking agreement. Such application shall include a
parking study that identifies the parking demand of all subject land uses and
that clearly demonstrates how and why parking facilities can be shared.
   (d)   Findings for granting shared agreements. To grant a request for shared
parking, the director shall make the following findings:
      (1)   There is clear and convincing evidence that peak-hour parking
demand from all uses does not coincide and/or the uses are such that the hours
of operation are different for various portions of the business.
      (2)   The adjacent or nearby properties will not be adversely affected by
the proposed reduction in parking.
   (e)   Conditions. The following conditions shall be required for all shared
parking agreement:
      (1)   A legal agreement shall be signed by all parties sharing parking
facilities, and shall constitute a mutual covenant running with the land. Such
agreement shall be approved by the city attorney and community development
director, shall be recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder, and shall
continue to be valid upon change of ownership. Such agreement may only be
terminated with the prior, written consent of the community development
director.
      (2)   The uses sharing the parking facilities must be located on
contiguous lots.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.110 Compact parking spaces.
   (a)   General Provisions. Subject to the approval of a Zoning Clearance
Application pursuant to
Chapter 21.96 , parking lots containing twenty or more parking spaces may
substitute standard spaces with compact spaces for up to thirty percent of the
total parking spaces required.
   (b)   Designation. Each compact space shall be clearly labeled "COMPACT".
   (c)   Location. Compact spaces shall be dispersed evenly throughout the
parking lot. For developments characterized by distinct, segmented parking
areas, the maximum permitted percentage of compact spaces shall apply to each
area or segment of the parking lot. Compact spaces shall not be located
adjacent to retaining walls or other formidable barriers which prevent adequate
vehicle overhang.
   (d)   Compact spaces cannot be used to fulfill the off-street parking
requirements of residential developments/uses as established by these parking
provisions. Except, compact spaces may be used for up to thirty percent of the
total required guest parking when more than ten guest parking spaces are
required.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.120 Development standards and maintenance for off-street parking.
   (a)    Surfacing of Parking Spaces and Lots. Required parking and
circulation areas shall be paved with a surface approved by the city. The
surfacing required for temporary lots shall be as determined by the designated
approving authority.
   (b)   Maintenance of Required Parking and Loading Areas. All parking
facilities, including curbs, directional markings, handicapped symbols,
landscaping, pavement, signs, striping, and wheel stops, shall be permanently
maintained by the property owner/tenant in good repair, free of litter and
debris, potholes, obstructions, and stored material.
   (c)   Marking and Signs. With the exception of striping for ADA parking
spaces and other required designated parking spaces, parking spaces shall be
delineated with white, four inch wide striping. Drive aisles, approach lanes,
and maneuvering areas shall be marked and maintained with directional arrows
and striping to expedite traffic movement. Any area not intended for parking
shall be signed as such, or in areas where curb exists, the curb may be painted
red in lieu of signs. All signing and striping installations shall be in
conformance with the city's current standards or as otherwise deemed necessary
by the community development director to ensure safe and efficient traffic flow
in or about any parking facility.
   (d)   Vehicle Access/Driveways/Circulation.
      (1)   Accessibility and usability. Driveways shall not be used for any
purpose that would prevent vehicles from accessing parking spaces, or inhibit
circulation or emergency service response.
      (2)   Access to adjacent roadways. Parking spaces within a designated
parking lot shall be designed to provide suitable maneuvering room so vehicles
can enter an abutting street in a forward direction (alleys may be used for
maneuvering space). Parking lots shall be designed to prevent access at any
point other than at a designated driveway(s).
      (3)   Circulation. Within a parking lot, circulation shall be such that a
vehicle entering the parking lot need not enter the street to reach another
aisle and that a vehicle shall not enter a public street backwards. Speed bumps
or similar devices designed to control vehicle speed within parking lots may be
required as determined by the designated approving authority.
      (4)   Visibility at driveways. Driveways shall be designed and located in
such a manner so as to ensure proper visibility to on-street traffic. Driveway
design shall take into consideration slopes, curvature, speed, and conflicting
turning movements in the area. Clear visibility shall be maintained from the
driveway by keeping the designated clear vision triangle free of obstacles such
as signs, landscaping, and structures. See
Article X for a description of the clear vision triangle.
   (e)   Pedestrian Access and Circulation. All multi-family and non-
residential developments shall be designed with a minimum of one designated
pedestrian path from each abutting street to the primary entrance(s) to such
use. Access shall be distinct from the vehicle access, visibly delineated, and
designed to be safe and convenient. Specifically, internal pedestrian walkways
shall be distinguished from driving surfaces through the use of raised
sidewalks, special pavers, bricks, or scored/stamped concrete.
   (f)   Drainage. Drainage facilities shall be provided in all public parking
areas capable of handling and maintaining the drainage requirements of the
subject property and surrounding properties. Drainage facilities shall be
designed to dispose of all surface water consistent with regional water quality
control board standards, and to alleviate the creation of flooding and drainage
problems.
   (g)   Curbing. Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a
concrete curb at least six inches high and six inches wide. Alternative barrier
design to protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles may be approved by
the community development director.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.130 Prohibition on commercial vehicle parking in residential zones.
   (a)   No commercial vehicle weighing six thousand pounds or more gross shall
be parked, stored, or kept on any lot in any residential zoning district in the
city.
   (b)   Commercial vehicles weighing less than six thousand pounds gross may
be parked on a lot in a residential zoning district, but such parking shall be
limited to a designated driveway only.
   (c)   Nonconforming vehicle parking in any zoning district shall be
regulated by
Chapter 10.16 of Title 10 of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.140 Parking lot landscaping.
   (a)   General. Within parking lots, landscaping shall be used for shade and
climate control, to enhance project design, and to screen the visual impact of
vehicles and large expanses of pavement as set forth in the following
paragraphs.
   (b)   Parking Lot Shade. Trees shall be planted and maintained in all
parking lots at a ratio of one tree for every ten parking spaces. The trees
shall be placed throughout the parking lot in a manner that will ensure that
all portions of the lot receive tree shade. Trees shall be of varieties that
provide a broad canopy.
   (c)   Parking Lot Screening. Landscaping within the perimeter planter
between parking lot and street right-of-way shall be designed and maintained
for partial screening of vehicles to a minimum height of thirty inches,
measured from the finished grade of the parking lot. Screening materials may
include any combination of plant materials, earthen berms, solid masonry walls,
raised planters, or other screening device deemed by the community development
director to comply with the intent of this requirement.
   (d)   Percent Coverage. A minimum of ten percent of the parking lot area
shall be landscaped. Parking lot landscaping shall not count toward required
landscape coverage otherwise required for the zoning district in which a
project is located.
   (e)   Screening of Drive-through Aisles. To screen vehicles in a drive-
through and associated headlights from view of abutting street rights-of-way, a
minimum, continuous, and immediate three-foot-high landscape screen shall be
established along the outer edge of drive-through aisles. Screening materials
may include a combination of plant materials and raised planters as approved by
the community development director.
   (f)   Irrigation. All landscaped areas shall be equipped with an underground
automated irrigation system.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.150 Off-street loading requirements.
   (a)   Off-street Loading Requirements. Non-residential uses with more than
five thousand square feet of floor area shall provide off-street loading in
compliance with Table 21.68.150.
Table 21.68.150
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Use and Floor Area Loading Spaces Required Dimensions (minimum)
                                           Width Length Vertical Clearance
                                                                        Dimensions (minimum)
Use and Floor Area         Loading Spaces Required                      Width Length Vertical
                                                                                     Clearance
Commercial Uses:            
a.   5,000 - 10,000 sq. a.   1 space                              15
ft.                                                                     ft.   25 ft. 14 ft.
b.   >10,000 sq. ft.    b.   1 space/10,000 sq. ft., maximum of 4
                           spaces
Office Uses:                
a.   5,000 - 35,000 sq. a.   1 space                              15
ft.                                                                     ft.   25 ft. 14 ft.
b.   >35,000 sq. ft.    b.   1 space/35,000 sq. ft., maximum of 4
                           spaces
Industrial Uses:            
a.   5,000 - 20,000 sq. a.   1 space                              15    25 ft. 14 ft.
ft.                                                                     ft.
b.   >20,000 sq. ft.    b.   1 space/20,000 sq. ft.
 
   (b)   Location. All sites shall be designed so that all loading and
unloading as well as truck back-up maneuvering occurs entirely on private
property and does not utilize any public street right-of-way.
   (c)   Common Loading Facilities. The off-street loading facilities
requirements of this section may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of
the prescribed number of loading spaces for each use in a common truck loading
facility, provided that the total number of loading spaces shall not be less
than the sum of the individual requirements.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
21.68.160 Bicycle parking requirements.
    (a)   General Provisions. Bicycle parking shall be provided in compliance
with the California Green Building Standards Code.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 9 (part), 2019)
CHAPTER 21.70
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Sections:
   
21.70.010   Purpose.
   
21.70.020   Applicability.
   
21.70.030   Hazardous materials.
   
21.70.040   Emission of smoke.
   
21.70.050   Radioactivity.
   
21.70.060   Electric and electromagnetic disturbances hazards.
   
21.70.070   Light and glare.
   
21.70.080   Noise and vibration.
   
21.70.090   Odor.
21.70.010 Purpose.
   (a)   This chapter describes certain characteristics associated with the
design and operation of development - such as noise, light and glare, and odors
- that have the potential to create negative impacts on surrounding uses.
Provisions herein identify the potential nuisance, establish thresholds for
compliance, and explain the intent of development and operational standards to
reduce potential impacts.
   (b)   Performance standards are provided to:
      (1)   Establish standards by which potential nuisances can be assessed,
measured, and otherwise dealt with factually and objectively;
      (2)   Ensure that all preventable nuisances are controlled in the design
and engineering of new development projects rather than be retrofit or post-
construction mitigation measures;
      (3)   Ensure that nuisances generated by the operation and design of
existing development promptly abated by the property owner(s);
      (4)   Protect property owners and users from arbitrary exclusion,
persecution, or other unfair actions as a result of subjective judgment
regarding activities which create a public nuisance; and
      (5)   Provide a framework by which potential impacts can be assessed in
granting special use and conditional use permits.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.020 Applicability.
   (a)   These performance standards shall apply to all uses in all zoning
districts, except for legal nonconforming uses which, based on a written
opinion of the city attorney, have an established right not to comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Compliance may be waived by the city council if a building condition
created under prior ordinances physically precludes the reasonable application
of the standards. Additional categorical exceptions from compliance with the
performance standards are as follows:
      (1)   Temporary activity. Festivals and other special events with
approved temporary use permits or other required permits, where such activities
otherwise comply with other applicable provisions of this title.
      (2)   Emergency activities. Any emergency activity on the part of the
city or a private party.
      (3)   Construction activity. Temporary construction activity is exempted
except where such activity is explicitly regulated by other regulations of the
Municipal Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.030 Hazardous materials.
   (a)   Purpose. The intent of this section is to protect local health,
safety, and general welfare by ensuring that the design and operational
characteristics of property does not adversely impact neighboring property
owners, neighboring property users, or the general public through the
accidental or intentional release or use of hazardous materials.
   (b)   Regulated by State of California and the U.S. EPA. The use, handling,
storage, and transportation of hazardous and extremely hazardous materials
shall comply with the provisions of the California Hazardous Materials
Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 22, Division 4). The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Department of Health
Services (DHS) identify hazardous materials and prescribe handling, use, and
disposal practices. The use, storage, manufacture, and disposal of hazardous
materials shall be regulated and monitored according to the standards
established by these agencies and any delegated government agencies.
   (c)   Combustibles and Explosives.
      (1)   The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and
explosives shall comply with the provisions of Section 13-13: Uniform Fire
Code.
      (2)   No gasoline or other inflammables or explosives shall be stored
unless the location, plans, and construction conform to the laws and
regulations of the State of California and have the approval of the city.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.040 Emission of smoke.
No use shall emit visible gray smoke of a shade or quality darker than No. 1 on
the Ringlemann Chart, as specified in Information Circular 7718 of the U.S.
Bureau of Mines, for more than five minutes in any one hour.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.050 Radioactivity.
No use shall be permitted that emits radioactivity in dangerous amounts. The
use, handling, storage, and transportation of radioactive materials shall
comply with the provisions of the California Radiation Control Regulations
(California Administrative Code, Title 17).
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.060 Electric and electromagnetic disturbances and hazards.
No use shall be permitted where such use results in electric or electromagnetic
interference that adversely affects the operation of any equipment other than
that belonging to the creator of such interference, or that does not conform to
the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.070 Light and glare.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes outdoor lighting standards that are
intended to balance safety and security needs for lighting with efforts to
ensure that light trespass and glare have a negligible impact on surrounding
property, and on residential uses in particular.
   (b)   Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting provisions:
      (1)   Outdoor lights associated with a temporary event for which a
temporary use permit was granted.
      (2)   Outdoor lights used at public parks and school sites. Outdoor
lights for recreational activities and special events shall be turned off
between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
      (3)   Temporary lights used for holiday decorations.
      (4)   Emergency lighting erected for official purposes by a local, state,
or federal agency.
   (c)   Outdoor Lighting Standards for Single-family Residential Property.
Outdoor lighting is permitted in single-family residential developments as a
means of deterring crime and increasing safety of residents. However, to ensure
that the intensity and direction of light does not constitute a nuisance to
adjacent residential dwellings, outdoor lighting shall either be motion
detected, off between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., or directed and
shielded in a manner that does not constitute a nuisance to abutting
residential property.
   (d)   Outdoor Lighting Standards for Other than Residential Property.
Parking lots, driveways, pedestrian walkways, and building entrances/exits
shall be illuminated for security and safety purposes during business hours of
operation. Except as otherwise exempt, outdoor lighting shall be provided with
shielding so that the light emitted from an outdoor light fixture is projected
below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the fixture. Where the
light source from an outdoor light fixture is visible beyond the property line,
shielding shall be required to reduce glare so that the light source is not
visible from within any residential dwelling unit (Figure 21.70.070 D).
   (e)   Prohibited Lighting. The following outdoor light fixtures shall be
prohibited. Existing light fixtures legally permitted or authorized prior to
the effective date of this zoning ordinance may be maintained.
      (1)   Uplighted and back-lighted canopies or awnings.
      (2)   Searchlights, except as authorized for a special or temporary event
authorized by a temporary use permit.
      (3)   Flashing lights, except as used in conjunction with a security
alarm system.
      (4)   Roof-mounted lights.
      (5)   Any light that imitates or causes visual interference with a
traffic signal or other necessary safety or emergency light.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4335.jpg]
 
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.080 Noise and vibration.
   (a)   Purpose. Certain noise levels have been scientifically demonstrated to
be detrimental to the health and welfare of individuals. A goal of the city is
to minimize noise in residential areas and to prevent excessive exposure of all
persons to harmful noise. This chapter establishes regulations that prohibit
unnecessary, excessive, and annoying noises and vibration from all sources.
   (b)   Applicability and Exemptions. The standards provided in this chapter
apply to all land uses in all zoning districts unless otherwise specified. The
following are exempted from the maximum noise standards specified in this
section:
      (1)   Sporting events, festivals, and other events which otherwise
conform with applicable zoning requirements and have appropriate temporary use
and/or noise permits.
      (2)   Sounds emanating from the operation of mobile and stationary
equipment, including motor vehicles on a public highway; aircraft; outdoor
implements such as power lawn mowers, power hedge clippers, and power saws; and
pile drivers or jackhammers and other construction equipment.
      (3)   Sounds emanating from lawful and proper activities on school
grounds, playgrounds, parks, or places wherein athletic contests take place are
exempt from the provisions of this title.
      (4)   Sounds emanating from emergency equipment, air raid sirens, and
other apparatus used solely for public purposes.
   (c)   Noise Measurement. Noise shall be measured with a sound level meter
that meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI
Section S1.4-1979, Type 1 or Type 2). Noise levels shall be measured in
decibels at the property line of the receptor property, and at least four feet
above the ground and five feet from the nearest structure or wall. The unit of
measure shall be designated as dBA. A calibration check shall be made of the
instrument at the time any noise measurement is made.
   (d)   Maximum Noise Level.
      (1)   Residential areas. Noise levels from any property or any use shall
not exceed sixty dBA as measured in any portion of any surrounding or adjacent
residentially zoned property.
      (2)   Non-residential areas. Noise levels generated within any property
by any use shall not exceed seventy dBA in any portion of any surrounding or
adjacent property with nonresidential zoning.
   (e)   Vibration. Any use on any property within the city that generates
vibration that is discernable without instruments at any lot line adjacent to
an area with a residential use or residential zoning district is prohibited.
The ground vibration caused by moving vehicles, trains, aircraft, or temporary
construction or demolition is exempted.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.70.090 Odor.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes regulations intended to prevent the
exposure of persons to offensive odors.
   (b)   Compliance with South Coast Air Quality Management District. Any
process that creates or emits any odors, gases, or other odorous matter shall
comply with applicable standards set by the South Coast Air Quality Management
District (SCAQMD).
   (c)   Offensive Odors. No use shall be permitted to emit continuous,
frequent, or repetitive odorous gases or matter in quantities such as to be
perceptible at any lot line of the site. An odor emitted no more than fifteen
minutes in any one day shall not be deemed as continuous, frequent, or
repetitive within meaning of this standard.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.72
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sections:
   
21.72.010   Statement of need.
   
21.72.020   Purpose and intent.
   
21.72.030   Relationship to other laws.
   
21.72.040   Applicability.
   
21.72.050   General maintenance provisions.
   
21.72.060   Single-family standards.
   
21.72.070   Multi-family standards.
   
21.72.080   Commercial and industrial standards.
   
21.72.090   Enforcement.
21.72.010 Statement of need.
   (a)   Property values and the general welfare of the community are founded,
in part, upon the appearance and maintenance of private property. Within La
Mirada, owners and occupants of some properties have permitted visual blight,
including but not limited to deteriorated buildings, overgrowth of vegetation,
damaged and deteriorated fencing and other structures, and the accumulation of
broken or discarded property. The city finds that the existence of such
conditions is injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare of
residents of and visitors to La Mirada, and contributes to the deterioration of
residential and nonresidential areas.
   (b)   Abatement of these conditions is in the best interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of La Mirada. A city-wide minimum set of
standards for property maintenance can provide benefits to the community that
can protect the livability, appearance, and social and economic stability of La
Mirada; contribute to the appreciation of property values; improve the physical
character of residential, commercial and industrial zones; attract capital
investors; increase commercial trade and industrial productivity; and increase
in the tax base of the city. Minimum property maintenance standards can also
benefit the community by reducing the risks to health, safety, and general
welfare that exist due to deterioration, dilapidation, and blight.
   (c)   The uses and abuses of property described in this chapter and the
property maintenance standards provided herein relate to the proper exercise of
police power to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.020 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   This chapter promotes the health, safety, and general welfare of the
public by prescribing standards applicable to the maintenance and use of
property within the city which will protect the livability, appearance, and
social and economic stability of La Mirada, and which will also protect the
public from the health and safety hazards.
   (b)   The provisions of this chapter are not intended to regulate artistic,
cultural, or religious expression.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.030 Relationship to other laws.
In the event of any inconsistency between this chapter and any other provisions
of this title or other sections of the Municipal Code, or in the event that
this chapter conflicts with laws of the state or other city ordinances, the
higher standard - the standard that provides for a higher level of property
maintenance - shall prevail, unless otherwise specified. This chapter shall
supplement and be an addition to the other relevant regulatory codes, statutes,
and ordinances enacted by the city, State of California, or any other legal
entity or agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.040 Applicability.
   (a)   Unless otherwise exempted herein, owners or operators of all property
shall comply with the provisions of the property maintenance standards set
forth in this chapter. Property maintenance standards shall apply to all
development, whether constructed before or after the effective date of this
chapter.
   (b)   When used in this chapter, the words, terms and phrases defined herein
shall have the meaning and construction given herein, except when used in a
context which clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. Any word,
term, and phrase not specifically defined herein, but defined in this Title 21,
shall be given the meaning and construction set forth in this title.
      (1)   Single-family means all property in the R-1 zoning district, and
shall also include all property actually used for single-family residential and
second unit housing, notwithstanding the underlying zoning of the subject
property, and all districts combined with any R-1 zoning district.
      (2)   Multi-family means all property in the R-3 and R-4 zoning
districts, and shall also include all property actually used for multi-family
residential purposes, notwithstanding the underlying zoning of the subject
property and all districts combined with the R-3 and R-4 zoning districts.
      (3)   Commercial means all property classified as a commercial zoning
district pursuant to
Chapter 21.20. Additionally, commercial shall mean and include all property
actually used for such commercial purposes, notwithstanding the underlying
zoning of the subject property, and all districts combined with any commercial
district.
      (4)   Industrial means all property classified as an industrial zoning
district pursuant to
Chapter 21.22. Additionally, industrial shall mean and include all property
actually used for industrial purposes, notwithstanding the underlying zoning of
the subject property, and all districts combined with any industrial district.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.050 General maintenance provisions.
   (a)   General. All properties within the city shall be kept and maintained
in a clean, neat, orderly, operable, and usable condition that is safe both to
occupants and passers-by. This requirement applies to buildings, portions of
buildings, paving, fences, walls, landscaping, water, earth, and any other
structure or natural feature.
   (b)   Prohibition on Attractive Nuisances. Any property which can be easily
accessed by children must be kept clear of attractive nuisances that create a
danger for children and other persons, including but not limited to abandoned,
neglected, or broken equipment, machinery, appliances, refrigerators or
freezers; construction materials and construction equipment; and hazardous
pools, ponds, and excavations.
   (c)   Building Maintenance. All buildings, structures, and paved areas shall
be kept and maintained in a manner so as to not detract from the appearance of
the immediate neighborhood or district, and to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the user, occupant, and the general public. All such buildings,
structures and paved areas shall be deemed substandard and in violation of this
section when any or all of the same display evidence of dilapidated conditions
including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Faulty, sagging, or leaking roof and roofs, missing roof tiles, or
other visible roofing materials;
      (2)   Substantial areas of deteriorated building siding materials
including, but not limited to, dry rot, termite infestation, dented or rusting
metal siding, broken or missing pieces of stucco, or other siding materials;
      (3)   Broken or missing windows;
      (4)   Inadequate site drainage and/or standing water adjacent to building
foundations;
      (5)   Broken or inoperable sanitary and plumbing facilities and/or
fixtures;
      (6)   Broken or missing foundation;
      (7)   Broken, torn or missing attic vent screens;
      (8)   Broken, ripped or torn window screens;
      (9)   Structural defects such as warped, bowed or sagging structural
members including, but not limited to, headers, sills, beams, eaves, doorways,
doorjambs, and similar structural or architectural elements;
      (10)   Holes in siding areas;
      (11)   Weathered or peeling paint.
   (d)   Fencing and Walls. All fences and walls shall be kept and maintained
in a manner that does not to detract from the appearance of the immediate
neighborhood or district, and that protects the health, safety, and welfare of
the user, occupant, and general public. Fences and walls shall be deemed
substandard and in violation of this chapter when they display evidence of
dilapidation or other conditions, such as any or all of the following:
      (1)   Sagging, broken, rotted, or defective support posts or other
structural members.
      (2)   Missing or broken fence boards.
      (3)   Damaged or missing blocks from a block wall.
      (4)   Substantial areas of deterioration including dry rot, broken or
missing pieces or stucco, holes, or warped or leaning fence or wall areas.
      (5)   Chain link fence material which is damaged or broken.
      (6)   Portions of the fence or wall which are substantially defaced with
graffiti.
      (7)   Any condition of deterioration or any fault resulting in the fence
or wall being structurally unsound or otherwise hazardous to property owners,
occupants, or passersby.
      (8)   Height extensions of walls or fences in violation of this title.
   (e)   Litter and Refuse. All yards, landscaped areas, and other areas of
private property surrounding buildings shall be kept free of trash, old
building materials, junk, unlicensed or inoperative vehicles, broken or
discarded furniture, boxes, salvage materials, shopping carts, and other such
material and equipment which, by its appearance, location or use, makes it
incompatible with the principal use or other predominate principal uses in the
immediate neighborhood.
   (f)   Private Streets, Sidewalks, and Driveways.
      (1)   All parking, loading, storage, driveway, and vehicle maneuvering
shall be kept and maintained so as to not detract from the appearance of the
immediate neighborhood and to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
user, occupant and general public. Such areas shall be kept in a neat and clean
condition, free of inoperative vehicles, abandoned items, trash, debris or
rubbish, furniture, equipment, play equipment, or similar materials, and free
of potholes, sinkholes, standing water, cracks, and/or broken areas. Parking
spaces delineation, pavement striping and related features, and signs shall be
repainted, refurbished and/or replaced when the same become faded, damaged, or
destroyed to such an extent as to no longer be effective. Such areas shall,
further, be periodically resurfaced or sealed in order to minimize seepage of
water through such areas into the ground below such areas.
      (2)   When any paved area, which includes sidewalks, driveways, and
private roadways, shows evidence of dilapidated or deteriorated conditions, it
shall be deemed substandard and in violation of this chapter.
   (g)   Landscaping and Vegetation.
      (1)   All landscaped areas shall be kept and maintained in a manner that
does not detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or district,
and that protects the health, safety, and welfare of the user, occupant and
general public.
      (2)   Landscaped areas shall be kept in a neat and clean condition, free
of weeds, debris and dead, diseased or dying vegetation, and broken or
defective decorative elements of the landscaped area.
      (3)   Vegetation in landscaped areas shall be mowed, groomed, trimmed,
pruned and watered as to keep the same in a healthy, growing condition.
Irrigation systems shall be kept in good working condition and repair so as to
prevent leaks or public health hazards.
      (4)   Vegetative overgrowth shall not be permitted in a manner that is
likely to harbor rodents, vermin, insects, or other nuisances; or impedes,
obstructs, or denies pedestrian or other lawful travel on sidewalks, walk-ways
or other public rights-of-way.
   (h)   Maintenance Responsibility.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of any owner of any building,
structure, residence, property, grounds or lots to ensure or compel compliance
with the property maintenance standards set forth in this chapter on private
property within La Mirada.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of any owner, tenant, lessee, or
occupant of any building, structure, residence, property, grounds or lots to
remove debris and remove any vegetation that is in violation of this chapter
that has accumulated on any streets within the city, if such person(s) placed
the debris on such private property or streets, or otherwise owns, is
occupying, or has custody or control over such private property or streets.
      (3)   Vacant and undeveloped property shall be required to be view
obscured from the public right-of-way with decorative screen fencing in
combination with berms and automatically irrigated landscaping, subject to the
approval of the Planning Division.
(Ord. 618, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.060 Single-family standards.
   (a)   Storage - Front Yard and Side Yard Abutting a Street.
      (1)   The entire front yard and side yard abutting a street shall be kept
and maintained free and clear of all construction and automotive materials or
parts, trash, refuse, debris, trash storage receptacles, inoperative motor
vehicles, discarded or broken materials, appliances, furniture, patio
furniture, equipment, basketball hoops, play equipment, and similar materials.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this
section, emergency or minor repairs of a motor vehicle owned by a person
residing upon the lot or parcel may be conducted on an otherwise inoperative
motor vehicle upon a paved driveway or paved parking area. However, that such
emergency or minor repair shall be concluded within seventy-two hours of the
commencement thereof.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)(1) and (2) of
this section, a side yard abutting a street shall be treated the same as a rear
yard, so long as the side yard abutting a street is screened by an approved
wall or fence in a manner so the items set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this
section are not visible from the abutting street.
   (b)   Storage - Side Yard not Abutting a Street.
      (1)   All storage of materials including, but not limited to, trash and
trash receptacles, newspapers, maintenance tools, equipment, camper shells not
mounted on motor vehicles, boats and trailers, but not including inoperative
vehicles, appliances, furniture, play equipment, and similar materials within
side yards shall be screened by approved walls, fences, and/or landscaping
materials from view from abutting property, public and private streets, and
public and private right-of-ways. Reasonable pedestrian access shall be
provided for public safety purposes.
      (2)   Parking or storage of motor vehicles and/or trailers shall occur
upon an approved driveway, or other allowed paved or surfaced area.
      (3)   All storage within the side yard shall be kept and maintained free
of weeds, overgrown grass or plant material, debris, litter or any combination
thereof.
      (4)   Any and all firewood stored on a single-family lot shall be cut to
fireplace size, shall be neatly stacked and stored out of public view, and
shall not exceed two cords in amount.
   (c)   Storage - Rear Yard.
      (1)   All storage of materials within rear yards shall be screened by
approved walls, fences, and/or landscaping materials from view as seen from
abutting property, public and private streets, and public and private right-of-
ways. Storage of materials include, but not limited to, trash receptacles,
newspapers, building and automotive materials, landscape maintenance tools,
equipment or currently licensed boats and trailers, camper shells not mounted
on operative motor vehicles. Inoperative motor vehicles shall not be stored in
the rear yard.
      (2)   Unless a lower percentage is set forth in this title, any materials
stored, kept, or maintained pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section shall
not cover an area greater than twenty-five percent of the total square footage
of the rear yard.
      (3)   All storage within the rear yard shall be kept and maintained free
of weeds, overgrown grass or plant material, debris, litter or any combination
of such materials.
   (d)   Storage - Garage and Carports. Storage of materials in a garage or
unscreened storage of materials in a carport is prohibited if such storage
restricts the parking of an operative motor vehicle in the required parking
spaces. Storage of materials includes, but not limited to, trash, trash
receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive materials, landscape
maintenance tools, and equipment.
   (e)   Motor Vehicle Parking.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this title, all parking of
currently licensed and operative motor vehicles, currently licensed trailers,
and boats on a single-family lot or parcel shall occur within a garage, or
approved carport, or upon an approved driveway, or other allowed paved parking
area within the front yard, or within the side yard or rear yard. If parked in
a side yard, a pedestrian access way shall be maintained on one side yard.
      (2)   No motor vehicle or part thereof shall encroach onto the public
right-of-way where a sidewalk is present.
   (f)   Solid Waste Containers.
      (1)   All residences located in any area in which collection is by the
city or approved contractors shall have sufficient container capacity to
accommodate their normal volume of solid waste between collections.
      (2)   All items too large to fit into containers, such as, but not
limited to, appliances, furniture and mattresses, shall be disposed of by self-
transport of such items to end-disposal facilities.
      (3)   All loose materials which normally fit into containers but which
are excess as a result of special circumstances such as holidays shall be
bundled and tied securely to prevent them from blowing or scattering and shall
be placed beside the containers.
      (4)   Containers shall be kept covered at all times.
      (5)   Any container which does not conform to prescribed standards or
which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting
the contents thereof or the public generally shall be replaced promptly by the
owner or user of the container.
      (6)   Solid waste containers shall not remain at curbside or anywhere in
the front yard for more than forty-eight hours.
      (7)   No resident shall deposit household solid waste in any receptacle
maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by
pedestrians.
      (8)   Removal of trash or other scavenging from private residential solid
waste containers is prohibited.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.070 Multi-family standards.
   (a)   Storage - Yards.
      (1)   All front, side and rear yards, including side yards abutting a
street, shall be kept and maintained free and clear of all construction and
automotive materials or parts, trash, refuse, debris, trash storage
receptacles, inoperative motor vehicles, boats and trailers, camper shells not
mounted on motor vehicles, discarded or broken materials, appliances,
furniture, play equipment, equipment, and similar materials. All rubbish,
trash, and debris shall only be kept within approved trash enclosure(s).
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section,
emergency or minor repairs of a motor vehicle owned by a person residing upon
the lot or parcel may be conducted on an otherwise inoperative motor vehicle
within a paved area. However, such emergency or minor repair shall be concluded
within seventy-two hours of the commencement thereof.
   (b)   Storage - Garage and Carports. No storage of materials including but
not limited to, trash, trash receptacles, newspapers, building and automotive
materials, landscape maintenance tools, equipment, and debris, shall be
permitted within any garage, nor shall there be any unscreened storage of such
materials in any carport in any manner that restricts the parking of an
operative motor vehicle in the required parking spaces.
   (c)   Motor Vehicle Parking. Except as otherwise provided in this title, all
parking of motor vehicles on a multi-family lot or parcel shall occur within a
garage or carport or upon an approved paved parking area.
   (d)   Solid Waste Containers.
      (1)   All residences located in any area in which collection is by the
city or approved contractors shall have sufficient container capacity to
accommodate their normal volume of solid waste between collections.
      (2)   All items too large to fit into containers, such as, but not
limited to, appliances, furniture and mattresses, shall be disposed of by self-
transport of such items to end-disposal facilities.
      (3)   All loose materials which normally fit into containers but which
are excess as a result of special circumstances such as holidays shall be
bundled and tied securely to prevent them from blowing or scattering and shall
be placed beside the containers.
      (4)   Containers shall be kept covered at all times.
      (5)   Any container which does not conform to prescribed standards or
which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting
the contents thereof or the public generally shall be replaced promptly by the
owner or user of the container.
      (6)   Solid waste containers shall not remain at curbside or anywhere in
the front yard for more than forty-eight hours.
      (9)   No resident shall deposit household solid waste in any receptacle
maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by
pedestrians.
      (10)   Removal of trash or other scavenging from residential solid waste
containers is prohibited.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.080 Commercial and industrial standards.
   (a)   Storage in Yards. All storage within yard areas permitted by this
title shall be screened from public view and shall contain only items and/or
vehicles incidental to the business, or owned by the business or owner of the
business. Approved storage areas shall be kept and maintained free and clear of
all construction and automotive materials or parts, trash, refuse, debris,
trash storage receptacles, inoperative motor vehicles, discarded or broken
materials, appliances, furniture, equipment, and similar materials.
   (b)   Motor Vehicle Parking. Except as otherwise provided in this title, all
parking of currently licensed and operative motor vehicles, currently licensed
trailers, and boats on a commercial lot or parcel shall occur within a garage
or carport or upon an approved paved parking area.
   (c)   Solid Waste Containers.
      (1)   All establishments and institutions which generate solid waste for
collection by the city or approved contractors shall provide appropriate
containers for storage of solid waste, and locate these containers out of
public view in a location convenient for trash collectors.
      (2)   Containers shall be kept covered at all times.
      (3)   Any container which does not conform to prescribed standards or
which has defects likely to hamper collection or injure the person collecting
the contents thereof or the public generally shall be replaced promptly by the
owner or user of the container upon receipt of written notice of such defects
from the department in charge of solid waste management.
      (4)   No owner, manager or employee of a commercial or industrial
business or any institution shall deposit solid waste from that establishment
or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other
location for disposal of litter by pedestrians.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.72.090 Enforcement.
Violations of the provision of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance
with the enforcement provisions of
Chapter 21.14 and Chapter 9.02 of the La Mirada Municipal Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.76
SIGNS
Sections:
   
21.76.010   Purpose.
   
21.76.020   Definitions.
   
21.76.030   Permit requirements.
   
21.76.040   Exempt signs.
   
21.76.050   Prohibited signs.
   
21.76.060   Temporary signs.
   
21.76.070   Number of permitted signs and allowable sign area.
   
21.76.080   General development standards - non-exempt signs.
   
21.76.090   Sign construction and maintenance.
   
21.76.100   Removal of unauthorized signs on public property.
   
21.76.110   Signs utilizing non-Roman alphabet.
   
21.76.120   Nonconforming signs.
   
21.76.130   Off-site signs.
   
21.76.140   Electronic billboards.
21.76.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   (1)   Implement the city's community design and safety standards set forth
in the general plan; and
   (2)   Maintain and enhance the city's appearance by regulating the design,
character, location, number, type, quality of materials, size, illumination and
maintenance of signs; and
   (3)   Protect and improve pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety by
balancing the need for signs which facilitate the safe and smooth flow of
traffic (i.e., traffic directional signs) without an excess of signage which
may distract motorists, overload their capacity to quickly receive information,
visually obstruct traffic signs or otherwise create congestion and safety
hazards; and
   (4)   Eliminate the traffic safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists
posed by off-site signs bearing commercial messages; and
   (5)   Generally limit commercial signage to on-site locations in order to
protect the aesthetic environment from the visual clutter associated with the
unrestricted proliferation of signs, while providing channels of communication
to the public; and
   (6)   Allow the communication of information for commercial and
noncommercial purposes without regulating the content of noncommercial
messages; and
   (7)   Allow the expression of political, religious and other noncommercial
speech at all times, and allow for an increase in the quantity of such speech
in the period preceding elections; and
   (8)   Respect and protect the right of free speech by sign display, while
reasonably regulating the structural, locational and other non-communicative
aspects of signs, generally for the public health, safety, welfare, and
specifically to serve the public interests in traffic and pedestrian safety and
community aesthetics; and
   (9)   Minimize the possible adverse effects of signs on nearby public and
private property; and
   (10)   Serve the city's interests in maintaining and enhancing its visual
appeal for tourists and other visitors, by preventing the degradation of visual
quality which can result from excess signage; and
   (11)   Protect the investments in property and lifestyle quality made by
persons who choose to live, work, or do business in the city; and
   (12)   Defend the peace and tranquility of residential zones and
neighborhoods by generally forbidding commercial signs on private residences,
while allowing residents the opportunity, within reasonable limits, to express
political, religious and other noncommercial messages from their homes; and
   (13)   Enable the fair, consistent, and efficient enforcement of the sign
regulations of the city.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them:
   (1)   "Abandoned sign" means any sign where for a period of ninety days or
more, there is no sign copy appearing on the sign, or where the establishment
to which the sign is attached has ceased operation and where it is clear that
the sign has been forsaken or deserted.
   (2)   "Adjacent" means located entirely within two hundred fifty feet of the
freeway as measured from the freeway centerline, when referring to an
electronic billboard adjacent to a freeway.
   (3)   “Animated sign” means any sign that uses movement or change of
lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene, including
beacons, pennants, hand-held signs, large balloons or other inflatables used as
signs, high-intensity illuminated signs, or other moving or flashing signs.
Electronic or mechanical indications of time and temperature and decorations
shall not be included in this definition for animated signs.
   (4)   “Barber pole” means any cylindrical sign used to identify hair cutting
establishments.
   (5)   "Billboard" means an off-site sign that identifies or communicates a
commercial or noncommercial message related to an activity, a service rendered,
or a commodity sold mostly at a location other than where the sign is located.
The terms "billboard" and "off-site sign" may be used interchangeably to mean
the same.
   (6)   "Billboard, electronic" means a billboard where the alphabetic,
pictographic, symbolic informational and/or other content may be changed or
altered on a fixed display surface composed of electronically illuminated or
electronically actuated or motivated elements and can be changed or altered
electronically. This includes billboards with displays that must be
preprogrammed to display specific types of information (i.e., time, date,
temperature) and billboards whose informational content can be changed or
altered by means of computer-driven electronic impulses. This includes, without
limitation, billboards also known as digital billboards or light emitting diode
(LED) billboards.
   (7)   “Building facade” means the portion of any exterior elevation of a
building or structure from grade to the top of the roofline and the entire
width of the building.
   (8)   “Building frontage” means the horizontal length of an outside building
wall facing a street, public parking lot or mall.
   (9)   “Building frontage, primary” means the building frontage which faces
the street. In cases where a building has more than one street frontage, the
longest of the street frontages shall be considered the primary building
frontage. In cases where a business has no building frontage facing a street,
the building frontage with the primary business entrance shall be considered
the primary building frontage. Generally, individual tenants of a multi-tenant
building have primary building frontage equal to the horizontal length of their
business frontage. However, every multi-tenant building has only one primary
frontage, and in no event shall the combined sign area for all tenants exceed
the allowable sign area for the building.
   (10)   “Business frontage” means that business elevation that fronts on a
public street or that business elevation that fronts the subject business’
parking area and provides a public entrance.
   (11)   “Canopy sign” means any sign that is part of or attached to an
awning, canopy or other material, or structural protective cover over a door,
entrance, window, or service area.
   (12)   “Changeable copy sign” means a sign or portion of a sign with
characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without
altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign on which the message
changes more than once per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
   (13)   “Commercial message” means any sign wording, logo or other
representation that directly or indirectly names or advertises or calls
attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity, or
which proposes a commercial transaction or relates primarily to commercial
interests.
   (14)   “Directory sign” means a sign or set of similarly designed individual
signs, placed or displayed in sequence, to list all or part of the businesses
within a building or shopping center.
   (15)   “Directional sign” means an on-site sign designed to direct vehicular
or pedestrian traffic that does not promote or advertise a business, property
or product.
   (16)   “Display board sign” means a permanently installed panel (bulletin
board or display case) provided for the posting of temporary advertisements
and/or messages on which manually changeable messages are displayed.
   (17)   “Flag” means a piece of cloth or canvas, usually rectangular or
triangular in shape, displaying graphics, symbols, and/or written copy, and
designed to be flown from a flag pole. Colored cloth or canvas without any
graphics, symbols, and/or written copy is not included in this definition.
   (18)   “Freestanding sign” means a sign supported permanently upon the
ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building. Also referred to as
a “pylon sign” or “pole sign.”
   (19)   "Freeway" means the California Interstate 5 (I-5) freeway.
   (20)   "Freeway-oriented" means any electronic billboard that is adjacent to
a freeway (as defined herein) and designed to be viewed primarily by persons
traveling on the main freeway route.
   (21)   “Governmental/civic sign” means any temporary or permanent sign
erected and maintained by or required by the city, county, state or federal
government for traffic direction, city entrance, or for designation or
direction to any school, hospital, historical site, public service, property or
facility.
   (22)   “Illuminated sign” means a sign with an artificial light source
incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
   (23)   “Incidental sign” means a sign, emblem or decal informing the public
of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, including but not
limited to a restroom and phone sign, credit card sign or a sign indicating
hours of business. Incidental signs also include signs prohibiting trespassing
and soliciting, as well as neighborhood watch/alarm signs.
   (24)   “Integrated development” means a building with more than one
independent tenant suite/space or a commercial/industrial site or group of
separate properties, under single or multiple ownership, that are developed as
one continuous project with shared/common ingress and egress as well as
unrestricted on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
   (25)   “Logo sign” means a graphic sign that represents a particular
trademark or business symbol for identification.
   (26)   “Monument sign” means a sign constructed upon a solid base or
pedestal.
   (27)   “Name plate” means an attached wall, suspended, projecting or other
building sign identifying the occupant of a dwelling unit.
   (28)   “Neon sign” means illuminated bent glass tubing in the form of
symbols, graphics and/or written copy and illuminated linear tubing mounted
within windows/storefronts or on the exterior of a building.
   (29)   “Non-commercial sign” means any sign that does not bear a commercial
message including, by way of example and not limitation, commentary on social,
political, educational, religious, scientific, artistic, philosophical or
charitable subjects. Also includes signs regarding fund raising or membership
drive activities for noncommercial or nonprofit concerns.
   (30)   “Off-site sign” means a sign that directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, entertainment, or other product or activity offered at a
location other than the site on which the sign is located. This definition does
not include real estate signs, temporary signs, or directional signs approved
pursuant to this chapter.
   (31)   “Pole sign” means a freestanding sign attached to a pole.
   (32)   “Portable sign” means any sign not permanently attached to the ground
or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported. Portable
signs include, but are not limited to, signs designed to be transported by
means of wheels, signs configured as A-frame or T-frame; menu and sandwich
board signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible
from the public way, unless said vehicle is used in the day-to-day operations
of the business.
   (33)   “Projecting sign” means any sign affixed to a building or wall in
such a manner that its leading edge extends more than eighteen inches beyond
the surface of said building or wall.
   (34)   “Pylon sign” means any freestanding sign supported by means of more
than one pole.
   (35)   “Roof sign” means any sign erected on the roof or over the roofline
of a building. For the purposes of this chapter, the roofline is the top edge
of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any cupolas,
pylons, chimneys or minor projections.
   (36)   “Sandwich board sign” means a sign designed with an A-frame structure
and intended to be placed directly on a sidewalk or similar ground surface.
   (37)   “Sign” means any device, structure, fixture or placard displaying
graphics, symbols, and/or written copy for the primary purpose of identifying,
providing directions or advertising any establishment, product, goods, or
services to the public.
   (38)   “Sign area” means the measurable area of a sign face. Said sign area
shall be computed by means of a single continuous line composed of right angles
that enclose the extreme limits lettering, logo, trademark or other graphic
representation, together with any frame or structural trim forming an integral
part of the display. For pole and pylon signs, the perimeter of the measurable
sign area shall not include support and framing design embellishments exclusive
of logo or written copy. Sign area for multi-faced signs shall be computed by
adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point.
   (39)   “Real estate sign” means a temporary sign advertising the real estate
upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale.
   (40)   “Temporary sign” means a sign not constructed or intended for long-
term use. Included in this definition are hand-held signs that are not attached
in any manner to a stationary object.
   (41)   “Vehicle sign” means any sign that is attached to and is an integral
part of a motorized vehicle or bicycle used directly for the purpose of a
particular business and not used primarily as a sign base.
   (42)   “Wall sign” means a sign attached to a building facade, generally
parallel to and extending not more than eighteen inches from the wall of a
building with no copy on the sides or edges. This definition includes painted
signs, individual letters, cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard.
   (43)   “Window sign” means a sign installed or placed upon, inside, or
behind a window pane or glass door with the purpose of having the sign visible
from the outside of the building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5000.png]
 
(Ord. 722, §§ 5, 7, 2022; Ord. 627, §§ 5, 6, 2009; Ord. 624 § 8, 2008; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.030 Permit requirements.
   (a)   Unless otherwise exempt per this section, the construction,
installation or modification of any sign, other than changing the sign face
copy, shall require a building permit and zoning clearance to ensure compliance
with applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (b)   Temporary signs identified in Section
21.76.060 require planning division approval of a temporary sign permit (
Chapter 21.104).
   (c)   The community development director shall have the authority to require
a comprehensive sign program for commercial and industrial development projects
involving the establishment of leasable or saleable building space for more
than one tenant.
   (d)   Signs that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter shall
not be permitted unless a variance has been granted pursuant to the provisions
of
Chapter 21.108.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.040 Exempt signs.
The following signs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter but are
subject to compliance with all other provisions of this title. Unless otherwise
specified, all exempt signs shall be non-illuminated, externally illuminated,
or internally illuminated. Any proposed sign that exceeds the numerical or
square footage standards listed below shall require approval of a variance
pursuant to
Chapter 21.108.
   (1)   Barber poles. Building-/wall-mounted barber poles in non-residential
zones.
   (2)   Civic signs. City-sponsored civic signs for community entrance,
identification, direction and information, located off-premises on private
property or in the public right-of-way, with approval of an encroachment permit
by the public works department. Such signs shall be limited to a one hundred
fifty-square-foot sign area and a maximum height of fifteen feet. All such
signs shall be either non-illuminated or externally illuminated.
   (3)   Construction signs. One on-site temporary sign to identify the names
of individuals and/or firms connected with the construction of a project. On
residential property, the maximum sign area is six square feet, with a maximum
height of six feet. On non-residential property, the maximum sign area is forty
square feet and the maximum height ten feet. All such signs shall be non-
illuminated and set back a minimum of five feet from the public right-of-way.
All such signs shall be removed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
   (4)   Directional signs. The city has a compelling interest in ensuring
traffic safety. To directly advance that interest, one on-site directional sign
which does not promote or advertise a business, property, or product for each
one-way drive, drive aisle, and service or delivery entrance. Such signs shall
be located so as not to impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic. The maximum
area of each sign is four square feet and the maximum height four feet.
   (5)   Directory signs. One or more directory sign internal to the site
within an integrated development. Such sign shall be limited to a maximum sign
area of twenty-four square feet and a maximum height of six feet.
   (6)   Display board signs. One or more display board signs, attached to a
wall near the entrance to a non-residential use. Such signs shall be limited to
a maximum sign area of twenty-four square feet.
   (7)   Flags. Flags representing a country, state, or other civic entity, and
decorative flags with no commercial message.
   (8)   Governmental signs. Temporary or permanent signs erected and
maintained by or required by the city, county, state or federal government for
traffic direction, city entrance, or for designation or direction to any
school, hospital, historical site, or public service, property, or facility.
Signs shall be non-illuminated or externally illuminated.
   (9)   Garage/yard sale signs. One on-site garage/yard sale sign with a
maximum sign area of six square feet and a maximum height of four feet. Such
signs may only be displayed during the time of the sale and only in conjunction
with an approved garage sale permit.
   (10)   Holiday decorations. Holiday decorations that do not contain any
commercial message. Such signs shall be removed within seven days following the
holiday or event.
   (11)   House numbers. Street numbers identifying the address of a residence
or building, with a maximum sign area of two square feet, including those
painted on curbs in compliance with city code.
   (12)   Incidental signs. Signs that do not contain any commercial message,
as described in Section
21.76.020.
   (13)   Interior signs. One or more signs in the interior of a building,
mall, court, stadium, or enclosed lobby intended for interior viewing only.
   (14)   Memorial wall signs. Commemorative wall signs, wall signs indicating
the historical significance of a site or building, and building markers. Such
signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of four square feet each. Signs
shall be non-illuminated or externally illuminated.
   (15)   Menu/order board signs. Two menu/order board signs for each drive-in
or drive-through business. Each such sign shall be limited to a maximum area of
forty square feet and a maximum height of eight feet. Such signs shall be
located adjacent to the drive.
   (16)   Non-commercial signs. Non-commercial signs on private property,
provided such signs are not located within or over a public right-of-way, over
the roofline of any building, or within any required clear vision triangle.
Such signs shall have the following size limitations:
      (A)   For residential property, no more than two signs on any one parcel
of land with a maximum combined sign area of ten square feet and a maximum
height of four feet.
      (B)   For non-residential property, no more than two signs on any one
parcel, provided all such signs do not exceed a maximum combined sign area of
forty square feet and a maximum height of four feet.
   (17)   Political event sign. Political event and/or demonstration signs
during the course of and at the site of a political event or demonstration.
   (18)   Political campaign signs. Campaign signs pertaining to an election to
any public office or ballot measure may be erected not earlier than sixty days
prior to the election and shall be removed within ten days following said
election.
   (19)   Real estate signs.
      (A)   Real estate signs for sale or lease of property on private
property, as set forth below. All such signs shall be set back a minimum of
five feet from the public right-of-way and located outside of any required
clear vision triangle. Signs shall be non-illuminated or externally
illuminated.
      (B)   For residential property, one on-site sign is permitted with a
maximum sign area of six square feet. A maximum of three attached rider signs
are permitted on each real estate sign identifying the agent, special feature,
and/or sales status. On weekends and holidays, open house signs are permitted
as needed to direct traffic from major collector and arterial streets to the
subject property. One sign may be placed for each change in direction, to a
maximum of five signs, each with a maximum sign area of six square feet.
      (C)   For non-residential property, one on-site sign is permitted per
street frontage, each with a maximum sign area of nine square feet.
   (20)   Repair and maintenance. Sign repair and maintenance which does not
alter the type, size, or location of any sign.
   (21)   Residential nameplates. One nameplate identifying the occupants of a
dwelling unit, with a maximum sign area of two square feet.
   (22)   Service station fuel pricing signs. On-site service station fuel
pricing signs in accordance with California Business and Professions Code
Section 20880 et seq.
   (23)   Sign copy change. Sign copy changes that simply replace the sign face
without any structural alteration.
   (24)   Signs on bus benches and shelters.
   (25)   Temporary community activity signs. Temporary community activity
signs, as approved by the community development director, for a period not
exceeding thirty days in duration.
   (26)   Time and temperature signs. Time and temperature signs in non-
residential zones with a maximum sign area of twelve square feet.
   (27)   Vehicle signs. Vehicle signs attached to and an integral part of a
motorized vehicle or bicycle, if such vehicle is used directly for the
transportation purposes of a particular business.
   (28)   Window signs. Window signs, provided that all such signs (both
temporary and permanent) do not cover more than a combined maximum of twenty-
five percent of the total window area for each window, except as otherwise may
be regulated by a discretionary permit.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.050 Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited:
   (1)   Abandoned signs.
   (2)   All non-exempt signs without necessary and/or valid permits/approvals.
   (3)   Animated signs.
   (4)   Any sign located within a required clear-vision triangle.
   (5)   Off-site identification signs, except government, civic, and real
estate signs as provided in this chapter.
   (6)   Off-site advertising signs, except electronic billboards permitted
within the Freeway Commercial (C-F) Zoning District pursuant to Section
21.76.140 of this chapter. Conversion of a non-electric billboard to an
electronic billboard is only permitted within the Freeway Commercial (C-F)
Zoning District, and is subject to the requirements of Section 21.76.140.
   (7)   Pole signs.
   (8)   Portable signs, including hand-held temporary signs.
   (9)   Roof signs.
   (10)   Signs erected without the permission of the owner (or his/her agent)
of the property on which the sign is located.
   (11)   Signs within or projecting over the public right-of-way, with the
exception of governmental or city-sponsored civic signs.
   (12)   Signs which purport to be or are an imitation of or resemble official
traffic warning devices or signs, that by color, location or lighting may
confuse or disorient vehicular or pedestrian traffic, excluding authorized on-
site directional sites.
   (13)   Signs painted directly on an exterior wall, fence, fascia, or
parapet.
   (14)   Signs with exposed neon tubing or neon tubing enclosed in a sign
cabinet with a clear plexiglas sign face, with the exception of exempt window
signs.
   (15)   Vehicle signs where the primary purpose or use of the vehicle is the
display of advertising matter. This does not apply to signs maintained on
vehicles when such advertising is incidental to the primary purpose for which
the vehicle is being used.
   (16)   Neon signs including signs with neon tubing enclosed in a sign
cabinet with a clear sign face, with the exception of exempt window signs.
(Ord. 722, § 6, 2022; Ord. 627, § 7, 2009; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.060 Temporary signs.
Temporary commercial signs for a business grand opening or a special product,
sale, or event advertising may be permitted on the site of the business to
which the message pertains. Such temporary signs shall require approval of a
temporary sign permit in compliance with the following provisions:
   (1)   Maximum area. Each business or entity shall be permitted only one
temporary sign with a maximum sign area of one hundred square feet.
   (2)   Location. Temporary signs shall be attached to the main building or
wall/fence and shall not extend above the roofline or height of the wall/fence
on which they are located. Temporary signs shall not be freestanding or
illuminated.
   (3)   Temporary hand-held signs prohibited. Temporary hand-held signs
bearing a commercial message shall be prohibited at all locations in the city
at all times.
   (4)   Time limitation. Each business shall be allowed a maximum of eighty-
four days of temporary signage per calendar year. No single temporary
advertising period shall be longer than fourteen consecutive days, and no more
than six periods of such temporary advertising shall be permitted within a
calendar year. Temporary advertising periods may not be combined.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.070 Number of permitted signs and allowable sign area.
   (a) Number of Signs Permitted. Table 21.76.070 indicates the number of
permitted signs by sign type by zoning district.
Table 21.76.070
Sign Regulations by Zoning District
Zoning District Sign Type Maximum Number10 Maximum Sign Maximum Height4 Notes
                                           Area1,5
Table 21.76.070
Sign Regulations by Zoning District
Zoning      Sign Type          Maximum       Maximum Sign Maximum Notes
District                       Number10      Area1,5      Height4
            Building-attached  1             36 square    N/A
                                             feet
R-3 and R-4 Monument                         24 square            3
            (Pylon signs       12,6          feet         6 feet
            prohibited)
            Building-attached  1 per
            (Individual        business      1.0 square
            business)          frontage      foot of sign
                                             area for
                                             each linear  N/A
            Building-attached  1 per         foot of
C-O, C-1    (Integrated        business      business             3
            development)       frontage12    frontage


            Monument           1 per street  32 square
            (Pylon signs       frontage6,7   feet         6 feet
            prohibited)
            Building-attached  1 per
            (Individual        business      2.0 square
            business)          frontage      feet of sign
                                             area for
                                             each linear  N/A
            Building-attached  1 per         foot of
            (Integrated        business      business
            development)       frontage12    frontage

C-4
            Monument:
            a.   Individual 1 per street  32 square
            business           frontage6     feet         6 feet
            b.   Integrated 1 per street  64 square
            development        frontage6,7   feet
            Pylon:
            a.   Individual 1 per street  32 square
            business           frontage6     feet         15 feet
            b.   Integrated 1 per street  64 square
            development        frontage6,7   feet
            Building-attached  1 per primary
            (Individual        building      2.0 square
            business)          frontage      feet of sign
                                             area for
                                             each linear
            Building-attached  1 per         foot of      N/A
            (Integrated        business      primary
            development)       frontage12    business             See 21.76.080
                                             frontage             (d)

C-F
            Monument:
            a.   Individual 1 per street  50 square
            business           frontage8     feet         8 feet
            b.   Integrated 1 per street  100 square
            development        frontage7,8   feet
            Pylon:
            a.   Individual 1 per street  50 square
            business           frontage8,9   feet         30 feet
            b.   Integrated 1 per street  100 square
            development        frontage7,8,9 feet
            Electronic                       700 square
           billboard          See 21.76.140 feet per     50 feet See 21.76.140
                                             sign face
            Building-attached  1 per primary
            (Individual        building      1.0 square
            business)          frontage11    foot of sign
                                             area for
                                             each linear
            Building-attached  1 per         foot of      N/A
            (Integrated        business      primary
M-2         development)       frontage      business
                                             frontage


            Monument           1 per street  50 square    8 feet
                               frontage6,7   feet
            Pylon              1 per street  50 square    15 feet
                               frontage6,7   feet
 
Notes:
1.   Where more than one building attached sign is permitted, the maximum
allowable sign area shall include the combined sign area of all non-exempt
signs.
2.   A monument sign is permitted only for multi-family developments consisting
of more than 4 units.
3.   Signs shall be either non-illuminated or externally illuminated.
4.   Maximum height as measured from ground surface to the top of the sign
structure.
5.   For building-attached signs, the sign area shall be limited to the lesser
of the following: maximum sign area or 35% of the wall area to which the sign
is attached.
6.   The minimum street frontage for the installation of a monument sign shall
be 135 linear feet and the minimum street frontage for the installation of a
pylon sign shall be 150 linear feet.
7.   For an integrated development, monument and pylon signs may only be
considered when included as part of an approved comprehensive sign program that
is agreed upon by all affected property owners.
8.   The minimum parcel frontage for the installation of any sign shall be 200
linear feet. Parcels with less than 200 linear feet of frontage shall comply
with the C-4 zoning district’s sign regulations.
9.   Parcels shall have a minimum land area of six acres to install a pylon
sign. Separate but continuous parcels may combine to reach the minimum land
area provided a recorded agreement, in a form approved by the city, is executed
by the affected property owners.
10.   Parcels that meet the requirements for a pylon sign may have either a
pylon sign or a monument sign along the affected frontage; however, both types
of signs on the same frontage shall not be permitted.
11.   Buildings with 500 linear feet or more of building frontage and more than
400,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be allowed more than one sign
provided the total combined sign area does not exceed the maximum permitted
sign area.
12.   Tenant suites/spaces, within an integrated development, that encompass
more than 24,999 square feet of gross floor area shall be allowed one primary
sign and up to four (4) ancillary signs. The total combined sign area of all
signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign area. Multiple line signs
shall constitute one sign. When the installation of more than one sign
conflicts with an approved Sign Program, the deviation shall be allowed without
having to amend the Sign Program, with the written authorization of the
property owner or property management company.
   (b)   Allowable Sign Area Calculation. The allowable sign area shall be
calculated in one of two ways: 1) the sign area assigned to a particular use,
or 2) the sign area as a ratio of the length of the primary building frontage
for a particular use. Building-attached and freestanding sign area allowances
are listed separately. For the purpose of the calculation, building-attached
signs shall include all non-exempt wall, canopy, and projecting signs,
including non-exempt flags. Similarly, monument signs shall include non-exempt
monument signs and freestanding flagpoles with non-exempt flags. Unless
otherwise specified, the maximum allowable sign area shall include the combined
sign area of all non-exempt signs.
(Ord. 722, § 8, 2022; Ord. 717 § 8, 2021; Ord. 627, § 8, 2009; Ord. 624 § 9,
2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.080 General development standards - non-exempt signs.
   (a)   Building-attached Sign Location and Vertical Clearance.
      (1)   Building-attached signs may be placed on building frontages facing
a street, parking lot, or mall and shall not be located above the roofline.
      (2)   Wall signs shall not project more than eighteen inches from the
building wall, and the sign length shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the
building frontage on which it is located.
      (3)   Projecting and canopy signs shall maintain an eight-foot vertical
clearance from walkways and may not project into a public right-of-way.
   (b)   Monument Signs. Monument signs may be located in planter medians
abutting a driveway or within the project driveway, provided the community
development director determines that safe sight-distance is maintained.
Changeable copy may be incorporated into a monument sign, provided that the
sign area of the changeable copy does not exceed seventy-five percent of the
sign area. Monument signs shall be designed to be compatible with the
architectural style of the corresponding development.
   (c)   Illumination of Signs. Unless otherwise specified, signs may be non-
illuminated, or may be internally illuminated. External illumination may be
permitted only with the specific authorization of the community development
director. If illuminated, the illumination shall be fixed, steady, and directed
or controlled in a manner to prevent glare on streets, walkways, and
residential property. For the purposes of public safety, any illuminated sign
shall be required to remain lighted at least until 11:00 p.m.
   (d)   Additional Standards for Signs in the CF Zoning District. The
following additional standards shall apply to signs located in the CF zoning
district.
      (1)   A minimum parcel freeway frontage of two hundred linear feet shall
be required for any parcel on which a sign is proposed. For parcels having
frontage of less than two hundred linear feet, the sign standards applicable to
the C-4 zoning district shall apply.
      (2)   No more than four businesses shall be identified on any one sign
structure.
      (3)   For pylon signs, no more than two support pylons shall be used.
      (4)   The sign structure shall be constructed of materials and colors and
in an architectural style that correspond to and coordinate with the buildings
housing the businesses identified on the sign.
      (5)   Sign characters shall have a minimum height of twelve inches.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.090 Sign construction and maintenance.
The following requirements apply to the construction and maintenance of all
signs:
   (1)   Structural and electrical requirements. All signs shall comply with
the appropriate detailed provisions of the state building code, as adopted by
the city, relative to design and construction, structural integrity,
connections and safety. Signs shall also comply with the provisions of the
applicable electrical code and the additional construction standards set forth
in this chapter.
   (2)   Sign maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in good, operable
condition, including maintenance of colors and materials, replacement of
defective parts, painted, cleaned, and kept free of graffiti. Any portions of a
sign in need of repair shall be identified in writing by the code enforcement
officer, along with required action in accordance with enforcement procedures
of
Chapter 21.14.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.100 Removal of unauthorized signs on public property.
Any sign, advertising device, or handbill found posted, installed, located, or
otherwise affixed on any public property contrary to the provisions of this
chapter may be removed by the city or its authorized agents. The person
responsible for any such illegal posting shall be warned and/or held
responsible for the costs incurred in the removal thereof, and the community
development director is authorized to effect the collection of said costs.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.110 Signs utilizing non-Roman alphabet.
   (a)   To facilitate emergency response by public safety personnel, every
sign in connection with any business which utilizes any non-Roman alphabet
letters, characters, and/or symbols shall contain also thereon a general
description of the business written in English. The English language portion of
the sign shall be readable from the public right-of-way.
   (b)   In all cases where a sign or other zoning permit is required by this
title or other law, the applicant shall submit to the city a certification,
issued under penalty of perjury under the laws of the state, containing an
English language translation of all non-Roman alphabet letters, characters, and
symbols proposed to be displayed on the sign. An application for such permit
shall not be deemed complete until the applicant has provided such
certification.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.120 Nonconforming signs.
   (a)   Any on-site sign becoming nonconforming as a result of this zoning
ordinance shall not be required to be removed, except as provided in the
California Business and Professions Code Sections 5492, 5493, 5495, and 5497.
   (b)   Any off-site sign or billboard becoming nonconforming as a result of
this zoning ordinance shall not be required to be removed, except as provided
in the California Business and Professions Code Sections 5412, 5412.1, 5412.2
and 5412.3.
   (c)   Any nonconforming pole sign that is not used continuously for any
ninety-day period shall be considered abandoned and shall lose its
nonconforming status; such signs shall be subject to immediate abatement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.130 Off-site signs.
   (a)   Subject to subsections (b) and (c), below, off-site signs are
prohibited.
   (b)   Any off-site sign legally established prior to April 7, 2022, shall be
subject to the provisions of Section
21.76.120. No non-conforming off-site sign may be modified, enlarged,
reconstructed, or altered except as expressly authorized by Business and
Professions Code Section 5497.
   (c)   Any new electronic billboard, or conversion of a non-electronic
billboard to an electronic billboard, for which a deemed complete application
has been received after April 7, 2022, to be located within the Freeway
Commercial (C-F) Zoning District, shall be subject to the provisions of Section
21.76.140.
(Ord. 722, § 9, 2022; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.76.140 Electronic billboards.
Electronic billboards are recognized as a legitimate form of commercial use in
the city. However, the size, number, location and illumination of billboards
can have significant influence on the city's visual environment, and can,
without adequate control, create or contribute to blighted conditions. The
purpose of this section is to provide reasonable electronic billboard control,
recognizing that community appearance is an important factor in protecting the
general welfare of the community. This section contains the entirety of the
city's zoning regulations with respect to electronic billboards within the
Freeway Commercial (C-F) Zoning District (C-F Zoning District). In the event of
any conflict between any provision contained in this section and any other
provision contained elsewhere in this code, the provisions contained in this
section shall govern.
   (1)   Use regulations. Electronic billboards are only allowed in the C-
F Zoning District and only after a development agreement, pursuant to
Government Code Section 65864 et seq., has been approved. A development
agreement shall be entered into prior to the issuance of a building permit for
any project involving construction of a new electronic billboard, expansion or
modification of an electronic billboard, or conversion of a non-electronic
billboard to an electronic billboard. Any such development agreement shall
include compensation to be paid to the city as a result of the installation and
operation of the electronic billboard, and to administer such development
agreement for the term thereof.
   (2)   Application. A site plan review application is required for each
individual proposal to construct a new electronic billboard, modification of an
electronic billboard, or conversion of a non-electronic billboard to an
electronic billboard, which shall be considered a separate application, and
each application shall be separately and individually subject to the provisions
and requirements of this Section. Multiple sites, even if located on one
parcel, shall not be combined into one application.
   (3)   Findings. The Community Development Director shall not approve any
electronic billboard project unless a development agreement has previously been
executed between the applicant and the City of La Mirada, and it is determined
by the Director that the electronic billboard will not constitute a hazard to
the safe and efficient operation of vehicles upon a street or freeway.
   (4)   Locations allowed. Electronic billboards are only allowed in the C-
F Zoning District adjacent to the freeway.
   (5)   Prohibited installation locations. Electronic billboards shall not be
installed in any of the following locations:
      (A)   On any roof of a building or projecting over the roof of a
building.
      (B)   On any wall of a building or otherwise attached or integrated to or
suspended from a building.
      (C)   Within or encroaching over the public right-of-way.
      (D)   Any location which would result in a violation of any applicable
federal or state law.
   (6)   Landscape segment relocation credits. No new electronic billboard
shall be constructed or installed within the city through utilization, in whole
or in part, of credits given by the California Department of Transportation or
State for relocation of billboards located in landscaped freeway segments. This
shall include credits for billboards located either within the city or in other
jurisdictions.
   (7)   Development standards.
      (A)   Maximum area. The maximum area of electronic billboards shall be
seven hundred square feet (700 sq. ft.) per sign face (e.g., 14 feet x 48
feet).
      (B)   Maximum height. The maximum height of electronic billboards shall
be fifty feet (50'), measured from the finished grade at the base of the sign
to the highest projection.
      (C)   Maximum number of signs. No property (defined as a single parcel or
two or more contiguous parcels under common ownership) shall have more than two
double-sided electronic billboards.
      (D)   Minimum distance from another billboard on the same parcel. The
minimum distance from another billboard on the same property shall be one
thousand feet (1,000') as measured from the vertical centerline of each
billboard.
      (E)   Minimum distance from another billboard on the same side of the
freeway. The minimum distance from one electronic billboard to another
electronic billboard not on the same property but on the same side of the
freeway shall be one thousand feet (1,000'), as measured from the vertical
centerline of each electronic billboard. The minimum distance of an electronic
billboard from existing non-electronic billboards shall be five hundred feet
(500'), as measured from the vertical centerline of each billboard.
      (F)   Minimum setback. The minimum setback distance of the electronic
billboard column support post shall be at least twenty-five feet (25') from any
property line and at least twenty-five feet (25') from any building.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no portion of an electronic billboard shall
project beyond the subject site's property line onto or over a neighboring
property, street, highway or other public right-of-way.
      (G)   Minimum size of property. The minimum size of any property on which
an electronic billboard can be located shall be three acres.
      (H)   Maximum number of faces. No electronic billboard shall have more
than two faces. A face shall be considered the display surface upon which an
advertising message is displayed and shall comply with the following:
         i.   No V-shape electronic billboards shall be allowed.
         ii.   The two faces of two-sided electronic billboards shall be
identical in size.
         iii.   The two sign faces shall be attached directly to and be
parallel to each other.
         iv.   The top, bottom and sides of the two sign faces shall be in
alignment, and no portion of either face shall project beyond the corresponding
portion of the other face.
      (I)   Face orientation. No electronic billboard shall have more than one
face (display surface) oriented in the same vertical plane.
      (J)   Name of owner. No electronic billboard shall be maintained in the
city unless the name of the person or company owning or maintaining it and the
identifying number of the electronic billboard are plainly displayed thereon.
      (K)   Minimum clearance. All electronic billboards shall have a minimum
clearance of sixteen feet (16') between the lowest point of the sign and ground
level so as not to effect driveways, walkways and provide an attractive
nuisance for graffiti and vandalism.
      (L)   Screening. All back or rear non-electronic portions of single-faced
or double-faced electronic billboards visible from a public right-of-way or
other public or private property shall be screened to the satisfaction of the
Community Development Director. The screening shall cover all structural
members of the sign, not including the pole supports.
   (8)   Standards of design.
      (A)   All new electronic billboards shall be designed to have a single
architecturally enhanced support. When the subject property is developed with
buildings/structures the design and finish shall complement the design of the
existing buildings/ structures. A plain cylindrical column support post shall
not be permitted.
      (B)   All new electronic billboard structures shall be free of any
bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, antennas, etc.
      (C)   No projections including antennas shall project beyond the sign
face.
   (9)   Design and operational restrictions (applicable to conforming and non-
conforming billboards).
      (A)   Each electronic billboard shall be structurally engineered to
withstand such minimum wind pressure forces as required by the Building Plan
Check Engineer, but not less than as required by Business and Professions Code
Section 5401.
      (B)   No billboard shall display any statement, words, or images
prohibited by Business and Professions Code Section 5402. The required
development agreement for electronic billboards may include provisions which
preclude: (i) the display of words and/or images which the city or applicant
believes will be offensive, obscene, indecent or immoral to a substantial
segment of the public; and/or (ii) the advertisement of any product or event
which either party considers offensive to a substantial segment of the public,
including, but not limited to, marijuana, tobacco products, adult uses such as
nude or topless bars or nightclubs, or businesses featuring the sale of adult
novelty items, books, magazines, or videos in any media.
      (C)   No billboard shall display flashing, shimmering, glittering,
intermittent or moving light or lights. Exceptions to this restriction include
time, temperature and smog index units, provided the frequency of change does
not occur within four second intervals.
      (D)   No billboard shall include any illumination or message change that
is in motion or that change or expose a message for less than four seconds.
Continuous motion, including full motion video, shall not be permitted.
      (E)   The utilities of each billboard shall be underground.
      (F)   Each electronic billboard shall be electronically tied into the
National Emergency Network and provide emergency information, including child
abduction alerts (i.e., "Amber Alerts").
      (G)   Each billboard shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and
local laws and regulations.
      (H)   Each electronic billboard shall be provided with an ambient light
sensor that automatically adjusts the brightness level of the electronic sign
based on ambient light conditions.
      (I)   Electronic billboards shall not operate at brightness levels of
more than 0.3-foot candles above ambient light.
      (J)   Each electronic billboard shall be designed to either freeze the
display in one static position, display a full black screen or turn off in the
event of a malfunction.
      (K)   No electronic billboard shall utilize technology that would allow
interaction with drivers, vehicles or any device located in vehicles,
including, but not limited to a radio frequency identification device,
geographic positions system, or other device.
      (L)   Walls or screens at the base of a billboard shall not create a
hazard to public safety or provide an attractive nuisance.
      (M)   No billboard shall emit audible sound, odor or particulate matter.
      (N)   No billboard shall simulate or imitate any directional, warning,
danger or information sign, or any display likely to be mistaken for any
permitted sign intended or likely to be construed as giving warning to traffic,
by, for example, the use of the words "stop" or "slow down."
      (O)   No electronic billboard shall involve any red or blinking or
intermittent light likely to be mistaken for warning or danger signals nor
shall its illumination impair the vision of travelers on the adjacent freeway
and/or roadways.
      (P)   No electronic billboard shall be operated or maintained so as to
constitute an 'improper display' as described in Business and Professions Code
Section 5403.
      (Q)   No electronic billboard shall display messaging for on-site uses
greater than 20 percent (20%) of the time in any given hour of the day.
(Ord. 722, § 10, 2022)
CHAPTER 21.78
YARD REQUIREMENTS AND EXCEPTIONS
Sections:
   
21.78.010   Purpose.
   
21.78.020   Required yard areas by zoning district.
   
21.78.030   Setback measurements.
   
21.78.040   Allowed encroachments and projections into required yards.
21.78.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes standards for setback measurement, required yard
areas, and permitted encroachments. These provisions, in conjunction with other
applicable provisions of this title, are intended to ensure open areas around
primary structures; maintain clear visibility for traffic safety and pedestrian
access; buffer incompatible land uses; and establish natural and visual light
and air space for privacy, landscaping, and recreation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.78.020 Required yard areas by zoning district.
The required yard area (front, interior side, street side, and/or rear) of a
lot is the horizontal area between the property line and the minimum setback
distance required for the specific zoning district in question. Except as
otherwise specified in this title, required yard areas shall be kept free of
buildings and structures.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.78.030 Setback measurements.
   (a)   General. Except as otherwise specified in this section, all setback
distances shall be measured at right angles from the designated property line,
and the setback line shall be drawn parallel to the designated property line at
the required setback distance.
   (b)   Front Yard Setbacks. The front yard setback is a line parallel to the
front property line abutting the street, at a minimum distance measured at
right angles from the front property line, except as follows:
      (1)   Corner Lots. The front yard setback shall be measured from the
street right-of-way toward which the primary entrance of the main building is
directed. Upon approval of a Zoning Clearance Application pursuant to
Chapter 21.96, an alternate street right-of-way may be utilized to measure the
front yard setback. Approval of the application shall be subject to the
following conditions:
         (A)   The application shall be executed by the property owner(s) of
record.
         (B)   The application submittal shall include three copies of a fully
dimensioned and detailed site plan.
         (C)    The approval to use an alternate street right-of-way to measure
the front yard setback shall not create a non-con forming condition. When legal
non-conforming conditions exist, the approval to use an alternate street right-
of-way may be approved if it is determined that it will reduce the more
intensive legal nonconformity.
Figure 21.78.030
Front Yard Setbacks
[Image]
 
      (2)   Flag lots. Regardless of the orientation of the main building, the
measurement shall be taken from a parallel line established where the access
strip meets the buildable area of the parcel closest to the public street or
right-of-way.
      (3)   A building on a lot between two lots on which existing buildings
extend into the required front yard may have a front yard setback that is not
less in depth than the average of that provided on the adjacent lots.
   (c)   Rear Yard Setbacks. The rear yard setback is a line parallel to the
rear property line, at a minimum distance measured at right angles from the
rear property line, which extends between the side yards, except as follows
(see Figure 21.78.030.C):
      (1)   The rear yard setback on the street side of a double frontage lot
is a line parallel to the rear property line abutting the street. However, if
an access easement or street right-of-way line extends into or through a rear
yard, the minimum rear yard setback distance shall be measured at right angles
from the access easement or right-of-way line.
      (2)   Where the side lot lines converge to a point with two or three
lines, the rear yard setback shall be measured from an imaginary line drawn
parallel to the front property line from a distance of five feet from the point
at which the lines converge.
      (3)   In the event five or more lines bound a lot, only the two interior
lines that intersect a street shall be deemed side lot lines. All other
interior lines shall be deemed rear lot lines, with setback measurement
representing the converging boundaries of parallel lines drawn from each of the
rear lot lines.
Figure 21.78.030.C
Rear Yard Setbacks
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4346.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4349.jpg]
 
(Ord. 710 , § 11, 2019; Ord . 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.78.040 Allowed encroachments and projections into required yards.
Table 21.78.040 identifies structures and architectural features attached to
the main building that may project into required yards.
 
Table 21.78.040
Permitted Projections and Encroachments of Attached Structures into Required
Yard Areas
                              Permitted Encroachment Distance into Required
Architectural Feature         Yard
                              Front Yard Side Yard                 Rear Yard
Fireplaces, bay windows,
porches, pergolas, awnings,
trellis and decks and patios  2 ft.1
higher than 30 inches above
grade
Canopies, cornices, eaves,    2 ft.1
canopies, and roof overhangs
Uncovered porches or
stairways, fire escapes or    6 ft.1     Up to 3 ft. from property 6 ft.1
landing places higher than 30            line
inches above grade
 
Notes:
1.   The combined length of all such features shall not account for more than
25 percent of the length of the wall surface on which the features are located.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
ARTICLE VIII: LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIREMENTS/PROCEDURES
CHAPTER 21.80
GENERAL PERMIT PROVISIONS
Sections:
   
21.80.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.80.020   Discretionary permits and actions.
   
21.80.030   Exemptions from permit requirements.
   
21.80.040   Additional permits may be required.
   
21.80.050   Burden of proof and precedence.
21.80.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter establishes the overall structure for the application, review, and
action on discretionary permits, applications; and identifies and describes the
discretionary permits regulated by this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.80.020 Discretionary permits and actions.
   (a)   Administrative Permits and Actions. The community development director
has primary administrative authority over certain activities which require the
determination of compliance with applicable zoning provisions. In the case of a
temporary use permit, a permit review board will take action on the
administrative permit request. No public hearing is required for administrative
permits and actions unless the decision is appealed in accordance with
provisions of
Chapter 21.88.
      (1)   Zoning code interpretation (exclusive of use interpretations). An
administrative interpretation of certain provisions (exclusive of use
provisions) of the zoning ordinance in an effort to resolve ambiguity in the
regulations and to ensure their consistent application (
Chapter 21.94).
      (2)   Zoning clearance/plan check. An administrative plan check process
of nonexempt uses and structures that do not otherwise require review to
determine conformance with applicable provisions of this title (
Chapter 21.96).
      (3)   Home occupation permit. An administrative permit authorizing
limited non-residential activities on residential properties in compliance with
specific criteria and performance standards (
Chapter 21.98).
      (4)   Temporary use permit. An administrative permit authorizing specific
limited-term uses in conformance with specified conditions and performance
criteria set forth in
Chapter 21.100.
      (5)   Administrative adjustment. An administrative permit granting
limited exceptions to certain development standards of this title where strict
compliance would result in a unique hardship (
Chapter 21.102).
      (6)   Temporary sign permit. An administrative permit authorizing a
variety of temporary signs for limited-term promotional advertising in
conformance with specific provisions and conditions of this title (
Chapter 21.104). Temporary signs may also be approved in conjunction with a
temporary use permit (
Chapter 21.100).
      (7)   Site plan review. An administrative review process providing for
review of projects for compliance with the provisions of this title and
compliance with any site plan or architectural design guidelines adopted by the
city (
Chapter 21.114).
      (8)   Large family day care home permit (LDC). An administrative permit
authorizing a properly licensed applicant to operate a large family day care
home, which provides care for nine to fourteen children, from a single-family
zoned residence and in compliance with specific criteria and performance
standards in
Chapter 21.103 of this Title.
   (b)   Quasi-judicial Permits and Actions. Except when combined with
legislative actions, the planning commission is the designated approving
authority for quasi-judicial permits and actions. A public hearing is required
for the following quasi-judicial actions:
      (1)   Zoning code use interpretation. An action establishing a use
determination in an effort to resolve ambiguity in the use regulations and to
ensure their consistent application (
Chapter 21.106).
      (2)   Variance. An action granting exception to the development standards
of this title in cases where strict compliance would result in a unique
hardship. This permit applies to all requests for exception to the development
standards of this title that do not qualify as a minor variance (
Chapter 21.108).
      (3)   Conditional use permit. A permit authorizing the operation of a
specific use of land or a building in a particular location consistent with the
provisions of this title (
Chapter 21.110).
      (4)   Certificate of compatibility. An action authorizing the design
compatibility of new single-family homes with surrounding neighborhoods beyond
consistency with applicable zoning provisions of this title (
Chapter 21.112).
      (5)   Abatement/extension of nonconforming uses/structures. An action
requiring the abatement or authorizing the extension of nonconforming uses or
structures pursuant to provisions of Article IX,
Chapter 21.130 (
Chapter 21.114).
   (c)   Legislative Actions. The designated approving authority for all
legislative actions by the city is the city council. A public hearing is
required for all following legislative actions:
      (1)   Planned unit development. An action adopting a special area plan
addressing the use and/or development of land that may not conform to the
underlying zoning map or district regulations, but which complies with the
goals and policies of the general plan for a particular area (
Chapter 21.116).
      (2)   Specific plan. A regulatory document prepared pursuant to the
Government Code Section 65450 et seq. for the systematic implementation of the
general plan for a particular area (
Chapter 21.118).
      (3)   Zoning ordinance text/map amendment. An action authorizing either a
text amendment to this title or a map amendment changing the zoning designation
of particular property consistent with the general plan (
Chapter 21.120).
      (4)   General plan text/map amendment. An action authorizing either a
text amendment to the general plan or a map amendment changing the general plan
land use designation of particular property(s) (
Chapter 21.122).
      (5)   Development agreement. An agreement between the city and a party
with legal or equitable interest in the real property relating to the
development of property (
Chapter 21.124).
   (d)   Subdivisions and Other Building Regulations. In addition to the
permits listed in this title, regulations governing the subdivision of land are
established in Title 20 of the Municipal Code. Provisions for construction and
building are established in Title 17 of the Municipal Code.
(Ord. 651, § 10, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008; Ord. 705, § 8, 2018).
21.80.030 Exemptions from permit requirements.
The following activities and uses of land and/or structures are exempt from the
land use and development permit requirements of this title. However,
activities/uses shall comply with all other relevant provisions of this title
and may require other permits.
   (1)   Decks and paths. Decks, platforms, and on-site paths that are less
than thirty inches above natural grade, are not over any basement or story
below, and are unenclosed except for a safety railing with a maximum height of
forty-two inches.
   (2)   Fences in residential zoning districts. Certain fences in residential
zoning districts are exempt from land use permit requirements, as provided in
Chapter 21.62.
   (3)   Portable spas, hot tubs, fish ponds. Portable spas, hot tubs, fish
ponds, and similar structures that are less than one hundred twenty square feet
in area (including related equipment), contain less than two thousand gallons
of water, and are less than three feet in depth.
   (4)   Accessory structures. Accessory structures, as defined in Article X,
that are smaller than one hundred twenty square feet in size, are not located
in the required front yard, and have no portion of the structure equal to or
greater than eight feet in height.
   (5)   Interior remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the
gross floor area within the structure or change/expand the permitted use of the
structure.
   (6)   Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if:
      (A)   The work does not change the approved land use of the site or the
structure or add to, enlarge or expand the area occupied by the land use, or
the floor area of the structure.
      (B)   Within a parking lot, the work does not alter the number or
configuration of parking and/or landscape planters in any manner.
      (C)   Any exterior repairs employ the same materials and design as the
original construction.
   (7)   Solar collectors. The addition of solar collection systems to the
roofs of existing structures.
   (8)   Utilities. The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by a
public utility or public agency of underground or overhead utilities intended
to service existing or nearby approved developments (e.g., water, gas, electric
or telecommunication supply or disposal systems, including wires, mains,
drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire-alarm boxes, police call boxes,
traffic signals, hydrants, and similar facilities and equipment), but not
including new transmission lines and structures. Satellite and cellular
telephone antennas are subject to compliance with
Chapter 21.46.
   (9)   Activities/uses.
      (A)   Garage sales in residential zoning districts and neighborhoods,
provided a garage sale permit has been issued.
      (B)   Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities
including, but not limited to emergency utility and response facilities.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.80.040 Additional permits may be required.
   (a)   A land use on property that complies with the permit requirement or
exemption provisions of this title shall also comply with the permit
requirements of other Municipal Code provisions and any permit requirements
other agencies before construction or use of the property is commenced. Nothing
in this title shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits required by:
      (1)   Any other Municipal Code provisions, including building, grading,
or other construction permits (Title 17); a business license, if required; or
subdivision approval if required by Title 20; or
      (2)   Any applicable county, regional, state, or federal regulations.
   (b)   All necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or
establishing a new use.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.80.050 Burden of proof and precedence.
   (a)   Burden of Proof. The burden of proof to establish the evidence in
support of the required finding(s) for any permit in accordance with this
chapter is the responsibility of the applicant.
   (b)   Precedence. Each permit shall be evaluated on a case-specific basis.
Therefore, granting of a prior permit does not create a precedent and is not
justification for the granting of a new permit.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.82
APPROVING AUTHORITY
Sections:
   
21.82.010   Purpose.
   
21.82.020   Designated approving authority.
   
21.82.030   Concurrent processing of permits.
21.82.010 Purpose.
This chapter identifies the designated planning agency for the review of the
land use development permits and actions required by this title. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.82.020 Designated approving authority.
   (a) General Provisions. The approving authority, as designated in Table
21.82.020, shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny applications in
accordance with the requirements of this title. Table 21.82.020 identifies both
recommending (R) and final (F) authorities for each application. When a
proposed project requires more than one permit with more than one approving
authority, all project permits shall be processed concurrently, and final
action shall be taken by the highest level designated approving authority for
all such requested permits.
   (b)   Findings Required. In acting on an application, the approving
authority shall make the applicable findings required for a particular permit
or approval and as may be required by other laws and regulations.
   (c)   Appeals. An action of the approving authority may be appealed pursuant
to procedures set forth in
Chapter 21.88.
Table 21.82.020
Approving Authority
               Designated Approving Authority
Type of Permit Community   Permit Review              Planning
or Action      Development Board         City Manager Commission City Council 1
               Director
                Designated Approving Authority
Type of Permit  Community   Permit Review              Planning   City Council
or Action       Development Board         City Manager Commission 1
                Director
Zoning code
interpretation  F                                      A          A
(excludes use
interpretation)
Zoning
clearance/plan  F                                      A          A
check
Home occupation F                                      A          A
permit
Temporary use               F             A                       A
permit
Administrative  F                                      A          A
adjustment
Temporary sign  F                                      A          A
permit
Site plan       F                                      A          A
review
Zoning code use R                                      F          A
interpretation
Variance        R                                      F          A
Conditional use R                                      F          A
permit
Certificate of                                         R          F
compatibility
Abatement/
extension of    R                                      F          A
nonconforming
use/structure
Planned unit                                           R          F
development
Specific plan                                          R          F
Zoning code                                            R          F
amendment
General plan                                           R          F
amendment
Development     F                                      A          A
agreement
Large family
day care home   F                                      A          A
(LDC)
Affordable
housing         R/F                                    A/R/F      F/A
implementation
plan2
R = Recommending authority
F = Final action authority (unless appealed)
A = Appeal authority
Notes:
1.   Decisions of the city council cannot be appealed.
2.   Refer to Section 21.128.030 for review authority.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 651, § 11, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.82.030 Concurrent processing of permits.
When a proposed project requires more than one permit application with more
than one approving authority, all project permits shall be processed
concurrently as interrelated permits for a project and shall not be bifurcated.
The highest designated approving authority for all such requested permits shall
take final action on multiple permits. For example, the planning commission
takes final action on a conditional use permit. However, when processed in
conjunction with a development agreement, the conditional use permit shall be
reviewed and acted upon by the city council in conjunction with the other
application request(s). The planning commission provides recommendations to the
city council on both entitlement requests. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord.
612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.84
GENERAL APPLICATION PROCESSING PROCEDURES
Sections:
   
21.84.010   Purpose.
   
21.84.020   Application submittal.
   
21.84.030   Eligible applicants.
   
21.84.040   Submittal requirements.
   
21.84.050   Exceptions to the fee requirements.
   
21.84.060   Initial application completeness review.
   
21.84.070   Environmental assessment.
   
21.84.080   Application review and determinations.
   
21.84.090   Notice of decision.
   
21.84.100   Application denial; reapplication.
21.84.010 Purpose.
This chapter establishes land use and development application processing
procedures for all discretionary actions authorized by this title. Unique
processing procedures are listed in the individual permit sections (Chapters
21.94 through
21.124), along with several figures showing specific permit processes.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.020 Application submittal.
All applications for land use and development permits and actions pertaining to
this title shall be submitted to the planning division on a city application
form, together with all fees, plans, maps, and any other information required
by the planning division.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.030 Eligible applicants.
The owner(s) or lessee(s) of the property, or the authorized agent(s), or a
plaintiff in an action of eminent domain, shall make the application. Any
authorized agent shall be formally delegated as such in writing by the property
owner.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.040 Submittal requirements.
   (a)   Every application for a land use or development permit shall include a
completed application form designated for the particular request, the applicant
signature(s), the agent authorization as appropriate, and processing fee(s)
established by city council resolution. Additionally, each application shall
include particular maps, plans, and other data about the project development,
project site and vicinity deemed necessary by the community development
director to provide the recommending and final approving authorities with
adequate information on which to base decisions.
    (b)   Applications will not be accepted by the planning department without
required signed application forms and permit fees as established by resolution
of the city council.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.050 Exceptions to the fee requirements.
Required application fees may be waived by the community development director
in the following cases:
   (1)   When the application or appeal is filed by a public agency of the
city, state, or federal government; or
   (2)   When the application is for a variance to permit the relocation of a
building on the same lot, if such relocation is necessary solely because of the
condemnation for a public use or the sale to a public agency on a portion of
such lot.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.060 Initial application completeness review.
All applications filed with the planning division in compliance with this title
shall be initially reviewed for application completeness as follows:
   (1)   Within thirty days of application submittal, the community development
director shall determine whether or not the application is complete. The
applicant shall be notified in writing of the determination either that: a) all
the submittal requirements have been satisfied and that the application has
been accepted as complete; or b) specific information is still necessary to
complete the application. The letter may also identify preliminary information
regarding the areas in which the submitted plans are not in compliance with
city standards and requirements. The applicant may appeal the determination in
accordance with
Chapter 21.88 and the Permit Streamlining Act (California Government Code
Section 65943).
   (2)   To expedite the determination of completeness for administrative
permits and actions of the community development director, administrative
permit applications shall be deemed complete within seven working days, unless
the applicant is otherwise notified in writing within the seven days that
additional information is necessary to complete the application.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.070 Environmental assessment.
After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed in
accordance with the environmental review procedures of the California
Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq.).
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.080 Application review and determinations.
   (a)   Distribution and Review. Application materials shall be circulated to
other city departments and agencies for review and comment as determined
necessary or appropriate by the community development director. Planning
department staff shall be responsible for requesting and incorporating comments
into project modifications or conditions of approval to ensure conformance with
all provisions of the municipal code and other adopted policies and plans.
   (b)   Staff Determinations, Recommendations, and Reports.
      (1)   For administrative permits, the community development director
shall create a written record of action to approve, conditionally approve, or
deny the permit.
      (2)   For quasi-judicial and legislative actions, the community
development director shall prepare a staff report that analyzes the proposed
land use and development application for compliance and consistency with the
provisions of this title, other applicable sections of the city's Municipal
Code, the general plan, any applicable planned unit development, and applicable
state law. The staff report shall include recommendations on the approval,
approval with conditions, or disapproval of the application, taking into
account the information provided by CEQA documentation. The staff report shall
be mailed or delivered to the approving authority and the applicant not less
than three days prior to public hearing or action on the application.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.090 Notice of decision.
A notice of decision shall be required for zoning code interpretations,
temporary use permits, administrative adjustments, design review, and all
quasi-judicial permits and legislative actions in accordance with the
provisions of this section. Within seven days from the final action on an
application, the community development director shall send written notice of
decision to the project applicant. The notice of decision shall identify the
specific action of the approving authority, including the date of action,
applicable conditions, basis for determination, and appeal period. A failure to
comply with this section shall not affect the validity of the decision.
(Ord. 624 § 10, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.84.100 Applications denial; reapplication.
Whenever an application or portion of an application has been denied or revoked
and the denial or revocation becomes final, no new application for the same or
similar request may be accepted within one year of the date of the action to
deny or revoke, unless the community development director determines that a new
application is warranted due to a substantial change in land use on properties
in the vicinity, improved infrastructure in the vicinity, altered traffic
patterns, or any such similar change resulting in a changed physical
environment.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.86
NOTICES AND HEARINGS
Sections:
   
21.86.010   Public hearing required.
   
21.86.020   Notice of hearing for quasi-judicial permits and legislative
actions.
   
21.86.030   Requests for notification.
   
21.86.040   Failure to receive notice.
   
21.86.050   Hearing procedure.
21.86.010 Public hearing required.
The following procedures shall govern the notice and public hearing, where
required, for consideration of a land use or development permit or action.
Public hearings shall be required for all quasi-judicial permits and
legislative actions identified herein. The hearing(s) shall be held before the
designated approving authority pursuant to Section
21.82.020.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.86.020 Notice of hearing for quasi-judicial permits and legislative actions.
   (a)   Not less than ten days before the scheduled date of a hearing, public
notice shall be given of such hearing in the manner listed below. The notice
shall state the date, time, and place of hearing; identify the hearing body;
provide a general explanation of the matter to be considered; and provide a
general description of the real property (text or diagram), if any, which is
the subject of the hearing.
   (b)   Notice of the public hearings shall be provided as required by law.
   (c)   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet of the exterior
boundaries of the property involved in the application, using for this purpose
that last known name and address of such owners as shown upon the current tax
assessors records. If the number of owners to whom notice would be mailed or
delivered is greater than one thousand, notice may be given by placing a
display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in the newspaper of general
circulation in the city in lieu of the above-required mailed or delivered
notice.
   (d)   Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the
owner of the subject real property or the owner's authorized agent, and to each
local agency expected to provide water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or
other essential facilities or services to the proposed project.
(Ord. 624 § 11, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.86.030 Requests for notification.
Any person who requests inclusion on a mailing list for notice of hearing for a
development project or projects shall submit such request in writing to the
city clerk. The city may impose a reasonable fee for the purpose of recovering
the cost of such notification.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.86.040 Failure to receive notice.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65093, failure of any person or
entity to receive notice required by law of any hearing as required by this
title shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the actions of a
designated approving authority for which the notice was given.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.86.050 Hearing procedure.
   (a)   Hearings as provided for in this chapter shall be held at the date,
time, and place for which notice has been given as required in this chapter.
The designated approving authority shall conduct the public hearing and hear
testimony.
   (b)   The summary minutes shall be prepared and made part of the permanent
file of the case.
   (c)   Any hearing may be continued, and no further public notice shall be
required unless the hearing is not continued to a specific date/time, in which
instance the hearing shall be re-noticed.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.88
APPEALS
Sections:
   
21.88.010   Purpose.
   
21.88.020   Appeal applicability and authority.
   
21.88.030   Filing an appeal.
   
21.88.040   Notice and schedule of appeal hearings.
   
21.88.050   Appeal hearing and action.
21.88.010 Purpose.
This chapter identifies the procedures for filing and processing an appeal of
actions of approving authorities, consistent with California Government Code
Section 65904. Where the appeal provisions of this chapter conflict with other
provisions of the La Mirada Municipal Code, the appeal provisions of this
chapter shall apply with regard to planning and zoning matters.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.88.020 Appeal applicability and authority.
   (a)   Any person dissatisfied with an interpretation or action of the
community development director or permit review board made pursuant to this
article may appeal such action to the planning commission within ten business
days from the date of the action. Similarly, any person dissatisfied with an
interpretation or action of the planning commission or city manager made
pursuant to this article may appeal such action to the city council within ten
business days of the planning commission action. Actions by the city council
are not subject to appeal. Table 21.82.020 identifies the appeal authority for
each of the city's land use and development permits and actions.
   (b)   In the event that city initiates an appeal, the city shall be exempt
from the payment of fees.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.88.030 Filing an appeal.
All appeals shall be submitted in writing, identifying the action being
appealed and specifically stating the basis or grounds of the appeal. Appeals
shall be filed within ten business days following the date of determination or
action for which an appeal is made and shall be accompanied by a filing fee as
established by city council resolution. Appeals shall be submitted to the city
clerk. The filing of an appeal shall stay the issuance of subsequent permit(s)
including, but not limited to, grading and building permits.
(Ord. 623 § 6, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.88.040 Notice and schedule of appeal hearings.
Unless otherwise stated herein or agreed upon by the person filing the appeal
and the applicant, appeal hearings should be conducted within forty-five days
from the date of appeal submittal. Notice of hearing for the appeal shall be
provided pursuant to noticing requirements of
Chapter 21.86.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.88.050 Appeal hearing and action.
Each appeal shall be considered de novo (new), and the appeal authority may
reverse, modify or affirm the decision in whole or in part. In taking its
action on an appeal, the appeal authority shall state the basis for its action.
The appeal authority may modify, delete, or add such conditions as it deems
necessary. The appeal authority may also refer the matter back to the original
approving authority for further action.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.90
PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS
Sections:
   
21.90.010   Purpose.
   
21.90.020   Effective date and effect of permit.
   
21.90.030   Permit time limits.
   
21.90.040   Permit extension.
   
21.90.050   Exercising permits.
   
21.90.060   Phased construction.
   
21.90.070   Permit to run with land.
   
21.90.080   Permit on site during construction.
21.90.010 Purpose.
This chapter identifies the effective date of permit approvals and provides
requirements (including time limits) for permit implementation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.020 Effective date and effect of permit.
   (a)   Effective Date.
      (1)   Generally, the action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a
permit authorized by this title shall be effective on the eleventh calendar day
after the date of action, immediately following expiration of the ten-day
appeal period. However, where the last of the specified number of days falls on
a weekend or city holiday, the time limit of the appeal shall extend to the end
of the next working day.
      (2)   Legislative actions of the city council normally become effective
thirty days from the date of final action and may not be appealed. Therefore,
administrative and quasi-judicial permits that are processed in conjunction
with (or that are contingent upon) a legislative action shall not be acted upon
until the effective date of the required legislative action. Permit(s) shall
not be issued until the effective date of required permit.
   (b)   Effect of Permit. The approval of a land use or development permit
authorizes the applicant to proceed with the proposed project upon the
effective date of the permit, subject to all conditions or restrictions imposed
by the approving authority. However, all other permits, licenses, certificates
and other grants of approval to which the proposed development project is
subject must be secured before the development or use may commence.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.030 Permit time limits.
Unless conditions of approval or other provisions of this title establish a
different time limit, any permit or approval not exercised within one year from
the date of final approval shall expire and become null and void.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.040 Permit extension.
   (a)   The period within which the exercise of a permit must occur may be
extended by the same approving authority that granted the original permit. An
application for extension shall be filed not less than thirty days prior to the
expiration date of the permit, along with appropriate fees and necessary
submittal materials pursuant to
Chapter 21.84.
   (b)   The term of a temporary use permit may not be extended.
   (c)   The approval of an extension extends the expiration date for one year
from the original permit date. No additional extensions shall be granted for a
permit which has been active for a period of two years, unless otherwise
provided for in the conditions of approval or by this title.
   (d)   The permit, as extended, may be conditioned to comply with any
development standards that may have been enacted since the permit was initially
approved.
   (e)   The extension may be granted only when the designated approving
authority finds that the original permit findings can be made and that there
are changing circumstances or that there has been diligent pursuit to exercise
the permit that warrants such extension.
   (f)   Extensions related to the terms of nonconforming uses and structures
are governed by Article X,
Chapter 21.130 and by Article VIII,
Chapter 21.114.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.050 Exercising permits.
   (a)   The exercise of a permit occurs when the property owner has performed
substantial work and incurred substantial liabilities in good faith reliance
upon such permit(s). Unless otherwise provided by law, such exercise of a
permit constitutes the vested right to complete the work authorized by the
permit. A permit may be otherwise exercised by a condition of the permit or
corresponding legal agreement that specifies that other substantial efforts or
expenditures constitutes exercise of the permit.
   (b)   Unless otherwise provided, permits that have not been exercised prior
to a zoning code amendment which makes the approved use or structure of the
permit nonconforming shall automatically be deemed invalid on the effective
date of the zoning code amendment.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.060 Phased construction.
For projects that involve construction in phases, the time periods for the
phases may be stated in the conditions of the permit to avoid a lapse of
progressive development following the completion of the first or preceding
phase.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.070 Permit to run with land.
   (a)   Rule. Land use and development permits and approvals granted pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable upon a change of
ownership of the site, business, service, use or structures, provided that the
use and conditions of the original permit or approval are fully complied with,
and the project is not modified or enlarged/expanded.
   (b)   Exception. The home occupation permit is personal to the resident
named on the permit and valid only for the occupation to be conducted by the
resident at the location stated on the permit. The home occupation permit is
not transferable to another person or site and shall not run with the land.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.90.080 Permit on site during construction.
A copy of all land use and development permits (including all corresponding
stamped-approved plans) authorizing construction shall be kept on site at all
times during construction.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.92
PERMIT MODIFICATION AND REVOCATION
Sections:
   
21.92.010   Modification.
   
21.92.020   Revocation.
21.92.010 Modification.
   (a)   Any person holding a permit granted under this title may request a
modification or amendment to that permit. For the purpose of this section, the
modification of a permit may include modification of the terms of the permit
itself, project design, or the waiver or alteration of conditions imposed in
the granting of the permit.
   (b)   If the community development director determines that a proposed
project action is not in substantial conformance with the original approval,
the community development director shall notify the property owner of the
requirement to submit a permit modification application for consideration and
action by the same approving authority as the original permit.
   (c)   A permit modification may be granted only when the approving authority
makes all findings required for the original approval, and the additional
finding that there are changed circumstances sufficient to justify the
modification of the approval.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.92.020 Revocation.
   (a)   Purpose. This section provides for the revocation of any land use or
development permit granted under this title.
   (b)   Revocation or Modification of a Permit for Cause. A permit may be
revoked or modified for cause as provided by the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Grounds for revocation. A permit may be revoked upon a finding of
any of the following grounds:
         (A)   The permit was obtained or extended by false, misleading or
incomplete information.
         (B)   One or more of the conditions upon which the permit was approved
have been violated, or have not been complied with.
         (C)   The use or development is being conducted in a manner
detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare, or such use or development
constitutes a nuisance in accordance with this title.
      (2)   Initiation of action. The revocation of a permit may be initiated
by any of the city department. The responsible department shall specify in
writing to the permittee the basis upon which the action to revoke the permit
is to be evaluated during the hearing to revoke.
   (c)   Revocation Hearing.
      (1)   A public hearing is required for any action to revoke a permit. The
original approving authority for the subject permit shall hold the hearing. The
hearing shall be noticed in the same manner required for the granting of the
original permit.
      (2)   At its discretion, the designated approving authority may modify or
delete the conditions of approval or add new conditions of approval in lieu of
revoking a permit in order to address the issues raised by the revocation
hearing.
      (3)   An action on a revocation is subject to appeal in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 21.88.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.94
ZONING ORDINANCE INTERPRETATION (EXCLUDES USE INTERPRETATIONS)
Sections:
   
21.94.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.94.020   Applicability.
   
21.94.030   Determination.
   
21.94.040   Record of administrative interpretations.
21.94.010 Purpose and intent.
The zoning ordinance interpretation process establishes a means to clarify any
ambiguity in the regulations of this title, and to ensure consistent
interpretation and application of this title. With the exception of
interpretation of use provisions, the community development director has the
authority to interpret the zoning ordinance. Authority and procedures for the
interpretation of use provisions are contained in
Chapter 21.106.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.94.020 Applicability.
An administrative zoning ordinance interpretation can be requested or applied
to the following provisions:
   (1)   Development standards applicable to a particular zoning district or
use.
   (2)   Zoning boundaries.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.94.030 Determination.
An administrative zoning ordinance interpretation shall be determined after the
community development director reviews the pertinent facts and establishes the
intent of the particular provision. The determination shall comply with
applicable rules of interpretation listed in Section
21.12.030.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.94.040 Record of administrative interpretations.
Once the community development director has identified the ambiguity and
considered relevant information, an official interpretation shall be
established in writing and shall cite the provisions being interpreted,
together with an explanation of the meaning or applicability of the provision
(s) in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for
interpretation. All recorded interpretations shall be provided to the city's
planning agencies and applicable city departments within thirty days of the
determination.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.96
ZONING CLEARANCE/PLAN CHECK
Sections:
   
21.96.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.96.020   Applicability.
   
21.96.030   Findings and conditions.
   
21.96.040   Issuance.
21.96.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of the zoning clearance/plan check process is to ensure that all
proposed new and modified uses and structures that do not require any
discretionary actions or approvals subject to this title otherwise comply with
applicable provisions of this title. The zoning clearance is an administrative
review action undertaken by the community development director. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.96.020 Applicability.
An administrative zoning clearance is required for the following actions not
requiring any discretionary actions or approvals pursuant to this title:
   (1)   Issuance of a business license for a new use, change in use, or
expansion of an existing use.
   (2)   Issuance of building permit for any structure, including signs.
   (3)   Issuance of building or similar permits for exterior mechanical
equipment, air conditioning and/or filtration units, attic ventilators, roof-
mounted fans and gable-end fans, and windmill systems.
   (4)   Initial paving, resurfacing and/or restriping of off-street parking
lots which alters the number and/or configuration of parking spaces or
corresponding landscape planters for multi-family and non-residential uses.
   (5)   Recycling facilities as specified in
Chapter 21.50.
   (6)   Approval of exterior mechanical equipment plans for residential
structures, as described in Section
21.18.050.
   (7)   Approval of the co-location of a wireless telecommunication facility,
provided such co-location meets the requirements set forth in Section
21.46.030(d).
   (8)   Review any residential development that does not require a public
hearing for compliance with the zoning code. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord.
612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.96.030 Findings and conditions.
Zoning clearance shall be granted only when the community development director
finds the proposed use or development action to be in conformance with all
applicable provisions of this title and other adopted policies of the city. The
community development director may modify plans in whole or in part, apply
conditions of approval, or require guarantees to ensure compliance with
applicable provisions of this title. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.96.040 Issuance.
The authorized signature of the community development director on a designated
form, or a stamp approval on a set of plans, shall signify approval of a zoning
clearance. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.98
HOME OCCUPATION PERMIT
Sections:
   
21.98.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.98.020   Applicability/permit requirement.
   
21.98.030   Finding and conditions.
   
21.98.040   Permit issuance.
21.98.010 Purpose and intent.
The home occupation permit allows limited low-intensity commercial and office
uses to be established within a residential zoning district consistent with
established criteria that ensure compatibility with surrounding residential
uses and character.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.98.020 Applicability/permit requirement.
A home occupation permit is required prior to operating any commercial or
office-related use within a residential neighborhood or zoning district,
residential structure, or permitted accessory structure.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.98.030 Finding and conditions.
   (a)   Prior to issuance of a home occupation permit, the public safety/code
enforcement officer shall find that the property is used primarily as a place
of residence and is not in violation of any portion of the Municipal Code.
   (b)   The following conditions shall be imposed as part of any home
occupation permit to ensure that the use of the property is consistent with the
residential character of the neighborhood:
      (1)   No persons other than the residents of the premises shall work on
the premises in connection with the home occupation.
      (2)   There shall be no sale of goods or products to customers or other
customer activity on the premises.
      (3)   The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial
vehicles for the delivery of materials to or from the premises.
      (4)   No activity upon the premises related to the home occupation will
violate the city's residential noise standards.
      (5)   No display of any sign visible from the exterior of the home shall
be permitted indicating the presence of a home occupation therein.
      (6)   Parking of vehicles on the site or in the vicinity of the home
occupation not substantially utilized by resident for personal purposes, but
rather, used in connection with the home occupation, is prohibited.
      (7)   No display of any kind shall be visible from the exterior of the
building.
      (8)   There shall be no traffic to or from the premises by customers,
salesmen, repairmen, service vehicles, delivery persons, messengers, or others
beyond the amount of such traffic incidental to residential uses.
      (9)   Alterations of the premises are not permitted, including entrance
or exit ways specifically provided in the dwelling or on the premises for the
conduct of the home occupation.
      (10)   The conduct of a home occupation shall not interfere with the
maintenance of the required parking spaces within the garage of the residence.
      (11)   No more than one room in a dwelling unit, or the maintenance of an
office open to the general public, shall be used in connection with the home
occupation.
      (12)   No hazardous materials shall be stored or utilized.
      (13)   There shall be no generation or creation of any radio, television
or computer interference or any vibration, noise, or odor not normally
associated with the residential use.
      (14)   There shall be complete conformity to the provisions of the La
Mirada Municipal Code adopted or as may be amended by the city.
   (c)   The community development director may impose additional conditions
necessary to ensure that the home occupation does not substantially or
materially change the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.98.040 Permit issuance.
   (a)   An authorized signature of the community development director on the
completed home occupation permit application form shall signify issuance of the
permit. Such permit shall only become valid after the designated ten-day appeal
period has expired.
   (b)   The home occupation may not begin operation until a business license
has been obtained.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.100
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT
Sections:
   
21.100.010   Purpose.
   
21.100.020   Applicability/permit requirement.
   
21.100.030   Outdoor display.
   
21.100.040   Temporary use permit processing.
   
21.100.050   Findings and conditions of approval.
   
21.100.060   Permit issuance.
   
21.100.070   Insurance deposit.
   
21.100.080   Permit suspension.
21.100.010 Purpose.
The purpose of a temporary use permit is to regulate those uses and activities
of a temporary nature which may affect the public peace, health, safety, and
general welfare.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.020 Applicability/permit requirement.
   (a)   A temporary use permit is required prior to the construction or
operation of any facility or use associated with the following activities:
      (1)   The following activities may be permitted for a maximum period of
four days within a ninety-day period at any one location for a given applicant.
         (A)   Exhibits, demonstrations or sales of goods, equipment,
merchandise or services.
         (B)   Aircraft, helicopter, hot air balloon and parachutist
demonstrations and landings.
         (C)   Promotional events.
         (D)   Halloween haunted houses.
         (E)   Art and craft shows and exhibits.
         (F)   Health and safety services, demonstration and training.
         (G)   Revivals.
      (2)   Patriotic, historic or similar displays or exhibits adjacent to
commercial buildings, parking areas, or sidewalks and special outdoor holiday
sales or displays may be permitted for a maximum period of fifteen days within
a ninety-day period at any one location for a given applicant.
      (3)   Carnivals, circuses, fairs, rodeos, pony riding, or similar
traveling amusement enterprises may be permitted for a maximum period of seven
days or three weekends of operation within a one hundred eighty-day period at
any one location for a given applicant.
   (b)   The community development director, upon consulting with the permit
review board, may approve other similar temporary uses in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and title. Any request to exceed the specified time
limits for temporary uses herein shall require a conditional use permit
pursuant to
Chapter 21.110.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.030 Outdoor display.
Any outdoor display of goods associated with a temporary promotional or sales
event shall comply with the outdoor display standards set forth in Sections
21.20.060 and
21.22.050.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.040 Temporary use permit processing.
A temporary use permit application shall be submitted to the finance and
community development department no less than forty-five days prior to the
proposed commencement date of the temporary use. Within twenty days from
receipt of a complete application, the permit review board shall approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the temporary use permit application. No public
hearing shall be required.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.050 Findings and conditions of approval.
   (a)   Findings. A temporary use permit shall be granted only when the permit
review board finds that the proposed activity complies with all of the
following criteria:
      (1)   The temporary use or activity is in harmony with the various
elements and objectives of the city's general plan;
      (2)   The temporary use or activity complies with all applicable
standards of the zoning ordinance with respect to the location of the proposed
activity;
      (3)   The temporary use or activity will not be detrimental to persons or
properties adjacent to or in the vicinity of the proposed location of the
activity; and
      (4)   Provisions for adequate traffic circulation, off-street parking and
pedestrian safety have been provided and will be maintained during the
operation of the use or activity.
   (b)   Conditions. The permit review board may impose such terms, conditions
and restrictions upon the operation or conduct of the use or activity as deemed
necessary or expedient to protect the public peace, health, safety, morals, or
welfare of the citizens of the city. Such conditions may include a requirement
for temporary fencing. A notice of decision with written record of findings and
conditions shall be mailed to the applicant in accordance with provisions of
Section
21.84.090.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.060 Permit issuance.
An authorized signature of the community development director on the completed
temporary use permit application form, along with applicable conditions, shall
signify issuance of the permit. Such permit shall only become valid after the
designated ten-day appeal period has expired.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.070 Insurance deposit.
The permit review board may impose the following insurance conditions on any
temporary use permit approval.
   (1)   Site clean up. A cash deposit may be required to ensure clean up of
the site following the event. If the applicant fails to clean up the site to
its original condition within seven days from the termination of the permit,
the city may apply the applicant's deposit for the payment of all costs
associated with site clean up.
   (2)   Liability. Liability insurance may be required in compliance with the
city's insurance requirements in effect at the time of permit issuance. Such
condition is mandatory if the temporary use or activity is conducted on public
property.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.100.080 Permit suspension.
   (a)   Immediate Suspension. Temporary use permits issued in accordance with
provisions of this chapter may be immediately and permanently suspended for the
protection of public health, safety, or welfare. If the city manager finds that
the use is being conducted in a manner that constitutes an immediate threat to
the public health, safety, or welfare, the temporary use permit shall be
immediately suspended. Within twenty-four hours, the city manager shall serve a
notice of suspension to the business address or location of the subject use.
The notice shall identify the basis for suspension and opportunity to contest
the suspension. The written request for hearing shall be submitted to the city
clerk within two days from the notice date. If the suspension is contested, a
hearing shall be scheduled with the city council at the next regularly
scheduled city council meeting. Notice of the final decision shall be mailed to
the permittee.
   (b)   Suspension Upon Notice. If the temporary use or activity is being
conducted in violation of the permit conditions or there has been a material
misrepresentation in the application, the city manager may provide written
notice of the violation. The notice shall specify that immediate compliance is
required, and that failure to do so within the time set forth therein will
result in suspension of the permit. If the permittee fails to comply with the
notice, the permit shall be suspended in accordance with the dates on the
violation notice. The suspension is deemed permanent unless contested by filing
a written request for hearing with the city clerk within two business days from
the date of suspension. If the suspension is contested, a hearing shall be
scheduled with the city council at the next regularly scheduled council
meeting. Notice of the final decision shall be mailed to the permittee.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.102
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUSTMENT
Sections:
   
21.102.010   Purpose.
   
21.102.020   Applicability/permit requirement.
   
21.102.030   Special noticing requirements.
   
21.102.040   Required findings.
   
21.102.050   Conditions.
   
21.102.060   Permit issuance.
21.102.010 Purpose.
The administrative adjustment process is established to grant the community
development director with the authority to take actions on requests for minor
modifications or adjustments to certain requirements of this title, where such
requests constitute a reasonable use of property not permissible under the
literal or strict interpretation of regulations, and where it can be shown that
such modification or adjustment meets the intent of this title and the general
plan, serves the public interest, and will not result in any adverse impacts on
the subject or surrounding properties. An administrative adjustment may not be
approved for uses or activities not otherwise expressly authorized by this
title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.102.020 Applicability/permit requirement.
   (a)   An administrative adjustment application may be accepted whenever any
one of the following deviations from the provisions of this title is proposed.
      (1)   A reduction in the dimensions of a side yard or a rear yard up to
ten percent.
      (2)   A reduction in the depth of a front yard not exceeding ten percent
of the requirement.
      (3)   An increase in the percentage of lot coverage by not more than ten
percent of the specified percentage.
      (4)   Any adjustment in the height of a fence or wall.
      (5)   An adjustment by not more than ten percent in the number of parking
or loading spaces required.
      (6)   A decrease of up to ten percent any required landscaping.
      (7)   A decrease of up to ten percent of the required distance between
buildings.
      (8)   Construction of a pylon sign in the CF zone up to thirty-five feet
in height.
   (b)   Modifications in excess or other than those cited in subsection (a)
shall require a variance (see
Chapter 21.108).
   (c)   Except as otherwise specified herein, administrative adjustment
applications shall be processed in accordance with standard administrative
processing procedures.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.102.030 Special noticing requirements.
   (a)   Upon receipt of a complete application for an administrative
adjustment, the community development director shall send a notice of
application review to the applicant and owners of abutting properties. The
notice shall include a description of the project, location, and request, and
shall indicate the date a decision will be made. Such date shall be no later
than ten days following release of the notice. The notice shall also state the
opportunity provided to interested parties to comment on the application prior
to such determination.
   (b)   Once the community development director has made a written
determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the administrative
adjustment application, the community development director shall send a notice
of decision to the applicant and owners of abutting property per Section
21.84.090. The notice of decision shall include information regarding the
action taken, findings and conditions for action as applicable, along with the
appeal period.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.102.040 Required findings.
In granting administrative adjustment approval, the community development
director shall be required to make the following findings:
   (1)   The granting of the administrative adjustment will not be detrimental
to persons or properties adjacent to the subject property, and will not be
detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or general
welfare; and
   (2)   The subject property is physically suitable for the type of
administrative adjustment proposed; and
   (3)   The granting of the administrative adjustment is consistent with the
goals and policies of the general plan; and
   (4)   The granting of the administrative adjustment meets the intent of the
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.102.050 Conditions.
The community development director may impose conditions for the administrative
adjustment to ensure compliance with this section and other applicable
provisions of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.102.060 Permit issuance.
The final action on the administrative adjustment by the community development
director shall constitute approval of the permit. Such permit shall only become
valid after the designated ten-day appeal period has expired.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.103
LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE PERMIT (LDC)
Sections:
   
21.103.010   Purpose.
   
21.103.020   Applicability/permit requirements.
   
21.103.030   Special noticing.
   
21.103.040   Required findings.
   
21.103.050   Conditions.
   
21.103.060   Permit issuance.
   
21.103.070   Permit revocation.
21.103.010 Purpose.
   The large family day care home permit (LDC) process is established to grant
the community development director with the authority to take action on
requests to establish large family day care homes, where the requests
constitute a reasonable use of residential property and where it can be shown
that the use meets the intent of this Title and the general plan, serves the
public's interest, and will not result in any adverse impacts on the subject or
surrounding properties.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
21.103.020 Applicability/permit requirements.
   An LDC is required prior to operating a large family day care home within a
residential zoning district or residential structure.
   (1)   Every applicant for a LDC shall submit a complete city administrative
permit application together with all fees, plans, maps and other required
information. The fee shall be established by resolution of the city council.
   (2)   The applicant for an LDC shall reside in the home where the large
family day care home is proposed.
   (3)   When the applicant is not the property owner of the site where the
large family day care home is proposed, a notarized property owner's affidavit
of consent to operate a large family day care home shall be submitted in
conjunction with the application.
   (4)   The community development director or designee ('Director') shall
conduct the LDC review process, including notification and a public hearing (if
requested by the applicant or affected person) in accordance with California
Health and Safety Code Section 1597.46, or any successor provision.
   (5)   The decision to approve or deny a LDC shall be made by the director
within thirty calendar days of the date of submission of a completed
application. Applications determined to be incomplete shall be returned with
written notification of the deficiency.
   (6)   If the application is denied, the director shall specify the grounds
for the decision in a written notice to the applicant. A copy of the decision
shall be mailed to any affected person who requested a hearing. The applicant
and any affected person shall have the right to appeal the decision to the
planning commission. Appeals shall be filed and processed in accordance with
Chapter 21.88 (“Appeals”) of Title 21 of the city's Municipal Code. However,
noticing for the appeal hearing shall be limited to the affected persons and
the applicant. The appellant shall be responsible for payment of any appeal
fees as established by resolution of the city council. When more than one
appeal is received, the costs shall be evenly divided among the appellants.
   (7)   The applicant and any affected person shall have the right to appeal
the decision of the planning commission to the city council. Appeals shall be
filed and processed in accordance with
Chapter 21.88 ('Appeals') of Title 21 of the city's Municipal Code. However,
noticing for the appeal hearing shall be limited to the affected persons and
the applicant. The appellant shall be responsible for payment of any appeal
fees as established by resolution of the city council. When more than one
appeal is received, the costs shall be evenly divided.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
21.103.030 Special noticing.
   Not less than ten calendar days prior to the date on which the director
intends to issue a decision granting an LDC permit, the director shall provide
notice of the proposed use to all persons owning real property within a one
hundred-foot radius of the property line of the proposed large family day care
home (‘affected persons’). The applicant shall be responsible for providing the
director with all notification materials, including a radius map, and certified
address list sheets with mailing labels. Notices shall be sent via U.S.
Postage, first class mail, in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section
1597.46. If within the ten-day notice period, a request for a hearing is made
by the applicant or any affected person, a hearing shall be held by the
director. The date of the hearing shall be set to occur within ten calendar
days of the hearing request, and notice of the hearing shall be provided to the
applicant and all persons requesting the hearing.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
21.103.040 Required findings.
   In granting an LDC, the community development director shall be required to
make the following findings:
   (1)   The granting of the LDC will not be detrimental to the persons or
properties adjacent to the subject property, and will not be detrimental to the
public interest, health, safety, convenience, or general welfare;
   (2)   The subject property is physically suitable for the operation of a
large family day care home;
   (3)   The granting of the LDC is consistent with the goals and policies of
the general plan, and;
   (4)   The granting of the LDC meets the intent of the provisions of this
Title.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
21.103.050 Conditions.
The following conditions shall be imposed as part of any large family day care
home:
   (1)   The home where the use is being conducted shall conform to the
residential development standards of the zoning district in which it is
located;
   (2)   The use shall be licensed pursuant to California Health and Safety
Code Sections 1597.30 through 1597.621, including any or successor provisions;
   (3)   The operator shall obtain a city business license in accordance with
Title 5 (‘Business Licenses’) of the city’s Municipal Code;
   (4)   There shall be one additional on-site parking space for each
nonresident employee of the large family day care home. The parking shall
comply with this Code;
   (5)   Based upon the potential for noise emanating from the day care home,
as determined by the director, construction of a six-foot-high, solid
decorative fence or wall may be required as a noise mitigation measure. The
fence or wall shall be constructed pursuant to
Chapter 21.62 ('Fences and Walls'), of this Title;
   (6)   Based upon the potential for noise emanating from the large family day
care home, as determined by the director, additional landscaping may be
required as a noise mitigation measure. A landscape plan shall be submitted for
review and approval by the director. Implementation and maintenance of the
landscaping plan shall be required for as long as the large family day care
home is in operation;
   (7)   A large family day care home cannot be located within five hundred
lineal feet of an existing large family day care home, boarding home, or
rooming house, measured property line to property line, except as hereinafter
provided. If an applicant can demonstrate that the concentration of said uses
within five hundred feet will not adversely affect traffic circulation or
create congestion in the vicinity, then the large family day care home may be
located no less than three hundred lineal feet from an existing large family
day care home, boarding home, or rooming house; and
   (8)   Each large family day care home shall comply with the state fire
marshal's fire and life safety standards, as specifically required by the
California Health and Safety Code and the California Building Standards Code.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
21.103.060 Permit issuance.
   A permit, with or without conditions consistent with California Health and
Safety Code Section 1597.46, shall be issued by the director if all the
requirements of this Code are satisfied. Such permit shall only become valid
after the designated ten-day appeal period has expired, or following a final
decision to grant the permit. The permit is non-transferable and may not be
utilized to operate at a different location.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
21.103.070 Permit revocation.
   The Director may hold a hearing to revoke or modify a LDC upon giving notice
no less than ten calendar days prior to the hearing. Notice shall be in writing
and mailed to the permittee, as listed on the permit application, and owner of
the property as shown on the current County of Los Angeles tax rolls. An LDC
may be revoked or modified by the director, following a hearing, under any of
the following circumstances:
   (1)   If conditions giving rise to a complaint that this chapter or permit
condition is being violated, and that is determined to be well-founded by the
director, have not been corrected within fourteen calendar days of the date a
written notice to correct was served, and/or if the operator and/or property
owner has been unable or unwilling to modify its operation to correct the
violation, or to eliminate or reduce the adverse effects of the violation to an
insignificant level;
   (2)   A change in circumstances that would substantially change the
findings, conditions, or requirements set forth in the LDC application and/or
permit;
   (3)   If the information on the LDC application was false or the permit was
obtained by misrepresentation or fraud;
   (4)   If any of the requirements of this chapter, or conditions imposed on a
permit, have not been met and continuously maintained;
   (5)   If the use is being conducted in a manner detrimental to public
health, safety, or welfare, or such use constitutes a nuisance in accordance
the city's Municipal Code;
   (6)   When the Director determines that the use or how it is being
conducted, is in violation of any statute, ordinance, law, or regulation.
(Ord. 651, § 12, 2012).
CHAPTER 21.104
TEMPORARY SIGN PERMIT
Sections:
   
21.104.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.104.020   Applicability/permit requirement.
   
21.104.030   Findings and conditions.
   
21.104.040   Permit issuance.
21.104.010 Purpose and intent.
The temporary sign permit administrative process is established to regulate the
number, size, placement, and frequency of non-permanent signs used for
temporary advertising in accordance with the temporary sign permit provisions
of Section
21.76.060.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.104.020 Applicability/permit requirement.
A temporary sign permit is required prior to outdoor display of all non-exempt
temporary commercial signs for a grand opening, special produce, sale, or event
advertising on the site of the business to which the message pertains.
Temporary signs may also be approved in conjunction with a temporary use permit
application in accordance with the temporary sign provisions of Section
21.76.060.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.104.030 Findings and conditions.
Temporary sign permits may only be granted when the community development
director finds that the proposed sign(s) comply with all applicable temporary
sign regulations. The community development director may impose conditions and/
or require guarantees to ensure conformance with applicable provisions of this
title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.104.040 Permit issuance.
An authorized signature of the community development director on the completed
temporary sign permit application form shall signify issuance of the permit.
Such permit becomes valid after completion of the designated ten-day appeal
period.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.106
ZONING ORDINANCE USE INTERPRETATION
Sections:
   
21.106.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.106.020   Applicability.
   
21.106.030   Determination/required findings.
   
21.106.040   Record of use interpretations.
21.106.010 Purpose and intent.
The zoning ordinance use interpretation process is established to provide a
means to clarify any ambiguity in the use regulations of this title, and to
ensure consistent interpretation and application of this title. The planning
commission has the authority for the interpretation of use provisions.
Interpretation authority and procedures for all other regulations of this title
are listed in
Chapter 21.94.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.106.020 Applicability.
It is recognized that every conceivable use cannot be identified in this title
and that new uses will evolve over time. Therefore, when a use is not
specifically listed in this title, the use may be permitted if the planning
commission determines that the use is similar to other uses listed.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.106.030 Determination/required findings.
In determining the similarity of a proposed use that is not listed in this
title, the planning commission will compare a proposed use and measure it
against those uses that are identified in the applicable zoning district(s). In
order to grant a zoning ordinance use interpretation for a use that is not
listed, the planning commission shall make all of the following findings:
   (1)   The proposed use meets the intent of, and is consistent with the
goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan;
   (2)   The proposed use meets the stated purpose and general intent of the
zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located;
   (3)   The proposed use will not adversely impact the public health, safety,
and general welfare of the city's residents; and
   (4)   The proposed use shares characteristics common with, and is not of
greater intensity, density, or environmental impact, than those uses listed in
the land use zoning district in which it is to be located.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.106.040 Record of use interpretations.
In addition to the standard noticing requirement in Section
21.84.090, all similar use determinations of the planning commission shall be
recorded and filed with the planning department. The record of the official
interpretation shall cite the specific use and required findings. All recorded
interpretations shall be provided to the city's planning agencies and
applicable city departments within thirty days of the determination.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.108
VARIANCE
Sections:
   
21.108.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.108.020   Applicability.
   
21.108.030   Proceedings.
   
21.108.040   Required findings.
   
21.108.050   Conditions.
21.108.010 Purpose and intent.
California Government Code Section 65906 establishes the authority of the city
to grant exception to the development standards and provisions of this title in
cases where, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, the
strict application of this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed
by other property in the vicinity and under identical land use zoning
districts.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.108.020 Applicability.
   (a) A variance application shall be filed whenever any deviation from the
provisions of this title is proposed, except those minor deviations that
qualify for an Administration Adjustment pursuant to Section
21.102 of this Code.
   (b)   Variances may not be approved for uses or activities not otherwise
expressly authorized by this title. A variance is not a substitute for a zone
change, zone text amendment, or conditional use permit.
   (c)   Financial hardship in and of itself does not represent grounds on
which to file a variance application.
(Ord. 618 § 7, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.108.030 Proceedings.
Variance applications shall be processed in accordance with the standard permit
processing provisions of this article.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
Figure 21.108.030 requires Adobe Acrobat Reader.
Figure_21.108.030
21.108.040 Required findings.
The planning commission may approve and/or modify any variance application in
whole or in part, with or without conditions, only if the applicant can
demonstrate to the planning commission that the circumstances of the particular
case can justify making all of the following findings:
   (1)   That there are special circumstances applicable to the property
including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, which do not
generally apply to other property in the same district;
   (2)   That the granting of the minor variance does not constitute a grant of
special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in
the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.108.050 Conditions.
The planning commission may impose conditions for the variance to ensure
compliance with this section and other applicable provisions of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.110
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT
Sections:
   
21.110.010   Purpose.
   
21.110.020   Proceedings.
   
21.110.030   Required findings.
   
21.110.040   Conditions/guarantees.
   
21.110.050   Limited term approval.
   
21.110.060   Permit issuance.
   
21.110.070   Permit must be continuously used.
   
21.110.080   Review for compliance.
21.110.010 Purpose.
   (a)   The city recognizes that certain uses, due to the nature of use,
intensity, or size, require special review to determine if the use proposed, or
the location of that use, is compatible with surrounding uses, or through the
imposition of development and use conditions, can be made compatible with
surrounding uses. The conditional use permit is provided for this purpose.
   (b)   To ensure compatibility with zoning regulations and surrounding
properties, conditional uses require special consideration. The planning
commission is empowered to grant and deny applications for conditional use
permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permit.
   (c)   Applications for conditional use permits may be submitted only for
those uses specified as allowable conditional uses in the applicable zone
district. A conditional use permit is not a substitute for a change of zone or
zoning ordinance text amendment.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.110.020 Proceedings.
Conditional use permit applications shall be processed in accordance with the
standard quasi-judicial permit processing provisions of this article.
Figure 21.110.020 requires Adobe Acrobat Reader.
Figure_21.110.020
21.110.030 Required findings.
Conditional use permits shall be granted only when the planning commission
determines that the proposed use or activity complies with all of the following
findings.
   (1)   The use is one conditionally permitted within the subject zone and
complies with the intent of all applicable provisions of this title;
   (2)   The use will not impair the integrity and character of the zone in
which it is to be located;
   (3)   The subject site is physically suitable for the type of land use being
proposed;
   (4)   The use is compatible with any land uses presently on the subject
property;
   (5)   The use will be compatible with existing and future land uses within
the zone and the general area in which the proposed use is to be located;
   (6)   Adequate provisions for water, sanitation, and public utilities and
services are available to ensure that the use will not be detrimental to public
health and safety;
   (7)   Adequate provisions for public access are available to serve the use;
   (8)   The use is consistent with the general plan; and
   (9)   The use will not be detrimental to the public interest, health,
safety, convenience, or welfare.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.110.040 Conditions/guarantees.
The planning commission may impose conditions and/or require guarantees for the
conditional use permit to ensure compliance with this section and other
applicable provisions of this title, and to prevent adverse or detrimental
impact to the surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.110.050 Limited term approval.
The designated approving authority may approve a condition specifying a term
for which the conditional use permit is valid. The approval may be contingent
upon the written acceptance and continued observance of specified conditions,
including, but not limited to any of the following:
   (1)   Substantial conformity to approved plans and drawings;
   (2)   Guarantees as to compliance with the terms of approval;
   (3)   Dedication of and improvement of streets and other public facilities;
   (4)   Special yard, planting, fences or walls;
   (5)   Limitations on signs; and
   (6)   Limitations as to the time of day during which specified activities
may be conducted.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.110.060 Permit issuance.
The final action on the conditional use permit by the planning commission shall
constitute approval of the permit. Such permit shall only become valid after
the designated ten-day appeal period has expired.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.110.070 Permit must be continuously used.
Uses operating pursuant to an approved conditional use permit that are
abandoned or otherwise determined to be idle for a period of one hundred eighty
continuous days shall be automatically subject to permit revocation procedures
pursuant to the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.110.080 Review for compliance.
Upon reasonable notice, the city may conduct an investigation to ensure that
the permittee is maintaining the use as applied for and has not converted or
modified the use.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.112
CERTIFICATE OF COMPATIBILITY
Sections:
   
21.112.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.112.020   Applicability.
   
21.112.025   Planning commission recommendation.
   
21.112.030   Required findings.
   
21.112.040   Conditions.
   
21.112.050   Permit issuance.
   
21.112.060   Permit term.
21.112.010 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The certificate of compatibility provides a means to review new
commercial and industrial structures as well as the expansion of existing
commercial and industrial structures, for design and site compatibility with
adjacent structures within the subject site area.
   (b)   For the purpose of this chapter, “compatible” shall mean consistent
and harmonious in terms of scale, massing, use of landscaping, and quality of
workmanship and materials. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 623 § 7, 2008;
Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.112.020 Applicability.
   (a) When Required. A certificate of compatibility is required in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Construction of a new commercial or industrial building where the
gross floor area exceeds five thousand square feet.
      (2)   An expansion of an existing commercial or industrial building where
the expansion exceeds fifty percent of the structure’s existing gross floor
area.
   (b)   Processing. Applications shall be processed in accordance with the
standard permit processing provisions of this article. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part),
2025; Ord. 623 § 8, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.112.025 Planning commission recommendation.
The planning commission recommendation to the city council on all certificate
of compatibility applications shall be in the form of an adopted resolution for
approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the application. (Ord. 736,
§ 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 656 § 4 (part), 2012).
21.112.030 Required findings.
   To grant a certificate of compatibility, the city council shall consider the
recommendation by the planning commission and shall make all of the following
findings by adoption of a formal resolution:
   1.   The proposed structure or addition is designed so that it complies with
the development standards of the zoning code in which it is to be located and
the city's general plan;
   2.   The proposed structure or addition complies with the most recent
edition of the California Building Code as adopted and amended by the city;
applicable public works development standards, policies and requirements;
standards, and any other applicable regulations, policies or standards;
   3.   The proposed structure or addition, as conditioned, is not economically
or aesthetically detrimental to existing or previously approved uses or
structures within the surrounding area; and
   4.   The proposed structure or addition is aesthetically compatible with the
existing uses and structures within the surrounding area, and complies with any
applicable design guidelines, policies and/or standards established for the
purposes of the certificate of compatibility, including application review and
approval. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 656 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 623 § 9,
2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.112.040 Conditions.
The city council may impose conditions upon a proposed development where the
council determines that such conditions are necessary to further the objectives
of this title and/or the general plan, and are in harmony with the intent,
purpose, and spirit of this chapter, and/or where such additional requirements
are deemed essential to maintain the character and aesthetic quality of the
surrounding area, to avoid adverse impacts on surrounding properties, to
provide for privacy protection, and/or to protect the safety and general
welfare of the community. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 656 § 4 (part),
2012; Ord. 623 § 10, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.112.050 Permit issuance.
The final action on the certificate of compatibility by the city council shall
constitute approval of the permit. Such permit shall become valid after the
designated ten-day appeal period has expired. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord.
656 § 4 (part), 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.112.060 Permit term.
Unless otherwise specified in project conditions of approval, the certificate
of compatibility shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of final
action on the permit. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
CHAPTER 21.114
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Sections:
   
21.114.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.114.020   Applicability.
   
21.114.030   Application requirements.
   
21.114.040   Proceedings.
   
21.114.050   Considerations in review of application.
   
21.114.060   Findings and conditions.
   
21.114.070   Expiration.
   
21.114.080   Permit issuance.
21.114.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter establishes the procedure for site plan review. The purpose of
site plan review is to ensure that development proposals respect the physical
and environmental characteristics of the site on which they are located, are
compatible with and complement surrounding properties, and meet all
requirements of this title and any other applicable provisions of the Municipal
Code.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.020 Applicability.
Site plan review shall be required for building additions or modifications to
single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, commercial structures,
industrial structures, the installation of an electronic billboard or the
conversion of a non-electronic billboard to an electronic billboard.
   Additions to single-family dwellings are subject to Section
21.112 (Certificate of compatibility) if the combined total floor area ratio
(FAR) of the existing and new floor area exceeds the maximum FAR standard of
the residential district in which the dwelling is located pursuant to Table
21.18.040 (Floor Area Ratio Standards).
   (b)   In circumstances whereby no other discretionary application or review
is required pursuant to the provisions of this title, site plan review shall be
conducted by the community development director, and no public hearing shall be
required.
   (c)   In circumstances whereby a separate discretionary application or
review is required, site plan review shall be conducted concurrent with that
discretionary application, as set forth in Section
21.82.030.
(Ord. 722, § 11, 2022; Ord. 623 § 11, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.030 Application requirements.
The application form for site plan review shall specify the information,
materials, and exhibits to be submitted to allow for comprehensive review by
the community development director.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.040 Proceedings.
   (a)   Standards of Review. Site plan review shall be conducted after an
application has been deemed complete (
Chapter 21.84). Upon receiving a complete application, the community
development director or designee shall consider the location, design, site plan
configuration, setbacks from all property lines, land coverage, building height
and bulk, landscaping, access, parking, circulation, and the overall effect of
the proposed project upon its surroundings, as set forth in Section
21.114.050 below. Site plan review shall be conducted by utilizing applicable
general plan policies, any applicable specific plan or planned development,
adopted development standards, design guidelines, and other applicable city
ordinances and regulations.
   (b)   Modifications and Action. Within fifteen days of receiving a completed
application, the community development director or designee shall review the
application for compliance with the provision of this chapter and title, and
shall prepare and mail to the applicant a site plan review letter specifying
any required modifications. The applicant shall be provided the opportunity to
make the required modifications and to provide revised materials to the
community development director for subsequent review. Within fifteen days of
receiving revised materials, the community development director shall act to
approve the application, approve the application subject to conditions and
modifications, or deny the application.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.050 Considerations in review of application.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes the criteria that will be used by
the community development director or designee to focus site plan review and
assist in the development of conditions and required modifications. These
criteria shall be used in combination with the requirements set forth in this
title for the zoning district in which the project is located.
   (b)   General.
      (1)   The development shall create a pleasant character and be harmonious
with the past development.
      (2)   The development shall minimize disruption of existing natural
features such as trees and other vegetation and natural ground forms.
      (3)   The development shall illustrate a design compatibility with the
desired developing character of the surrounding area.
   (c)   Building and Site Planning Relationships.
      (1)   The building site shall avoid crowding structures and allow for a
functional use of space between buildings.
      (2)   The building or buildings shall reflect attention to shadows,
changing climatic conditions, and noise impacts.
      (3)   The building design exterior facade and architectural features
(including window types, entrance areas, porches, chimneys, and the use of
building modulation) shall complement and blend in with the surrounding area.
      (4)   Building height, profile of the structures, building materials,
finishes, and colors on exterior surfaces, and roof designs and materials shall
complement the surrounding area.
   (d)   Site Design.
      (1)   The orientation of building(s) and site layout shall be compatible
with the surrounding area, including entrances, parking areas, driveways,
landscape areas, setbacks, trash enclosures, and common and private recreation
areas (multiple-family development).
      (2)   The scale and bulk of building(s) shall be compatible with the
surrounding area.
      (3)   Pedestrian walkways and paving materials shall be clearly indicated
in the circulation design.
      (4)   Loading and unloading areas shall provide for adequate ingress and
egress.
      (5)   Lighting for safety of pedestrians and vehicles shall be integrated
into the design elements of the building(s) and landscaping.
      (6)   Art work, including sculpture, murals, fountains, and other
ornamental or decorative features for scale, design, shall be compatible with
the surrounding properties.
   (e)   Circulation.
      (1)   The development shall minimize impacts on surrounding properties
and streets and accommodate emergency vehicles.
      (2)   The development shall create a circulation system that avoids
conflicts among vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   The development shall accommodate individuals with physical
disabilities via the provision of conveniently located handicapped parking
stalls, ramps and the like.
   (f)   Landscaping.
      (1)   The development shall design landscaping to create a pleasing
appearance from both within and off the site.
      (2)   The development shall ensure landscaping accommodates adequate
sight distances for motorists and pedestrians entering and exiting the site and
does not interfere with circulation effectiveness.
   (g)   Buffering.
      (1)   Adequate screening shall be provided for exterior trash and storage
areas and service yards from view of adjacent streets and structures in a
manner that is compatible with building site design.
      (2)   Adequate buffering shall be provided to minimize the noise within
the project as well as noise created by the proposed project (traffic, air
conditioning, use, etc.) that may negatively impact the surrounding area.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.060 Findings and conditions.
A site plan review application shall be granted only when the community
development director finds the proposed use or development action to be in
conformance with all applicable provisions of this chapter and title and other
adopted policies of the city. The community development director may modify
plans in whole or in part, apply conditions of approval, or require guarantees
to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter and title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.070 Expiration.
An approval of a site plan shall become null and void if not exercised within
the time specified in said approval, or if no date is specified, twenty-four
months from the date of approval of the site plan. Upon written request of the
applicant, the authority that gave final approval to the original request may
extend the time at which such approval expires.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.114.080 Permit issuance.
The final action on the site plan review by the community development director
shall constitute approval of the permit. Such permit shall only become valid
after the designated ten-day appeal period has expired.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.116
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Sections:
   
21.116.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.116.020   Applicability.
   
21.116.030   Proceedings.
   
21.116.040   Required findings.
   
21.116.050   Conditions.
   
21.116.060   Action/adoption - rezoning of property.
21.116.010 Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The planned unit development allows for the adoption of special land
use regulations and development standards for properties in lieu of the
standards for citywide zoning districts. The planned unit development (PUD) is
a separate zoning district (see
Chapter 21.36).
   (b)   The planned unit development is intended to provide a process for
consideration of development proposals substantially improved by modifications
of conventional development regulations, provided the development is consistent
with the general plan.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.116.020 Applicability.
The planned unit development zoning district may be applied to areas under
single or unified ownership or control which are sufficiently large to allow
for overall planning and design in detail. A minimum planning area of one acre
shall be required.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.116.030 Development regulations.
   (a)   Maximum Density and Intensity. The maximum residential density and
nonresidential intensity of development shall not exceed the limits established
for the applicable properties in the city general plan.
   (b)   Minimum Area and Dimensions of Lots. The minimum required area, width,
and depth of individual lots within the PUD area shall be established as part
of the conditions of approval. The following factors will be considered in the
establishment of such requirements:
      (1)   Topography.
      (2)   Proposed lot coverage.
      (3)   The location and amount of common open space areas.
      (4)   Aesthetic relationships between individual units, buildings, and
open space.
   (c)   Yards and Setbacks. Minimum front, side, and rear yard requirements
shall be established as part of the conditions of approval, and building lines
shall be indicated on the approved site plan map.
   (d)   Maximum Building Height. Maximum building heights shall be established
as part of the conditions of approval. In no event, however, shall the maximum
height of residential buildings exceed thirty-five feet, or nonresidential or
mixed-use buildings exceed fifty feet. The planning commission shall take into
account surrounding properties and uses in establishing the maximum building
height.
   (e)   Parking and Loading. Parking and loading facilities shall be provided
as set forth in
Chapter 21.68.
   (f)   Landscaping. A comprehensive landscape plan shall be approved as part
of the conditions of approval. Required landscape coverage shall equal that
required in this title for the use or uses most similar to that/those proposed
for the PUD.
   (g)   Signs. A comprehensive sign plan shall be prepared. Sign regulations
shall those applicable to the CO zoning district, unless the planning
commission establishes alternative regulations through the conditions of
approval, taking into consideration the uses proposed and surrounding land
uses.
   (h)   Other Design Components. As part of the conditions of approval for the
PUD, the planning commission may establish development standards for common and
private open space, pedestrian access to recreational amenities, common open
space areas, privacy, and any other design or development component the
commission believes requires standards to achieve high design quality and
functionality of the development.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.116.040 Proceedings.
Except as provided below, planned unit development applications shall be
processed in accordance with the standard processing provisions of this
article:
   (1)   Pre-application conference requirement. Prior to filing a formal
application for a planned unit development zone change and permit, the
applicant shall submit preliminary plans to the community development director
for review for consistency with the general plan, appropriateness for the area
proposed, and general overall use and design concepts.
   (2)   Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission
recommendation to city council on all planned unit development applications
shall be in the form of an adopted resolution for approval, approval with
modifications, or denial of the application.
   (3)   Modifications. If the city council proposes any substantial
modification to the specific plan not previously considered by the planning
commission, the council shall refer the matter back to the commission for
consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the commission
to act within forty days of receiving the council's request shall provide the
council with the authority to act without the recommendation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.116.050 Required findings.
To grant approval of a planned unit development zone change, the city council
shall be required to make the following findings:
   (1)   The proposed development is consistent with the general plan.
   (2)   The location, design, and proposed uses are compatible with the
character of existing development in the vicinity.
   (3)   The proposed development will be well integrated into its setting.
   (4)   Provision is made for both public and private open spaces at least
equivalent to that required by the superceded district regulations.
   (5)   Suitable provision is made, where appropriate, for schools, parks, and
playgrounds, and for the protection and maintenance of private areas reserved
for common use.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.116.060 Conditions.
The planning commission may recommend and the city council impose conditions
and/or require guarantees for the planned unit development to ensure compliance
with this chapter and other applicable provisions of this title, and to prevent
adverse or detrimental impact to surrounding neighborhoods. The city council
shall require appropriate guarantees to ensure the accomplishment of any public
improvements, such grants of easement and development rights, and such
arrangements for maintenance of common open spaces as are relevant.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.116.070 Action/adoption - rezoning of property.
Adoption of the planned unit development by ordinance of the city council shall
constitute final action and approval of the permit, including a rezoning of the
subject property to a PUD district.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.117
PRELIMINARY REVIEW OF HOUSING DEVELOPMENT
Sections:
   
21.117.010   Purpose.
   
21.117.020   Applicability.
   
21.117.030   Application processing.
   
21.117.040   Application requirements.
   
21.117.050   Review and decision.
21.117.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to implement the provisions of California
Government Code Section 65941.1, the Housing Crisis Act of 2019, which aims to
increase housing supply by expediting the review process for certain housing
development projects and offering greater certainty by allowing an optional
vesting opportunity through the Preliminary Application process.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.117.020 Applicability.
   (a)   A housing development project shall be subject only to the ordinances,
policies, and standards adopted and in effect when a preliminary application
including all of the information required by this chapter was submitted except
as specified in Government Code Section 65586.5. To be eligible for the
preliminary application process and obtain vesting rights a housing development
project shall consist of one of the following and satisfy all other applicable
provisions of this Chapter:
      (1)   Residential units only (not including hotels) and creates two or
more new dwelling units on a project.
      (2)   Mixed-use developments consisting of residential and nonresidential
uses with at least two-thirds of the square footage designated for residential
use; or
      (3)   Transitional housing or supportive housing.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.117.030 Application processing.
   (a)   The applicant shall submit a preliminary application set forth by this
chapter to establish a project's vested rights.
   (b)    Within 180 days of submitting a complete preliminary application, the
applicant shall submit a Planning Application for the required land use
entitlement required for the project. If the City determines that the Planning
Application is not complete pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, the
applicant shall submit the specific information needed to complete the
application within 90 days of receiving the City's written incomplete notice.
If the applicant does not submit this information within the 90-day period,
then the preliminary application shall expire and have no further force or
effect.
   (c)    Within 30 days of the date that an application is deemed complete for
residential developments proposing 150 units or fewer, and within 60 days for
residential developments proposing greater than 150 units the city has to
inform an applicant that their project is consistent or inconsistent with an
applicable plan, program, policy, ordinance, standard, requirement, or similar
provision.
   (d)    After submittal of all of the required information, if the
development proponent revises the project such that the number of residential
units or square footage of construction changes by 20% or more, exclusive of
any increase resulting from the receipt of a density bonus, incentive,
concession, waiver, or similar provision, the housing development project shall
not be deemed to have submitted a preliminary application until the development
proponent resubmits the required information so that it reflects the revisions.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.117.040 Application requirements.
An applicant for a housing development project shall be deemed to have
submitted a preliminary application upon providing all of the following
information about the proposed project to the City and upon payment of the
permit processing fee:
   (a)   The specific location, including parcel numbers, a legal description,
and site address, if applicable.
   (b)   The existing uses on the project site and identification of major
physical alterations to the property on which the project is to be located.
   (c)   A site plan showing the location on the property, elevations showing
design, color, and material, and the massing, height, and approximate square
footage, of each building that is to be occupied.
   (d)   The proposed land uses by number of units and square feet of
residential and nonresidential development using the categories in the
applicable zoning ordinance.
   (e)   The proposed number of parking spaces.
   (f)   Any proposed point sources of air or water pollutants.
   (g)   Any species of special concern known to occur on the property.
   (h)   Whether a portion of the property is located within any of the
following:
      (1)   A very high fire hazard severity zone, as determined by the
Department of Forestry and Fire Protection pursuant to Section 51178.
      (2)   Wetlands, as defined in the United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Manual, Part 660 FW 2 (June 21, 1993).
      (3)   A hazardous waste site that is listed pursuant to Section 65962.5
or a hazardous waste site designated by the Department of Toxic Substances
Control pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 78760) of Chapter 4 of
Part 2 of Division 45 of the Health and Safety Code.
      (4)   A special flood hazard area subject to inundation by the 1% annual
chance flood (100-year flood) as determined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency in any official maps published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
      (5)   A delineated earthquake fault zone as determined by the State
Geologist in any official maps published by the State Geologist, unless the
development complies with applicable seismic protection building code standards
adopted by the California Building Standards Commission under the California
Building Standards Law (Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13
of the Health and Safety Code), and by any local building department under
Chapter 12.2 (commencing with Section 8875) of Division 1 of Title 2.
      (6)   A stream or other resource that may be subject to a streambed
alteration agreement pursuant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section 1600) of
Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code.
   (i)   Any historic or cultural resources known to exist on the property.
   (j)   The number of proposed below market rate units and their affordability
levels.
   (k)   The number of bonus units and any incentives, concessions, waivers, or
parking reductions requested pursuant to California Government Code Section
65915.
   (l)   Whether any approvals under the Subdivision Map Act, including, but
not limited to, a parcel map, a tentative map, or a condominium map, are being
requested.
   (m)   The applicant's contact information and, if the applicant does not own
the property, consent from the property owner to submit the application.
   (n)   The number of existing residential units on the project site that will
be demolished and whether each existing unit is occupied or unoccupied.
   (o)   A site map showing a stream or other resource that may be subject to a
streambed alteration agreement pursuant to Chapter 6 (commencing with Section
1600) of Division 2 of the Fish and Game Code and an aerial site photograph
showing existing site conditions of environmental site features that would be
subject to regulations by a public agency, including creeks and wetlands.
   (p)   The location of any recorded public easement, such as easements for
storm drains, water lines, and other public rights of way.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.117.050 Review and decision.
   (a)   If a proposed housing development project complies with the
applicable, objective general plan and zoning standards in effect at the time
an application is deemed complete, after the application is deemed complete,
the city shall not conduct more than five hearings, or any other law,
ordinance, or regulation requiring a public hearing in connection with the
approval of that housing development project. If the City continues a hearing
subject to this section to another date, the continued hearing shall count as
one of the five hearings allowed under this section.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
CHAPTER 21.118
SPECIFIC PLAN
Sections:
   
21.118.010   Purpose and intent.
   
21.118.020   Specific plan initiation.
   
21.118.030   Specific plan requirements.
   
21.118.040   Proceedings.
   
21.118.050   Required findings.
   
21.118.060   Action/adoption - rezoning of property.
   
21.118.070   Specific plan amendment.
21.118.010 Purpose and intent.
The specific plan provides a means to establish more specific land use
regulations and design standards for properties requiring special attention and
treatment (see Government Code Sections 65450 through 65457). A specific plan
serves as a policy and regulatory document, with policy direction and project
development concepts consistent with the general plan.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.118.020 Specific plan initiation.
The city council shall identify those portions of the city where a specific
plan is appropriate to meet the purposes of this chapter by adopting a
resolution of intention for a specific plan designation. At the discretion of
the city council, specific plans may be prepared by the city or by persons
representing affected property owners.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.118.030 Specific plan requirements.
   (a)   Relationship to Other Adopted Regulations. Specific plans may either
supplement or supersede all land use regulations applicable to the subject
property, including all previously adopted ordinances, standards, and
guidelines. In the event an inconsistency or conflict exists between standards
adopted within a specific plan and comparable provisions of this title, adopted
infrastructure master plans, or development standards, the standards and
regulations made part of the specific plan shall prevail.
   (b)   Scope of a Specific Plan. Each specific plan shall identify specific
land uses, standards, and criteria necessary for the development, maintenance,
and use of the subject property in compliance with the policies and programs of
the general plan. Each specific plan shall clearly specify how and to what
extent the plan is to improve upon, supplement, or supersede any adopted
ordinance, regulations, and standards. Where not otherwise specifically
referenced and addressed by a specific plan, all adopted ordinances,
regulations, standards, and guidelines of the city shall apply.
   (c)   Content. In addition to the minimum content requirements specified in
Government Code Section 65451, the following shall be included in all specific
plans:
      (1)   Statement of the relationship of the specific plan to the general
plan.
      (2)   Policies for development and standards for regulating development
within the plan area.
      (3)   The proposed land uses for all areas covered by the plan.
      (4)   General site design standards and guidelines for all developments.
      (5)   The location of and types of streets.
      (6)   Public facilities and infrastructure required to serve developments
within the plan area.
      (7)   Landscaping and parking lot treatments.
      (8)   Proposed conservation, open space and/or recreation areas, if any.
      (9)   Any other programs, guidelines or standards appropriate for the
area covered by the plan.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.118.040 Proceedings.
Except as provided below, specific plan applications shall be processed in
accordance with the standard processing provisions of this article:
   (1)   Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission
recommendation to city council on all specific plan applications shall be in
the form of an adopted resolution for approval, approval with modifications, or
denial of the application.
   (2)   Modifications. If the city council proposes any substantial
modification to the specific plan not previously considered by the planning
commission, the council shall refer the matter back to the commission for
consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the commission
to act within forty days of receiving the council's request shall provide the
council with the authority to act without the recommendation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.118.050 Required findings.
The city council shall be required to make the following findings in acting to
approve a specific plan and any amendment thereto:
   (1)   The proposed specific plan is consistent with and provides for the
orderly, systematic, and specific implementation of the general plan.
   (2)   The land use and development regulations within the specific plan are
comparable in breadth and depth to similar zoning regulations contained in this
title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.118.060 Action/adoption - rezoning of property.
Specific plan documents may be adopted by ordinance or resolution of the city
council. The rezoning of the subject property to a SP district shall be adopted
by ordinance of the city council.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.118.070 Specific plan amendment.
Any specific plan may be amended by the same procedure as the specific plan (or
portion thereof) is adopted. The city may initiate amendments to any portion of
a specific plan. The following changes to a specific plan shall require a
specific plan amendment:
   (1)   Changes to the text or maps other than the addition of information
that does not change the effect of any regulation.
   (2)   Changes in any specific plan boundary.
   (3)   Increase or decrease in the specified density for any area.
   (4)   Changes in standards or regulations, including landscaping and design
standards.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.120
ZONING ORDINANCE TEXT/MAP AMENDMENT
Sections:
   
21.120.010   Purpose.
   
21.120.020   Initiation of amendment.
   
21.120.030   Proceedings.
   
21.120.040   Required findings for zoning code amendment.
21.120.010 Purpose.
Government Code Section 65853 allows amendments to any provisions of this
title, including the adoption of new regulations or deletion of existing
regulations, and for changes to the zoning designation on any parcel(s) within
the city. Amendments are considered appropriate in response to changes in city
policies.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.120.020 Initiation of amendment.
Amendments to the provisions of this title may be initiated in any one of the
following manners:
   (1)   Upon resolution of the city council.
   (2)   Upon resolution of the planning commission.
   (3)   Upon application by a property owner or owners of any parcel subject
to requirements of this title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.120.030 Proceedings.
   (a)   General. Except as provided below, applications for zoning code
amendment shall be processed in accordance with the standard processing
provisions of this article.
   (b)   Planning Commission Recommendation. The planning commission shall make
a recommendation to the city council, in the form of an adopted resolution for
approval, approval with modifications, or denial, on all zoning code text and/
or map amendments that achieve any of the following:
      1.   Regulate the use of buildings, structures, and land as between
industry, business, residences, open space, including agriculture, recreation,
enjoyment of scenic beauty, use of natural resources, and other purposes.
      2.   Regulate signs and billboards.
      3.   Regulate the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of
buildings and structures.
      4.   Regulate the size and use of lots, yards, courts, and other open
spaces.
      5.   Regulate the percentage of a lot which may be occupied by a building
or structure.
      6.   Regulate the intensity of land use.
      7.   Establish requirements for off-street parking and loading.
      8.   Establish and maintain building setback lines.
      9.   Create civic districts around civic centers, public parks, public
buildings, or public grounds, and establish regulations for those civic
districts.
   When a proposed zoning code text and/or map amendment does not achieve any
of the above ((b)1 to (b)-9) the action shall not require planning commission
review.
   All resolutions recommending denial of a zoning code text and/or map
amendment shall be placed on the city council agenda as a receive-and-file
item. The commission’s decision shall be considered and no further action by
the city council will be required unless an appeal is filed in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 21.88, or unless at least one council member chooses to set the matter
for hearing.
   (c)   Modifications. If the city council proposes any substantial
modification to the zoning code amendment not previously considered by the
planning commission, the council shall refer the matter back to the commission
for consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the
commission to act within forty days of receiving the council's request shall
provide the council with the authority to act without the recommendation.
   (d)   Adoption. Zoning code map/text amendments shall be adopted by
ordinance of the city council, which constitutes final action.
(Ord. 624 § 12, 2008; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.120.040 Required findings for zoning code amendment.
In acting to approve an amendment to the zoning ordinance text or map, the city
council shall be required to make the following findings:
   (1)   That the proposed zoning ordinance text or map amendment is consistent
with the goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan;
   (2)   That the proposed zoning ordinance text or map amendment will not
adversely affect surrounding properties; and
   (3)   That the proposed zoning ordinance text or map amendment promotes
public health, safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of
this title.
Figure 21.120.040 requires Adobe Acrobat Reader.
Figure_21.120.040
CHAPTER 21.122
GENERAL PLAN TEXT/MAP AMENDMENT
Sections:
   
21.122.010   Purpose.
   
21.122.020   Initiation of amendment.
   
21.122.030   Frequency of general plan amendment.
   
21.122.040   Proceedings.
   
21.122.050   Required findings for general plan amendment.
   
21.122.060   Action/adoption.
21.122.010 Purpose.
Government Code Section 65358 allows for amendments and modifications to the
city's general plan. Amendments are considered appropriate in response to
changes in city policies, economic conditions, and other factors affecting La
Mirada.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.122.020 Initiation of amendment.
A general plan amendment may be initiated in any one of the following manners:
   (1)   Upon resolution of the city council.
   (2)   Upon resolution of the planning commission.
   (3)   Upon application by a property owner or owners of any parcel subject
to the general plan.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.122.030 Frequency of general plan amendment.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 65358, no mandatory element of the general
plan may be amended more frequently than four times during any calendar year.
Subject to that limitation, an amendment may be made at any time and may
include more than one change to the general plan.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.122.040 Proceedings.
Except as provided below, applications for general plan amendment shall be
processed in accordance with the standard processing provisions of this
article.
   (1)   Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission
recommendation to city council on all general plan text and/or map amendment
applications shall be in the form of an adopted resolution for approval,
approval with modifications, or denial of the application.
   (2)   Modifications. If the city council proposes any substantial
modification to the general plan amendment not previously considered by the
planning commission, the council shall refer the matter back to the commission
for consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the
commission to act within forty days of receiving the council's request shall
provide the council with the authority to act without the recommendation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.122.050 Required findings for general plan amendment.
In acting to approve an amendment to the general plan, the city council shall
be required to make the following findings:
   (1)   That the proposed general plan amendment is consistent with all other
goals, policies, and objectives of the general plan;
   (2)   That the proposed general plan amendment will not adversely affect
surrounding properties;
   (3)   That the proposed general plan amendment promotes public health,
safety, and general welfare and serves the goals and purposes of this title;
and
   (4)   That the proposed amendment will not conflict with provisions of this
title or the city's subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.122.060 Action/adoption.
Adoption of the general plan amendment shall be by resolution of the city
council and shall constitute final action and approval of the amendment.
Figure 21.122.060 requires Adobe Acrobat Reader.
Figure_21.122.060
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.124
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
Sections:
   
21.124.010   Purpose.
   
21.124.020   Authority to apply.
   
21.124.030   Contents of agreement.
   
21.124.040   Proceedings.
   
21.124.050   Required findings.
   
21.124.060   Adoption by ordinance.
   
21.124.070   Recordation and filing of agreement.
   
21.124.080   Amendment of cancellation.
   
21.124.090   Periodic review.
21.124.010 Purpose.
Development agreements are authorized by Government Code Section 65864 as a
means of providing both the city and property owners with assurances that
development projects can be completed under the terms, conditions, and
regulations in effect at the time that authority to proceed with a project is
granted.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.020 Authority to apply.
In accordance with Government Code Section 65865, any person having a legal or
equitable interest in real property for the development of such property, or
any authorized agent therefore, may apply to the city for a development
agreement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.030 Contents of agreement.
   (a)   Mandatory Contents. All draft and final development agreements shall,
at a minimum, contain the following information:
      (1)   The duration of the agreement.
      (2)   The permitted uses of the property.
      (3)   The density and intensity of permitted use.
      (4)   The maximum height and size of proposed buildings.
      (5)   Provisions for reservation or dedication of lands for public
purposes.
   (b)   Optional Contents. The development agreement may also contain the
following information:
      (1)   Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent
discretionary actions, provided such conditions, terms, provisions and
requirements do not prevent development of land for the purposes and level of
use set forth in the agreement.
      (2)   Requirements that construction be commenced within a specified time
period, and that the project or any phase thereof be completed within a
specified time frame.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.040 Proceedings.
Except as provided below, development agreement applications shall be processed
in accordance with the standard processing provisions of this article:
   (1)   Planning commission recommendation. The planning commission
recommendation to city council on all development agreement applications shall
be in the form of an adopted resolution for approval, approval with
modifications, or denial of the application.
   (2)   Modifications. If the city council proposes any substantial
modification to the development agreement not previously considered by the
planning commission, the council shall refer the matter back to the commission
for consideration. No public hearing shall be required. Failure of the
commission to act within forty days of receiving the council's request shall
provide the council with the authority to act without the recommendation.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.050 Required findings.
A development agreement may only be granted when the city council makes all of
the following findings:
   (1)   The development agreement is consistent with the general plan
objectives, policies, land uses, and implementation programs and any other
adopted plans or policies applicable to the agreement;
   (2)   The development agreement is compatible with the uses authorized in,
and the regulations prescribed for, the land use district in which the real
property is located;
   (3)   The development agreement is in conformance with the public
convenience and general welfare of persons residing in the immediate area and
will not be detrimental or injurious to property or persons in the general
neighborhood or to the general welfare of the residents of the city as a whole.
   (4)   The development agreement is consistent with the provisions of
California Government Code Section 65864 through 65869.5.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.060 Adoption by ordinance.
If the city council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the
adoption of an ordinance. After the effective date of the ordinance approving
the development agreement, the city may enter into the agreement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.070 Recordation and filing of agreement.
Within ten days after the effective date of a development agreement or any
amendment thereof, the city clerk shall have the agreement or amendment
recorded with the Los Angeles County Recorder. Additionally, the city clerk
shall be the official custodian of the agreement file. The file shall include
an executed copy of the agreement and the originals of all exhibits, reports of
periodic review, amendments, and/or cancellations to the agreement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.080 Amendment or cancellation.
Either the city or other parties to a development agreement may propose an
amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of an agreement previously
entered into. The procedure to amend a development agreement is the same as the
original adoption. However, for instances in which the city initiates the
proposed amendment or cancellation, the city shall give notice to the parties
to the agreement of the city's intention to initiate such proceedings.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.124.090 Periodic review.
The city shall review the development agreement at least once every twelve
months from the date the agreement is entered into. The community development
director shall initiate review proceedings and notice the property owner(s) at
least ten days prior to determination by the community development director.
The community development director shall determine on the basis of substantial
evidence whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review,
compiled in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. If so,
the review shall be concluded. However, if the city finds that the property
owner(s) have not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the
agreement during the period under review, the city council may hold a public
hearing to modify or terminate the agreement.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CHAPTER 21.126
REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
Sections:
   
21.126.010   Purpose and authority.
   
21.126.020   Requesting reasonable accommodation.
   
21.126.030   Application requirements.
   
21.126.040   Approval authority; Notice; Decision.
   
21.126.050   Grounds for reasonable accommodation.
   
21.126.060   Findings.
21.126.010 Purpose and authority.
It is the City of La Mirada's policy to provide individuals with disabilities
reasonable accommodation in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access
to housing, and to facilitate the development of housing. The purpose of this
chapter is to provide a procedure under which a disabled person may request a
reasonable accommodation in the application of zoning requirements. This
chapter is based on requirements of the federal and state fair housing laws,
and implements the housing element of the City of La Mirada's general plan. It
is distinct from the requirements for a variance set forth in Government Code
Section 65906 and
Chapter 21.108 of this code. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 9 (part),
2012).
21.126.020 Requesting reasonable accommodation.
   (a)   Request. A disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation in
the application of the City of La Mirada's land use and zoning regulations.
Such a request may include a modification or exception to the requirements for
the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that
would eliminate regulatory barriers. A reasonable accommodation cannot waive a
requirement for a conditional use permit when otherwise required or result in
approval of uses otherwise prohibited by the city's land use and zoning
regulations.
   (b)   Availability of information. Information regarding this reasonable
accommodation procedure shall be prominently displayed at the public
information counters in the city hall, advising the public of the availability
of the procedure for eligible applicants.
   (c)   Balancing rights and requirements. The City of La Mirada will attempt
to balance (1) the privacy rights and reasonable request of an applicant for
confidentiality, with (2) the land use requirements for notice and public
hearing, factual findings and rights to appeal, in the city's requests for
information, considering an application, preparing written findings and
maintaining records for a request for reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 9 (part), 2012).
21.126.030 Application requirements.
   (a)   Application. The applicant shall submit a request for reasonable
accommodation on a form provided by the community development department.
   (b)   Review with other land use applications. If the project for which the
reasonable accommodation is being requested also requires some other
discretionary approval, then the applicant shall submit the reasonable
accommodation application first for a determination by the community
development department, before proceeding with the other applications.
   (c)   Fee. The fee for an application for reasonable accommodation shall be
established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025;
Ord. 661 § 9 (part), 2012).
21.126.040 Approval authority; Notice; Decision.
The procedures for the approval and noticing of new development that is subject
to this chapter are detailed in Chapter 21.86 of this code. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 9 (part), 2012).
21.126.050 Grounds for reasonable accommodation.
The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to grant a
requested accommodation:
   (a)   Is the requested accommodation necessary to afford a disabled person
an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling? To determine whether the
accommodation is necessary, the director may consider, among other things: The
nature of the disability including the special needs created by the disability,
the physical attributes and setting of the property and structures, the
potential benefit that can be accomplished by the requested accommodation, and
alternative accommodations that may provide a comparable level of benefit.
   (b)   Is the requested accommodation reasonable? A requested accommodation
is not reasonable if it would impose an undue financial or administrative
burden on the City. It is also not reasonable if it would fundamentally alter a
City program, such as the City's zoning scheme.
      (1)   In considering the financial or administrative burden on the City,
the director may consider, among other things, the extent to which the City
would have to dedicate resources, such as staff time and funds, to grant the
request and other requests like it.
      (2)   In considering the potential alteration to a City program, such as
the City's zoning scheme, the director may consider, among other things,
whether granting the request would be consistent with the City's General Plan,
with the purpose and nature of the particular zoning district, and with nearby
uses. The director may also consider whether the requested accommodation would
potentially have adverse external impacts on properties in the vicinity. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.126.060 Findings.
The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for
reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following findings, all of which
are required for approval. In making these findings, the director may approve
alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of
benefit to the applicant.
   (a)   The requested accommodation is requested by or on the behalf of one or
more individuals with a disability protected under the fair housing laws.
   (b)   The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more
individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
   (c)   The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the
case, result in a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or
substantial physical damage to the property of others.
   (d)   The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental
alteration in the nature of the City's zoning program. The City may consider,
but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the
requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of
the City's zoning program:
      (1)   Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the
character of the neighborhood.
      (2)   Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in
traffic or insufficient parking.
      (3)   Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially
undermine any express purpose of either the City's general plan or an
applicable specific plan.
      (4)   Whether the requested accommodation would create an
institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between
facilities that are similar in nature or operation.
      (5)   Any other factors that would cause a fundamental alteration in the
city's zoning program, as may be defined in the Fair Housing Law. (Ord. 736, §
5 (part), 2025).
CHAPTER 21.128
AFFORDABLE HOUSING IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
Sections:
   
21.128.010   Purpose.
   
21.128.020   Applicability.
   
21.128.030   Application requirements.
   
21.128.040   Review authority.
   
21.128.050   Findings.
21.128.010 Purpose.
An affordable housing implementation plan (AHIP) provides a process to review
and grant density bonuses, concessions, incentives, and development standard
waivers in compliance with Government Code Section 65915 et seq. and Chapter
21.49. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.128.020 Applicability.
Any development project which requests a density bonus, concession/incentive,
and/or development standard waiver shall apply for an Affordable Housing
Implementation Plan. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.128.030 Application requirements.
An application for an affordable housing implementation plan shall include the
following information:
   (a)   A legal description of the project site where the target dwelling
units will be located including a statement of present ownership and present
and proposed zoning.
   (b)   A letter signed by the present owner stating what specific density
bonus, incentives or concessions, waivers or modifications in development
standards are being requested from the City and if reduced parking pursuant to
Section 21.49.060 is being requested.
   (c)   A detailed vicinity map showing the project location and such details
as the location of the nearest commercial retail, transit stop, potential
employment locations, park or recreation facilities or other social or
community service facilities.
   (d)   Site plans, floor plans, and building elevations, which shall
designate the total number of units proposed on the site, including the number
and location of target dwelling units and density bonus dwelling units, and
supporting plans per the application submittal requirements.
   (e)   If the project site contains existing dwelling units, a description of
the existing dwelling units. This shall include the number of units, whether
owner-occupied or rentals, the number of bedrooms in each of the units, and
evidence to household income of occupants for the previous five years.
   (f)   In the case of a request for any incentive or concession, evidence
that the request will result in identifiable and actual cost reductions.
   (g)   In the case of a request for a waiver or reduction of development
standards, evidence that the development standard being waived or reduced will
have the effect of physically precluding the construction of the development at
the densities proposed.(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025).
21.128.040 Review authority.
The review authority for affordable housing implementation plans shall be as
follows:
   (a)   For requests for increases in density and parking reductions, the
Director shall be the final action authority, subject to appeal to the Planning
Commission.
   (b)   For concessions/incentives, excluding financial incentives, or
development standard waivers/reductions, the Planning Commission shall be the
final action authority, subject to appeal to the City Council.
   (c)   For financial incentives, fee waivers, and waivers to dedication
requirements, the City Council shall be the final action authority. (Ord. 736,
§ 5 (part), 2025).
21.128.050 Findings.
The review authority shall approve the affordable housing implementation plan,
unless it adopts one of the following findings:
   (a)   The project would have a specific, adverse impact on the health and
safety of the public and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate
or avoid the specific, adverse impact without rendering the development
unaffordable to low-income and moderate-income households.
   (b)   The project would have a specific, adverse impact on any real property
that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and there is
no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse
impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low-income and
moderate-income households.
   (c)   A proposed concession/incentive does not result in identifiable and
actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs or rents for the
targeted units.
   (d)   Approval of the affordable housing implementation plan would be
contrary to state or federal law.
   (e)   Approval of the financial incentives, fee waiver, or waivers to
dedication requirements would not result in a public benefit. (Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025).
ARTICLE IX: NONCONFORMITIES
CHAPTER 21.130
GENERAL NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS
Sections:
Division I: General Nonconforming Provisions
   
21.130.010   Intent and purpose.
   
21.130.020   Establishment of legal nonconforming status.
   
21.130.030   Continuation and maintenance.
   
21.130.040   Continuation of incidental nonconformity.
   
21.130.050   Determination, extension, and abatement procedures.
   
21.130.060   Revocation of nonconforming use or structure.
   
21.130.070   No reversion to nonconformance.
Division II: Nonconforming Lots
   
21.130.080   Continuation of legal nonconforming lots.
   
21.130.090   Modification of legal nonconforming lots.
Division III: Nonconforming Structures
   
21.130.100   Continuation of legal nonconforming structure.
   
21.130.110   Nonconforming sign.
   
21.130.120   Modification or expansion of legal nonconforming structure.
   
21.130.130   Destruction of legal nonconforming structure.
   
21.130.140   Discontinuance of legal nonconforming structure.
   
21.130.150   Off-site relocation.
Division IV: Nonconforming Use
   
21.130.160   Continuation of legal nonconforming use.
   
21.130.170   Nonconforming use eligible for conditional use permit or other
approval.
   
21.130.180   Modifications and extensions to legal nonconforming uses.
   
21.130.190   Discontinuance of legal nonconforming use.
Division V: Abatement/Extension of Nonconforming Uses/Structures
   
21.130.200   Purpose and intent.
   
21.130.210   Applicability/permit requirement.
   
21.130.220   Required findings.
   
21.130.230   Conditions.
Division VI: Miscellaneous Nonconforming Provisions
   
21.130.240   Nonconforming environmental effects.
   
21.130.250   Nonconformities not requiring capital expenditure or loss to
conform.
   
21.130.260   Nonconformities regarding safety, access, and parking.
   
21.130.270   Nonconformities regarding fencing materials.
DIVISION I: GENERAL NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS
21.130.010 Intent and purpose.
Within the zoning districts established by this zoning ordinance or amendments
that may later be adopted, there exists or will exist lots, structures, and
uses of land and structures which were lawful before the adoption or amendment
of this zoning ordinance, but which no longer comply. The intent of this
article is to permit those nonconformities to continue until they are removed
or required to be terminated, but not to encourage their survival. Such uses
and structures are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses, structures,
and standards in the zoning districts involved, and it is intended that they
shall not be enlarged upon, expanded, or extended, nor be used as grounds for
adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same zone, except
as may be expressly permitted in this article.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.020 Establishment of legal nonconforming status.
   (a)   The provisions of this article shall regulate the continuation,
termination, and modification of lots, structures, and uses which were lawfully
established, but which no longer conform to the provisions of this title due to
a change in zoning district boundaries or a change in the regulations for the
zoning district in which it is located. A mere change in ownership or tenancy
without any change in use, occupancy, or development shall not affect any of
the legal nonconforming rights, privileges, and responsibilities provided under
this chapter.
   (b)   Lots, structures, and uses not having previously acquired proper
permits are illegal and subject to immediate abatement.
   (c)   Any nonconforming situation that becomes specifically authorized under
the terms of some approval pursuant to this title, other than approval of an
extension, expansion, change, or early termination of nonconformity, shall
henceforth be governed by the terms of such approval and shall no longer be
considered to be a nonconformity unless and until such approval expires or is
revoked.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.030 Continuation and maintenance.
   (a)   Continuation. Except as otherwise provided herein, any lot, structure,
or use legally in place on the effective date of this zoning ordinance may
continue as a legal nonconforming lot, structure, or use, respectively.
Likewise, any lot, structure, or use approved and exercised prior to the
effective date of this zoning ordinance shall be permitted.
   (b)   Maintenance. Routine maintenance and repairs of lots and structures
which do not increase the nonconformity may be performed.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.040 Continuation of incidental nonconformity.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when a nonconformity
exists incidental to a nonconforming use, that nonconformity may continue until
the time specified for the termination of the nonconforming use, provided such
nonconformity is brought into compliance with the regulations that would be
applicable to the use if it were located in the most restrictive zone which
automatically permits such use.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.050 Determination, extension, and abatement procedures.
   (a)   Purpose. This section sets forth provisions for the abatement of lots,
structures, and uses deemed to be nonconforming and subject to abatement
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
   (b)   Authority. The community development director shall be the designated
approving authority for determining that a lot, structure, or use is
nonconforming, and the planning commission shall be the designated approving
authority for action on the abatement procedures and extensions of the
nonconforming lots, structures, or uses.
   (c)   Notice and Hearing. Once the community development director has
determined that a lot, structure, or use is nonconforming, the director shall
provide required notice for hearing and action by the planning commission. The
purpose of the hearing is to determine whether the nonconformity should be
abated, given a specific term prior to abatement, or granted a time extension.
Notice and hearing shall be performed and conducted pursuant to
Chapter 21.86.
   (d)   Decision and Findings. The commission shall base its decision as to
the length of the permitted amortization period on any competent evidence
presented, included but not limited to the depreciation schedule attached to
the owner's latest federal income tax return. Findings shall be made as to
whether or not the balancing of the public interest and the request by the
owner for continuance, alteration, or expansion of the nonconformity of the
subject property requires a deviation from the city's development standards.
Findings shall be made in writing and provided to the property owner within ten
days after the decision is rendered.
   (e)   Appeal. Actions taken by the planning commission may be appealed to
the city council in accordance with provisions of
Chapter 21.88.
   (f)   Extension of Time. The approving authority, at its discretion, may
grant an extension of time for the abatement of a nonconformity where it finds
that an unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on the property owner.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.060 Revocation of nonconforming use or structure.
The city may revoke the right to continue a nonconforming use or structure.
Revocation procedures, including notice and hearing, shall be in accordance
with provisions of
Chapter 21.92.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.070 No reversion to nonconformance.
When any nonconformity is eliminated or brought into conformance with the
current regulations of this title, the nonconforming rights and privileges with
respect to that nonconformity are terminated and shall not be restored.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION II: NONCONFORMING LOTS
21.130.080 Continuation of legal nonconforming lots.
Any lawfully created lot which becomes nonconforming with regard to lot area,
street frontage, lot width, lot depth, or accessibility may continue
indefinitely with such nonconformity and may be developed and used as if it
were a conforming lot. However, any property proposed for development with
multi-family dwellings shall be fully conforming as to lot area and lot width.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.090 Modification of legal nonconforming lots.
Legal nonconforming lots may not be modified in any manner that increases the
degree of nonconformity.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION III: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
21.130.100 Continuation of legal nonconforming structure.
   (a)   Continuation of Structure. Any legally established nonconforming
structure that does not conform to the provisions of this title with regard to
maximum permitted height, minimum required setback, and/or maximum permitted
encroachment into required yard areas may be continued indefinitely.
   (b)   Exceptions. The following are the exceptions to the indefinite
continuation of a legal nonconforming structure:
      (1)   Residential structures. Any increase in the number of residential
units for buildings designed and occupied for residential use.
      (2)   Nonresidential structures. Any nonresidential building, structure,
or facility designed or intended only for uses which are nonconforming shall be
removed, or the design and use thereof shall be made conforming in all respects
within twenty-five years from the date of construction or the effective date of
this zoning ordinance, whichever is later.
      (3)   Utilities. Any new or replacement utility/mechanical facilities,
equipment, or construction shall conform to the maximum extent feasible, as
determined by the community development director.
      (4)   Fences and landscaping. Any fences and landscaped buffers that are
required along property lines shall be provided at the time of any expansion or
intensification of a nonresidential use.
      (5)   Encroachments in commercial zoning districts. Within the commercial
zoning districts, any nonconforming encroachment into required yards may be
required to be removed or reduced upon review by the approving authority as
follows:
         (A)   When an expansion in floor area which is greater than fifty
percent of the existing floor area is proposed for any structure maintaining a
nonconforming encroachment, or
         (B)   When an expansion in floor area is proposed anywhere within an
integrated development which is greater than fifty percent of the total floor
area of all structures within the integrated development.
      (6)   Outdoor storage and display. Trash areas or facilities, outdoor
storage areas, and outdoor display areas shall be made fully conforming at the
time of any expansion or intensification of use on the site.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.110 Nonconforming signs.
The provisions contained in Section
21.76.120 of this title shall regulate nonconforming on-site and off-site
signs.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.120 Modification or expansion of legal nonconforming structure.
   (a)   A legal nonconforming structure shall not be modified in a manner that
expands, extends, or enlarges the use in any manner beyond its existing scope
upon the effective date of this zoning ordinance, except as follows:
      (1)   The modifications are, in and of themselves, in conformance with
the provisions of this title.
      (2)   The modifications are limited to minor alterations, improvements,
or repairs that do not increase the degree of nonconformity present and do not
constitute or tend to produce an expansion or intensification of a
nonconforming use.
      (3)   The modifications are required by other laws.
      (4)   The modifications are incidental to the public acquisition of a
portion of a site, no greater degree of nonconformity will be created other
than that caused as a result of the public acquisition, and the changed
development will conform to current regulations to the maximum extent feasible.
   (b)   No change made to any development or use shall be construed as
automatically permitting an extension of any time limit for the termination of
a nonconformity.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.130 Destruction of legal nonconforming structure.
   (a)   If at any time a legal nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire,
act of God, or act of the public enemy to the extent that more than fifty
percent of the assessed value of replacing the structure, such structure is
subject to all current provisions of this title. Replacement costs are to be
estimated by the building official. In the case of a structure that is
necessary to the functioning of a complex of structures, the estimates of
repairs and replacement costs shall be for such interdependent complex as a
whole. In the case of successive incidents of damage, the estimate of repair
cost shall be for all uncompleted repairs following the most recent damage.
   (b)   The repair of structures pursuant to this section shall not be
construed as authorizing an extension of any time limit for the termination of
a nonconformity.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.140 Discontinuance of legal nonconforming structure.
If any legal nonconforming structure is abandoned or the use thereof
discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty consecutive days or more,
subsequent development of the land shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this title. Maintenance of a valid business license shall of itself not be
considered a continuation of the use.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.150 Off-site relocation.
When a structure is relocated to another lot, it shall be made conforming in
all respects with the provisions of this title and all other applicable laws
and regulations.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION IV: NONCONFORMING USE
21.130.160 Continuation of legal nonconforming use.
Except as otherwise listed below, a legal nonconforming use may continue
indefinitely.
   (1)   Nonconforming commercial and industrial uses. Nonconforming commercial
and industrial uses shall be terminated or made conforming as to use within ten
years from the date on which the use was rendered nonconforming.
   (2)   Other nonconforming non-residential use. Other nonconforming non-
residential uses shall be terminated or made conforming as to use within ten
years from the date on which the use was rendered nonconforming.
   (3)   Nonconforming mobile home park. A mobile home park that is
nonconforming as to use shall be terminated within twenty years from the date
on which the use was rendered nonconforming.
   (4)   Nonconforming animal keeping. Any nonconforming animal keeping,
whether a primary use or an accessory use, shall be terminated or made
conforming within three years from the date on which the use was rendered
nonconforming.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.170 Nonconforming use eligible for conditional use permit or other
approval.
Any nonconforming use that is eligible to be considered for a conditional use
permit or other special use approval under this title shall be considered to be
a nonconforming use unless and until such conditional use permit or other such
special approval is granted.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.180 Modifications and extensions to legal nonconforming uses.
   (a)   A legal nonconforming use shall not be modified in any manner that
expands, extends, or enlarges the use beyond its existing scope upon the
effective date of this zoning ordinance, except as specified below.
      (1)   The changes are, in and of themselves, in conformance with the
provisions of this title.
      (2)   The changes are limited to minor alterations, improvements, or
repairs that do not increase the degree of nonconformity present and do not
constitute or tend to produce an expansion or intensification of a
nonconforming use.
      (3)   The changes are required by other laws.
      (4)   The changes are incident to the public acquisition of a portion of
a site, no greater degree of nonconformity will be created other than that
caused as a result of the public acquisition, and the changed development will
conform to current regulations to the maximum extent feasible.
   (b)   No change made to any development or use shall be construed as
automatically permitting an extension of any time limit for the termination of
a nonconformity.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.190 Discontinuance of legal nonconforming use.
   (a)   If any legal nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one
hundred eighty consecutive days or more, subsequent development of the land
shall be in conformity with the provisions of this title. Maintenance of a
valid business license shall of itself not be considered a continuation of the
use.
   (b)   This section shall not apply to any use for which a different period
of discontinuance or abandonment is specified under other provisions of this
title.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION V: ABATEMENT/EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USES/STRUCTURES
21.130.200 Purpose and intent.
The abatement/extension of nonconforming uses/structures process is established
to provide a means by which to establish the period within which a
nonconforming use or structure must comply with current regulations of this
title, and to allow for the extension of such abatement period.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.210 Applicability/permit requirement.
All uses and structures determined by the community development director to be
nonconforming shall require a hearing before the planning commission to
establish the appropriate abatement period. Abatement periods may be extended
by the planning commission. Early termination of a nonconformity may be
initiated by order of the planning commission or city council for public
health, safety, and welfare purposes. Such actions shall be processed pursuant
to standard procedures in this article and
Chapter 21.130.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.220 Required findings.
   (a)   Abatement. In establishing the amortization period for a nonconforming
use and/or structure, the planning commission shall consider competent
financial data such as the depreciation schedule attached to the owner's latest
federal income tax return. Findings shall be made as to whether or not the
balancing of the public interest and the request by the owner for continuance,
alteration, or expansion of the nonconformity requires a deviation from the
city's development standards.
   (b)   Extension. To grant an extension to the abatement period for a
nonconformity, the planning commission shall find that an unreasonable hardship
would otherwise be imposed on the property owner if such an extension were not
granted.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.230 Conditions.
The planning commission may impose conditions to ensure maintenance of an
equitable balance of the public interest and the interests of the property
owner.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
DIVISION VI. MISCELLANEOUS NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS
21.130.240 Nonconforming environmental effects.
   (a)   Off-site Impacts. Any nonconformity with respect to environmental
effects upon surrounding property (such as lighting or noise) shall be made
conforming within two years after the date of becoming nonconforming.
   (b)   On-site Impacts. Any nonconformity with respect to an environmental
effect upon the premises where the source of the effect is located may continue
indefinitely.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.250 Nonconformities not requiring capital expenditure or loss to
conform.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any nonconformity which
can be made conforming without requiring that a capital expenditure be made or
a capital loss incurred shall be made conforming within one hundred twenty days
after the date of becoming nonconforming.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.260 Nonconformities regarding safety, access, and parking.
   (a)   Clear Visibility Triangle. Nonconforming obstructions to the required
clear visibility triangle, including landscaping, fencing, walls, signage,
artwork, and similar features but specifically excluding except buildings,
shall be removed or made conforming within five years after the date of
becoming nonconforming.
   (b)   Access. Nonconforming driveways or other vehicular access arrangements
may continue indefinitely, except that with any expansion or intensification of
use, the access serving such expansion or intensification shall be made fully
conforming.
   (c)   Parking or Loading Spaces. Any nonconformity with respect to parking
or loading areas, spaces, or improvements may continue indefinitely, except
that with any change, expansion, or intensification of use, the additional
parking and loading areas and spaces required for such change, expansion, or
intensification shall be fully conforming.
   (d)   Parking Lot Landscaping. Upon a review for any expansion,
intensification, or reconfiguration of an existing parking lot, the designated
approving authority may require that any nonconformity with respect to interior
landscaping and landscaped yards along streets and alleys for parking lots be
made conforming to the fullest extent feasible.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.130.270 Nonconformities regarding fencing materials.
All legal nonconforming fencing materials shall be abated within five years of
the date that such materials were rendered nonconforming. However, any legal
nonconforming chain-link fencing in residential zones shall be subject to
abatement within ten years of the date that such materials were rendered
nonconforming.
(Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
ARTICLE X: DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 21.200
DEFINITIONS
Sections:
   
21.200.010   Purpose and applicability.
   
21.200.020   A definitions.
   
21.200.030   B definitions.
   
21.200.040   C definitions.
   
21.200.050   D definitions.
   
21.200.060   E definitions.
   
21.200.070   F definitions.
   
21.200.080   G definitions.
   
21.200.090   H definitions.
   
21.200.100   I definitions.
   
21.200.110   J definitions.
   
21.200.120   K definitions.
   
21.200.130   L definitions.
   
21.200.140   M definitions.
   
21.200.150   N definitions.
   
21.200.160   O definitions.
   
21.200.170   P definitions.
   
21.200.180   Q definitions.
   
21.200.190   R definitions.
   
21.200.200   S definitions.
   
21.200.210   T definitions.
   
21.200.220   U definitions.
   
21.200.230   V definitions.
   
21.200.240   W definitions.
   
21.200.250   X definitions.
   
21.200.260   Y definitions.
21.200.010 Purpose and applicability.
   (a) This chapter provides definitions of the technical and special terms and
phrases used in this title in an effort to ensure precision in interpretation
of the zoning ordinance. Where any definition in this chapter may conflict with
definitions in other titles of the La Mirada Municipal Code, these definitions
shall prevail for the purposes of this title. If a word is not defined in this
chapter, or in other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most common
dictionary definition is presumed to be correct.
   (b)   In addition to the definitions provided in this section, definitions
for adult entertainment businesses and signs are found in Article VI, Chapter
21.44 and Article VII, Chapter 21.76, respectively. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part),
2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.020 A definitions.
     “Accessory use” mean a use incidental and subordinate to the principal use
on the premises which does not alter the characteristics of the use considered
as a whole and as related to other uses permitted in the same district.
Accessory uses are permanent or long-term in nature.
   “Accessory dwelling unit or ADU” means an attached or a detached residential
dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or
more persons and includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as a single-family dwelling is
situated. The term also includes an “efficiency unit” and “manufactured home”.
   “Accessory structure” means a detached structure or building which is
subordinate to, and the use of which is customarily incidental to, that of the
main building, structure, or use on the same lot. Detached structures that
contain dwelling units shall not be considered accessory structures.
   “Acupressure, acupuncture” is a form of medical treatment involving the use
of pressure, needles, or similar applications.
   “Adult day care home” is a home which provides supervision and non-medical
care to six or fewer adults, including elderly persons, in the provider’s own
home, on a less than twenty-four-hour basis.
   “Adult day care facility” is a facility which provides supervision and non-
medical care for more than six adults, including elderly persons, on a less
than twenty-four-hour basis.
   “Adult entertainment business” is defined in Article VI, Section, 21.44.020.
   “Alley” means any public roadway without curbs or sidewalks that is twenty-
five feet or less in width and is used primarily for side and/or rear vehicular
access to a building or property.
   “Animal, domestic” means any small animal (no larger than the largest breed
of dogs) customarily kept as a pet within a dwelling unit. This classification
includes dogs, cats, fish, and birds (excluding large tropical birds and
poultry).
   “Animal, exotic” means any wild animal not customarily confined or
cultivated by man for domestic or commercial purposes, but kept as a pet or for
display, including pot belly pigs, snakes, reptiles and large tropical birds
(including peacocks).
   “Animal, livestock” means any large mammal (larger than the largest breed of
dogs) customarily kept in corrals or stables. This classification includes
cattle, sheep, goats, horses, mules, llamas, ostriches, and hogs.
   “Animal, poultry” means domesticated birds (fowl) customarily kept for eggs
or meat. This classification includes chickens, roosters, ducks, geese, and
turkeys.
   “Antennas and wireless telecommunication facilities” means any and all of
the following and all related terms, and as may be further defined by
applicable federal regulations:
      (1)   “Amateur radio station antenna” means any antenna, and its
accompanying support structure, that is used solely for the purpose of
transmitting and receiving radio signals in connection with the operation of an
amateur radio station in accordance with licenses issued by the FCC.
      (2)   “Antenna, antenna array, wireless antenna array, or wireless
telecommunications antenna array” means one or more rods, poles, panels, discs,
or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio frequency
signals, which may include omni-directional antennas (whip), directional
antennas (panel), and parabolic antennas (disc), but excluding any support
structure as defined below.
      (3)   “Building-mounted” means mounted to the side or façade of a
building, or to the side of another structure such as a water tank, church
steeple, freestanding sign, or similar structure, but not to include the roof
of any structure.
      (4)   “Co-location” is the use of a common wireless antenna facility, or
a common site, by two or more providers of wireless services, or by one
provider of wireless services for more than one type of telecommunications
technology.
      (5)   “FCC” is the Federal Communications Commission.
      (6)   “Fixed wireless antenna facility” is an unstaffed facility for the
transmission or reception of wireless telecommunications services, commonly
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure to
achieve the necessary elevation, and an equipment facility or subterranean
vault to house accessory equipment, which may include cabinets, pedestals,
shelters, and similar protective structures.
      (7)   “Fixed wireless services” means any personal wireless services as
defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, including federally
licensed wireless telecommunications services consisting of cellular services,
personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services
(SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio services (ESMR), paging, and similar
services that currently exist or that may be developed in the future.
      (8)   “Ground-mounted” means mounted to a base (e.g., pole, monopole,
tower or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose
of supporting an antenna or wireless communication facility) placed directly on
the ground.
      (9)   “Mast” is a support structure that is constructed for the specific
purpose of elevating a satellite earth station antenna in order to receive
broadcast signals of an acceptable quality.
      (10)   “Monopole” is a structure composed of a single spire, pole, or
tower used to support antennas or related equipment.
      (11)   “Roof-mounted” means mounted above the eave line of a building.
      (12)   “Satellite earth station” is a parabolic or dish-shaped antenna or
other apparatus or device that is designed for the purpose of receiving or
transmitting signals for voice, video, or data.
      (13)   “Stealth facility” means any communication facility which is
designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is
architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure, and
shall include and mean any concealed antenna.
      (14)   “Support structure or wireless telecommunications antenna array
support structure” is a freestanding structure that is designed and constructed
for the specific purpose of supporting an antenna array and that may consist of
a monopole, a mast, a self-supporting lattice tower, a guy-wire support tower,
or other similar structures.
      (15)   “Wireless telecommunication antenna facility or wireless
telecommunications antenna array” means an unstaffed facility for the
transmission or reception of wireless telecommunications services, commonly
consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, a support structure to
achieve the necessary elevation, and an equipment facility or subterranean
vault to house accessory equipment, which may include cabinets, pedestals,
shelters, and similar protective structures.
      (16)   “Wireless services or wireless telecommunications services” means
any personal wireless services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996, including federally-licensed wireless telecommunications services
consisting of cellular services, personal communications services (PCS),
specialized mobile radio services (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
services (ESMR), paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may
be developed in the future.
      (17)   “Wireless facility - major” means any antenna or other
telecommunications facility that is ground- or roof-mounted or mounted in or on
any public property, including public right-of-way.
      (18)   “Wireless facility - minor” means any antenna or other
telecommunications facility that is building, façade, or wall-mounted and does
not exceed the height of the parapet wall or the roof line of the building. A
roof-mounted facility that is screened by a solid material on all four sides
and does not exceed the maximum height of the zoning district in which it is
located shall be considered a minor wireless telecommunications facility.
   “Approving authority” is the designated planning agency responsible for the
review and action on land use and development permits and approvals.
   “Arcade” is a location where four or more mechanical or electronic amusement
games, including computer terminals where such games may be played, are located
for use by business patrons, even if the games are provided in conjunction with
or as an accessory to another business.
   “Automotive reconditioning facility” means any facility or business engaged
in detail work, such as cleaning, waxing and polishing, upholstering, touch up,
painting, and minor body repair to improve the condition of an automobile.
   “Automotive repair facility” means any facility that provides general repair
services to automobiles, including but not limited to tire shops, muffler
shops, transmission shops, tune-up facilities, and upholstery shops.
   “Automotive service station” is an establishment engaged in the retail sale
of vehicle fuel, lubricants, parts, and accessories. Such establishments may
also include convenience stores, vehicle washing facilities, and service bays
for vehicle repair and service. Such service does not include maintenance and
repair of large trucks, or body or fender work or painting on vehicles of any
kind. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008; Ord. 705, §
9, 2018).
21.200.030 B definitions.
“Bar” means any facility licensed by the State of California which restricts
entry to persons of legal alcoholic beverage drinking age and at which the sale
of alcoholic beverages is provided for consumption on premises. Also referred
to as “tavern”.
   “Boardinghouse” is a residence or dwelling, other than a hotel, wherein
three or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities,
are rented to individuals under separate rental agreements or lease, either
written or oral, whether or not an owner, agent, or rental manager is in
residence in order to preserve the residential character of the neighborhood.
   “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals or
property.
   “Building articulation” means the process of creating variation in a
building’s external walls to reduce large expanses of blank walls (see Figure
21.200.030A).
   Figure 21.200.030A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5536.jpg]
   “Building coverage” is the horizontal area of a lot covered by buildings and
structures, including enclosed and/or solid-roofed accessory structures,
expressed as a percentage of the net lot area.
   “Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the street curb
level to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the highest
point of a mansard roof, or to the highest gable of a pitch or a hip roof (see
Figure 21.200.030B).
   Figure 21.200.030B
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5538.jpg]
 
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.040 C definitions
   “Canopy.” See “portable canopy”.
   “Carport” is a permanent roofed structure with not more than two enclosed
sides used or intended to be used for vehicle storage and shelter.
   “Car share vehicle” is a motor vehicle that is operated as part of a
regional fleet by a public or private car sharing company or organization and
provides hourly or daily service.
   “Check cashing facility” is a business establishment that provides financial
services limited to the exchange of cash for a personal or business check,
money order, or similar credit device, for a fee, as well as the sale of money
orders and cash gift cards. Such facilities do not provide loans, savings or
checking accounts, or any other such services generally offered by a bank,
savings and loan, credit union, or other regulated financial services business.
   “Child day care facility” is a facility which provides non-medical, care,
protection and supervision, to more than fourteen children under eighteen years
of age, on a less than twenty- four-hour basis.
   “Church” means any property utilized primarily as a place of worship or for
conducting religious services, and including accessory structures associated
with such use. Definition includes temple, mosque, synagogue, convent, and
similar.
   “Clear visibility triangle” is an area of clear cross-visibility area at an
intersection unobstructed by structures or landscaping. Clear-visibility
triangles are located at any corner formed by the intersection of two streets.
The required clear cross-visibility area shall be a triangle having two sides
fifteen-feet long extending along the curb line of each street (Figure
21.200.040A).
Figure 21.200.040A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5540.jpg]
 
   “Club” is an association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated,
for some common purpose, but not including groups primarily organized to render
a service carried on as a business.
   “Council” means the City Council of the City of La Mirada.
   “Cyber café” is an establishment that provides four or more computers and/or
other electronic devices for access to that system commonly referred to as the
Internet, email, playing video games over the Internet, and/or access to other
computer software programs, to the public for compensation and/or for public
access. Cyber café is also synonymous with PC café, Internet café, and cyber
centers.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 651, § 8, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.200.050 D definitions.
“Dance hall” is a commercial establishment located in building or portion of a
building that is available for rent to the public for special events such as
weddings, special celebrations, dances, and meetings, provided such events are
permitted in the zoning district in which the dance hall is located.
   “Day care facility.” See “child day care facility” and “adult day care
facility”.
   “Development standards” are regulations establishing parameters on size,
bulk, and siting of buildings or uses within a particular zoning district.
   “Director” means the Community Development Director.
   “Discretionary” is an action on the part of a public or elected official
which requires the exercise of judgment or deliberation, including the issuance
of a permit or other approval.
   “Driveway” is a private roadway or access way that provides vehicular access
to a parking space, parking lot, garage, dwelling, or other structure.
   “Drive-through facility” means any place of business where customers order
and receive goods, including prepared food, by driving to one or more windows.
   “Dwelling” means a room or group of internally connected rooms that has
sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities but not more than one
kitchen, and that constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or
intended for one household on a long-term basis. Types of dwellings are as
follows:
      (1)   “Single-family dwelling” is a building designed exclusively for
occupancy by one family. This classification includes manufactured homes
(defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 18007) and model homes
for the first sale of homes within the subdivision.
      (2)   “Duplex” means an attached building (e.g. duplex) designed for
occupancy by two families living independently of each other, where both
dwellings are located on a single lot. More than one duplex may be located on a
single lot consistent with the density provisions of the general plan. Does not
include second dwelling units as defined in Chapter 21.54.
      (3)   “Multi-family dwelling” is a building designed and intended for
occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, each in
a separate dwelling unit, which may be owned individually or by a single
landlord.
      (4)   “Primary dwelling unit (PDU)” means the main housing unit that is
either existing or is proposed to be the main housing unit on a single parcel
with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation
sited on a parcel that meets all the criteria and standards set forth in this
chapter and title.
      (5)   “Secondary dwelling unit (SDU)” is an attached or detached dwelling
unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, with permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation sited on the same parcel as the primary dwelling unit. This is a
housing unit that is authorized and eligible utilizing Senate Bill 9 and meets
all the criteria and standards set forth in this chapter and title. A primary
dwelling unit must be established in order to create a secondary dwelling unit.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.060 E definitions.
   “Efficiency unit” means a dwelling unit that complies with the following:
      (1)   The unit shall have a living room of not less than 190 square feet
(17.7 m2) of floor area.
      (2)   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
      (3)   For other than accessible, adaptable dwelling units, the unit shall
be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance and refrigerator, each
having a clear working space of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in front.
Light and ventilation conforming to the building code shall be provided.
      (4)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
“Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless
persons that is limited to six months or less by a homeless person. No
individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability
to pay.
   “Employee housing” means privately-owned living quarter provided for five or
more employees in connection with any work, whether or not rent is involved, in
accordance with the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part),
2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.070 F definitions.
“Family” means two or more persons bearing the generic character of, and living
together as, a relatively permanent single bona fide housekeeping unit in a
domestic relationship based upon birth, marriage, or other domestic bond of
social, economic, and psychological commitment to each other, as distinguished
from a group occupying a boarding house, club, dormitory, fraternity, lodging
house, motel, rehabilitation center, rest home, or sorority.
   “Family day care home” means a home that regularly provides care,
protection, and supervision for fourteen or fewer children, in the provider's
own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the
children’s parents or guardians are away, and is either classified as a small
or large family day care home as follows:      
      (1)   “Small family day care home” means a home located upon
residentially- zoned property where non-medical family day care is provided for
eight or fewer children, including children under the age of ten years who
reside at the home, in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 1597.44,
on less than a twenty-four hour basis (or as otherwise defined by the
California Health and Safety Code.)
      (2)   “Large family day care home” means a home located on residentially-
zoned property where non-medical family day care is provided for nine and up to
fourteen children under the age of eighteen years of age, on less than a
twenty-four hour basis (or as otherwise defined by the California Health and
Safety Code).
   “Fence” means a solid or open barrier, other than a wall, located above
ground and intended to enclose or mark a boundary.
   “Floor-area ratio (FAR)” means the total gross area of all buildings on a
lot divided by the lot area. For the purpose of calculating floor area, floor
area shall not include exterior open courts, detached garages, carports,
elevator shafts, stairwells, or detached minor accessory structures. FAR shall
be calculated based on the exterior faces of walls. (See Figure 21.200.070).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5542.jpg]
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 651, § 8, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.200.080 G definitions.
   “Garage” is an enclosed building or portion of a building in which motor
vehicles are stored or intended to be stored.
   “General plan” is the general plan of the city adopted pursuant to the
Government Code Section 65301 et seq. and adopted by the city council.
   “Glare” means any brightness within the field of vision of such a character
as to cause annoyance, discomfort, interference with vision, or loss in visual
performance and visibility.
   “Group home” means any residential care facility licensed by the State of
California occupied by six or fewer persons.
   “Guest house” is an attached or detached habitable structure with only
sleeping, living, and bathroom provisions, exclusive of kitchen or cooking
facilities. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.090 H definitions.
“High quality transit corridor” means a corridor with fixed route bus service
with service intervals no longer than 15 minutes during peak commute hours, in
accordance with the California Public Resources Code.
   “Home occupation” means any commercial activity conducted entirely within a
dwelling by the occupants of that dwelling, and that complies with the
applicable provisions of this title.
   “Hotel, motel” is a commercial establishment offering overnight visitor
accommodations, but not providing room rentals on an hourly basis. A hotel or
motel may include, as permitted, ancillary facilities such as common meeting
rooms, dining facilities, and guest amenities.
   “Housing development project” means a use consisting of any of the
following: (1) residential units only; (2) mixed-use developments consisting of
residential and nonresidential uses with at least two-thirds of the square
footage designated for residential use; and (3) transitional housing or
supportive housing.(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.200.100 I definitions.
   “Independent institution of higher education” means those nonpublic higher
education institutions that grant undergraduate degrees, graduate degrees, or
both, and that are formed as nonprofit corporations in this state and are
accredited by an agency recognized by the United States Department of
Education.
   “Internet café.” See “cyber café”. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025)
21.200.110 J definitions.
   “Junior accessory dwelling unit (JADU)” means a residential dwelling unit
that is no more than 500 square feet in size, includes an efficiency kitchen
consistent with building code standards, is contained entirely within the walls
of a single-family dwelling, and may include separate sanitation facilities or
may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.
   “Junk or salvage yard” means any area, lot, parcel, building, or part
thereof used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, or
abandonment or wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or other scrap or discarded
materials, machinery, or other types of junk. Such uses include baling of
cardboard and other paper materials. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612
Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.120 K definitions.
   ”Kitchen” means a room or space used, or intended, or designed to be used
for cooking or preparation of food. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025)
21.200.130 L definitions.
“Landscaping” is the planting and maintenance of some combination of trees,
shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers or lawns. It may include natural features
such as mounds and boulders; and structural features such as fountains,
reflecting pools, and art works.
   “Liquor store” is a retail establishment primarily engaged in the sale of
beer, wine, and spirits, and regulated by the State Alcoholic Beverage Control
Board.
   “Lot” means a legally established parcel of land having frontage upon a
street. Lot types area as follows and as illustrated in Figure 21.200.130
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5544.jpg]
 
      (1)     “Corner lot” is a lot bounded by two or more abutt ing and inter
secting street lines.
      (2)    “Flag lot” is a lot conn ected to a street by an access corri dor
such as an alley, narr ow private drive , or access ease ment.
      (3)     “Interior lot” is a lot which is not a corner lot and has only
one street frontage.
      (4)    “Key lot” is a lot, the side line of which coincides with the rear
lot line of one or more other lots.
      (5)   “Through lot” is an interior lot bounded by two or more abutting
street lines that do not intersect.
      (6)   “Reversed corner lot” is a corner lot with its front lot line
facing the shorter side of the block lengths.
   “Lot area” is the total horizontal area (square footage) contained within
the boundaries of a lot.
   “Lot coverage” is that portion of a lot covered by all roofed buildings at
ground level, excluding permitted architectural projections (defined in Section
21.78.040) and excluding any underground structure or that part of any such
structure which extends less than eighteen inches above the ground level. A
roofed, unenclosed or unscreened patio shall not be included in a lot coverage
calculation, provided such patio roof does not exceed six hundred twenty-five
square feet in area.
   “Lot depth” is the horizontal distance between the front and rear property
lines measured along a line midway between the side property lines.
   “Lot frontage” is that portion of a lot which abuts a street right-of-way or
other principle means of access thereto.
   “Lot frontage, corner lot” is that portion of a lot which abuts a street
right-of-way, toward which the primary entrance of the main building is
oriented. The Community Development Department may designate an alternative
portion of the lot which abuts the street right-of-way as the frontage upon
application by the property owner.
   “Lot width” is the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at
the required front setback line.(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 710, § 12,
2019; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.140 M definitions.
“Main building” means any building in which the principal use of the lot is
conducted. Every dwelling unit in a residential zoning district is considered
to be the main building.
   “Major transit stop” means a site containing any of the following: (1) an
existing rail or bus rapid transit station; (2) a ferry terminal served by
either a bus or rail transit service; (3) the intersection of two or more major
bus routes with a frequency of service interval of fifteen minutes or less
during the morning and afternoon peak commute periods; or (4) any major transit
spot identified by SCAG.
   “Manufactured home” means a structure that was constructed on or after June
15, 1976, is transportable in one or more sections, is eight body feet or more
in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a
foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.
   “Ministerial” means a government decision involving little or no personal
judgment by the public official as to the wisdom or manner of carrying out the
action, including the issuance of a permit.
   “Mobile home” means a structure that was constructed prior to June 15, 1976,
is transportable in one or more sections, is eight body feet or more in width,
or 40 body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when erected
onsite, is 320 or more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation
system when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein.
   “Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where two or more lots
are rented or leased, held out (or were formerly held out) for rent or lease to
accommodate manufactured homes or mobile homes used for human habitation
(California Health and Safety Code Section 18214). A mobile home park provides
utility services and other facilities either separately or in common to mobile
home spaces therein.
   “Multi-family dwelling” means two or more legally permitted, attached
primary dwelling units. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008).
21.200.150 N definitions.
    “Nonconforming lot” means any property created by a legal subdivision of
land that created in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time the property was subdivided, but which, due to subsequently enacted
ordinances or laws, no longer complies with the applicable regulations and
standards for the zoning district in which the property is located.
   “Nonconforming structure” means any structure, building, or improvement that
was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and
laws at the time it was erected, but which, due to subsequently enacted
ordinances or laws, no longer complies with the applicable regulations and
standards for the zoning district in which the structure is located.
   “Nonconforming use” means any use of land or activity that was lawfully
established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the
time such use was initiated, but which, due to subsequently enacted ordinances
or laws, no longer complies with the applicable regulations and standards for
the zoning district in which the use is located.
   “Nursery school.” See “child day care facility”. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part),
2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.160 O definitions.
   ”Official zoning map” means the maps delineating the locations and
boundaries of zones as described in this article, and shall include such other
maps and amendments as may hereafter be adopted in accordance with the
provisions of this article, which maps are a part of this article when adopted
by ordinance passed by the Council in the manner prescribed by law.
   “Open space” means land areas that are not occupied by buildings,
structures, parking areas, driveways, streets, or alleys. Open space may
include land areas occupied by buildings or structures specifically designed
for recreation purposes such as swimming pools and recreation buildings.
   “Open space, common” means open space reserved primarily for the enjoyment
and recreational use of all residents of a residential development, such as a
planned unit development, condominium, or mixed-use development, and owned and
maintained by all residents, generally through a homeowner’s association.
   “Open space, private” means open space located adjacent to, and directly
accessible from the living room, family room, kitchen or dining room of an
individual dwelling unit that is designed, maintained, and reserved exclusively
for the use of the residents of said unit.
   “Open space, usable” means an open area or recreational facility that is
designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025)
21.200.170 P definitions.
   “Planning Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City of La
Mirada.
   “Portable canopy” means any structure, tent or canopy, or combination
thereof, including legs and other support structure, whether freestanding or
secured to the ground or to any other structure, that is enclosed or covered on
one or more sides or the top, by fabric, canvas, nylon, vinyl, plastic or other
non-rigid material.
   “Primary dwelling unit” is an existing single-family residential structure
on a single lot with provisions for living, sleeping, eating, a single kitchen
for cooking, and sanitation facilities occupied. This does not include an
accessory dwelling unit or junior accessory.
   “Principal or primary use” means any use which represents the predominant
activity on a property and for which authority to conduct such use is derived
from this title. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.180 Q definitions.
   Reserved
21.200.190 R definitions.
“Recessed entry” means an entryway with steps that are built into the wall a
minimum of 24" from the facade to the door (see Figure 21.200.190).
   Figure 21.200.190
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5546.jpg]
   “Recycling facility” is a facility established for the collection and/or
treatment of used or waste materials for the purpose of reuse, including the
following:
      (1)   “Large collection facility” means a recycling facility used for the
acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from
the public that may occupy more than five hundred square feet and include
permanent structures. A large collection facility does not involve the use of
power-driven processing equipment, except for compacting, baling, plastic
shredding, and other activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and
material shipment.
      (2)   “Processing facility” means recycling facilities located in a
building or enclosed space and used for the collection and processing of
recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for
efficient shipment or to an end-user’s specifications by such means as baling,
briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting,
shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing.
      (3)   “Reverse-vending machine” means an automated mechanical device that
accepts one or more types of empty containers including, but not limited to,
aluminum cans, glass bottles and plastic bottles; and that issues a cash refund
or a redeemable credit clip with value of not less than the container’s
redemption value, as determined by the state.
      (4)   “Scrap and dismantling facility” means a facility engaged in the
assembling, breaking up, sorting, temporary storage, and distribution of
recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including the dismantling or
wrecking of automobiles or other motor vehicles, or the storage or keeping for
sale of parts and equipment resulting from such dismantling or wrecking.
      (5)   “Small collection facility” means a recycling facility used for the
acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase of recyclable materials from
the public and that does not occupy more than five hundred square feet. This
classification may include a mobile unit, kiosk-type units that may include
permanent structures, and unattended containers placed for the donation of
recyclable materials.
   “Religious institution” means an institution owned, controlled, and
operated, and maintained by a bona fide church, religious denomination, or
religious organization composed of multidenominational members of the same
well-recognized religion, lawfully operating as a nonprofit religious
corporation or as a corporation sole pursuant to the Corporations Code.
   “Residential care home” is a residential home that provides twenty-four-hour
non- medical care for six or fewer persons eighteen years of age or older, or
emancipated minors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of personal
services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential
for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection of the
individual. This classification includes group homes, residential care
facilities for the elderly, adult residential facilities, wards of the juvenile
court, and other facilities licensed by the state.
   “Residential care facility” means any facility that provides twenty-four-
hour non-medical care for more than six persons eighteen years of age or older,
or emancipated minors, with chronic, life-threatening illness in need of
personal services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training
essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection
of the individual. This classification includes residential care facilities for
the elderly, adult residential facilities, facilities for wards of the juvenile
court, and other facilities licensed by the state.
   “Rest home.” See “residential care facility”.
   “Restaurant” is an establishment where food and drink are prepared, served,
and consumed primarily within the principal building, or where food prepared on
the premises is served for carry-out or quick on-premises consumption. See also
“drive-through facility.” (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A
(part), 2008).
21.200.200 S definitions.
   “Setback” is the minimum distance between the main building on a lot and the
property lines of the lot, measured at a right angle from the designated
property line. Minimum setback distances are listed by zoning district in
Article IV. (See Figure 21.200.200).
   Figure 21.200.200
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/e5f5435d883b428cfb2c2a84378478cea4567f6e/
IMAGES/0-0-0-5548.jpg]
   “Shielding” (relative to lighting), is a technique or method of construction
which causes light emitted from an outdoor light fixture to be restricted from
shining above or beyond an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the
fixture.
   “Shopping center” is a group of businesses comprised of at least three
individual shops functioning as a unit, with common off-street parking as an
integral part of the unit, and occupying in aggregate five thousand square feet
or more of parcel area.
   “Sign” is defined in Article VI, Section
21.76.020.
   “Single room occupancy” is a multiple-tenant building comprised of single
room dwellings accessed through a common primary entrance, and which contain
commons, lounges, or other congregate living spaces of not less than five
square feet per dwelling unit. SROs can each accommodate a maximum occupancy of
up to three (3) persons per unit, but no more than one (1) adult. Each SRO
includes a kitchenette, bathroom with shower, and living room area. SROs are
primarily rented as permanent residences and provide management on a twenty-
four (24) hour basis.
   “Specific adverse impact” is a significant, quantifiable, direct, and
unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified written public health or
safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the
application was deemed complete and there is no feasible method to mitigate the
impact.
   “Storage yard” is a property or establishment used for the keeping of
equipment, motor vehicles, construction supplies, or other materials for the
use, distribution, or dispatch by a permitted business, public utility, or
government agency.
   “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is
occupied by the target population, and that is linked to an onsite or offsite
service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing,
improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
and, when possible, work in the community.
      (1)   “Target population” means persons, including persons with
disabilities, and families are “homeless,” as that term is defined by Section
11302 of Title 42 of the United States Code, or who are “homeless youth,” as
that term is defined by paragraph (2) of subdivision (e) of Section 12957 of
the Government Code.
   “Supportive services” include, but are not limited to, a combination of
subsidized, permanent housing, intensive case management, medical and mental
health care, substance abuse treatment, employment services, and benefits
advocacy.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 661 § 14, 2012; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part),
2008; Ord. 705, § 10, 2018).
21.200.210 T definitions.
   “Tobacco retail business” means any person or business, whether or not
regulated by other provisions of the La Mirada Municipal Code, selling or
offering to sell, or otherwise convey in exchange for any form of
consideration, any tobacco, tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia, provided
the area utilized for the sale of any of the foregoing comprises thirty- three
percent or more of the floor area of the business, or thirty-three percent or
more of the gross sales of such business in any seven consecutive day period.
For purposes of this section, the term “tobacco product” shall mean any item or
thing containing or consisting of any amount of tobacco or other combustible
plant material designed for and intended to be smoked. “Tobacco paraphernalia”
shall mean cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, whether made of glass, wood or
other material, waterpipes, hookahs, holders of smoking materials of all types,
cigarette rolling machines, and any other thing or item designed for the
smoking or ingestion of tobacco, or the smoking of any tobacco product. Nothing
in this definition shall be deemed to render inapplicable any provision,
regulation or standard contained in the La Mirada Municipal Code that would
otherwise apply to any tobacco retail business, as defined herein.
   “Tarp.” See “portable canopy”.
   “Temporary structure” is a structure without any foundation of footings
which will be removed when the permit for the activity or use for which the
structure was erected has expired.
   “Temporary use” is a use established for a fixed period of time consistent
with a required permit, with the intent to discontinue such use as directed in
the documentation permitting such use.
   “Transitional housing” is housing that provides long-term, temporary shelter
(up to two years) for persons transitioning to permanent housing. Transitional
housing may provide support and rehabilitative services to residents, including
substance abuse and mental health care interventions, employment services,
individual and group counseling, and life skills training.
   “Truck terminal” is a facility used for the parking, service, repair, and/or
storage of trucks, including storage areas for rental or leasing purposes, and
that provides services and facilities, including but not limited to restrooms/
showers and offices, for persons using or renting truck spaces.
   “Two-unit development” means a development that proposes no more than two
new units or proposed to add one new unit to one existing unit.(Ord. 736, § 5
(part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.220 U definitions.
   “Urban lot split” means a subdivision of an existing parcel into no more
than two separate parcels that meets all the criteria and standards set forth
in this chapter.
   “Urban uses” means any current or former residential, commercial, public
institutional, transit or transportation passenger facility, or retail use, or
any combination thereof.
   “Use” means the purpose for which land or a building is designed, arranged,
or intended, or for which the land or building may be occupied or maintained.
(Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.230 V definitions.
   Variance” means permission to depart from the provisions of this title when,
due to special circumstances applicable to a property, strict application of
the requirements deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other
identically zoned property. See Article VIII, Chapters 21.102 and 21.108. (Ord.
736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.240 W definitions.
    “Wall” means a physical barrier constructed largely of masonry, brick,
concrete, stucco, concrete block, or any combination thereof and intended to
mark a boundary.
   “Warehouse” is a building or portion thereof used for the storage,
receiving, shipping, or wholesaling of goods and merchandise, and any
incidental or accessory activities.
   “Wireless facilities.” See “antennas and wireless communications
facilities”. (Ord. 736, § 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.250 X definitions.
   Reserved
21.200.260 Y definitions.
   “Yard” is an open space on a lot that, except for otherwise provided in this
title, is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward.
   “Yard area” means the horizontal area between a property line and a parallel
line along the nearest structure located outside of the required setback area.
   “Yard area, required” means the open space between a lot line and the
building area within which no structure is permitted to be located. (Ord. 736,
§ 5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
21.200.270 Z definitions.
   “Zoning district” is a designated or mapped portion of the city within which
a uniform set of land use and development regulations apply. Zoning districts
include the following categories:
      (1)   “Base zoning district” means a zoning district that establishes the
primary type and intensity of land use for the parcel, along with development
regulations for that particular type and intensity of land use.
      (2)   “Overlay zoning district” means a zoning district that supplements
the base zoning district for the purpose of establishing special use or
development regulations for a particular area in addition to the provisions of
the underlying base zone.
   “Zoning map” is the current city-adopted map showing zoning district
boundaries using the symbols listed in Article III of this title. (Ord. 736, §
5 (part), 2025; Ord. 612 Exhibit A (part), 2008).
CROSS REFERENCE TABLES
1960 CODE
1960 Code Herein
1960 Code     Herein
1100--1103    (Repealed by 163)
1104          1.01.050
1105          1.01.060
1106          1.01.070
1200          (Repealed by 412)
1201          (Repealed by 412)
1202--1249    (Missing)
1250          (Repealed by 491)
1251          (Repealed by 491)
1252          (Repealed by 491)
1253          (Repealed by 491)
1254          (Repealed by 491)
1255          (Repealed by 491)
1256          (Repealed by 491)
1257          (Repealed by 491)
1258          (Repealed by 491)
1259          (Repealed by 491)
1300--1325    (Repealed by 163)
2200          2.20.010
2200.1        2.20.020
2200.2        2.20.030
2201          2.12.010
2202          2.12.020
2203          2.12.030
2204--2229    (Missing)
2210          2.08.010
2230          2.40.010
2231          (Repealed by 216)
2232--2249    (Missing)
2250          2.16.010
2251--2259    (Missing)
2260          2.32.020
2300          (Repealed by 155)
2301          2.32.010
2900          2.04.010
2901          (Repealed by 491)
2902          2.04.020
2903          (Repealed by 491)
2904          (Repealed by 491)
2905          2.04.030
2906          2.04.040
2907          2.04.050
2908          2.04.060
2909          2.04.070
2910          2.04.080
3100          16.08.010
3101          (Repealed by 155)
3102          16.08.020
3103          16.08.030
3104          16.08.040
3200          (Repealed by 384)
3201          (Repealed by 384)
3202          (Repealed by 384)
3203          (Repealed by 384)
3204          (Repealed by 384)
3205          (Repealed by 384)
3300          16.12.010
3301          16.12.020
3302          16.12.030
3303          16.12.040
3304          16.12.050
3305          16.12.060
3306          16.12.070
3307          16.12.080
3308          16.12.090
3309          16.12.100
3310          16.12.110
3311          16.12.120
3312          16.12.130
3313          16.12.140
3314          16.12.150
3315          16.12.160
3316          16.12.170
3317          16.12.180
3318          16.12.190
3319          16.12.200
4100          Ch. 9.12
4101          Ch. 9.12
4102          (Missing)
4103          (Repealed by 491)
4104          (Repealed by 491)
4105          (Repealed by 155)
4106          9.12.050
4107          (Repealed by 491)
4108          9.04.050
4109--4110    (Missing)
4111--4113    (Repealed by 155)
4114          9.08.010
4115          9.08.020
4116--4119    (Missing)
4120          (Repealed by 491)
4121          (Repealed by 491)
4122          9.24.030
4123          9.24.040
4124          9.24.050
4125--4129    (Missing)
4130          9.84.010
4131          9.84.020
4132          9.84.030
4133--4134    (Missing)
4135          (Repealed by 491)
4136--4139    (Missing)
4140          (Repealed by 417)
4141          (Repealed by 417)
4142--4169    (Missing)
4170          10.20.010
4171          10.20.020
4172          10.20.030
4173          10.20.040
4174          10.20.050
4175          10.20.060
4176          10.20.070
4177          10.20.080
4178          10.20.090
4200          (Repealed by 491)
4201          (Repealed by 491)
4202          (Repealed by 417)
4203          (Repealed by 491)
4204--4209    (Missing)
4210          (Repealed by 511)
4211          (Repealed by 511)
4300          (Repealed by 491)
4301          9.04.010
4302          9.56.010
4303          (Repealed by 491)
4304          8.08.010
4305          (Not codified)
4306          9.48.010
4307          9.48.020
4308          (Repealed by 491)
4309          9.76.010
4310          9.28.010
4311          (Repealed by 491)
4312          (Repealed by 155)
4313          9.52.010
4314          9.44.010
4315          9.44.020
4316          9.44.030
4317          (Repealed by 491)
4318          9.60.010
4319--4329    (Missing)
4330          (Repealed by 372)
4331          (Repealed by 372)
4332          (Repealed by 372)
4333          (Repealed by 372)
4334          (Repealed by 383)
4335--4349    (Missing)
4350          9.20.010
4351          9.20.020
4400          10.08.010
4401          10.08.020
4402          10.08.030
4403          10.08.040
4404          10.08.050
4405          10.08.060
4406          10.08.070
4407          10.08.080
4408          10.08.090
4409          10.08.100
4410          10.08.110
4411          10.08.120
4412          10.08.130
4413          10.08.140
4500          10.04.010
4501          10.04.020
4502          10.04.030
4503          10.04.040
4504          10.04.060
4505          10.04.070
4506          10.04.080
4507          10.04.090
4508          10.04.100
4509          (Missing)
4510          10.16.010
4511          10.16.020
4512          10.16.030
4600          10.24.010
4601          10.24.020
4602          10.24.030
4602.1        10.24.030
5100          (Missing)
5101          6.04.010
5102          6.04.020
5103          6.04.030
5104          6.04.040
5105          6.04.050
5200          (Repealed by 523)
5201          (Repealed by 523)
5202          (Repealed by 523)
5203          (Repealed by 523)
5204          (Repealed by 523)
5205          (Repealed by 523)
5206          (Repealed by 523)
5300          (Repealed by 419)
5301          (Repealed by 419)
5302          (Repealed by 419)
5303          (Repealed by 419)
5900          (Repealed by 429)
5901          (Repealed by 429)
5902          (Repealed by 429)
5903          (Repealed by 429)
5904          (Repealed by 429)
6100          (Missing)
6101          (Repealed by 365)
6102          (Repealed by 365)
6103          (Repealed by 365)
6104          (Repealed by 365)
6200          (Missing)
6201          (Repealed by 367)
6202          (Repealed by 367)
6203          (Repealed by 367)
6300          (Missing)
6301          17.12.010
6302          17.12.020
6303          17.12.030
6400          17.20.010
6401          17.20.020
6402          17.20.030
6403          17.20.040
6500          9.64.010
6501          9.64.020
6502          9.64.030
6503          9.64.040
6504          9.64.050
6600          (Repealed by 366)
6601          (Repealed by 366)
6602          (Repealed by 366)
6603          (Repealed by 366)
6700          12.04.010
6701          12.04.020
6702          12.04.030
6703          12.04.040
6704          12.04.050
6705          12.04.060
6800          13.08.010
6801          13.08.020
6802          13.08.030
6803          13.08.040
6900          (Repealed by 442)
6901          (Repealed by 442)
6902          (Repealed by 442)
7100--7104    (Repealed by 383)
7105--7107    (Repealed by 204)
7200--7223    (Repealed by 383)
7300--7307    (Repealed by 383)
7400--7414    (Repealed by 383)
7600--7603    (Repealed by 383)
7800--7813    (Repealed by 383)
7900--7911    (Repealed by 383)
8500          3.12.040
8501          3.12.050
8502          3.12.060
8503          (Repealed by 491)
8504          3.12.080
8505          3.12.090
9100-- 9197.4 (Repealed by 612)
9198          (Not codified)
9200          (Repealed by 155)
9300--9303    (Repealed by 121)
9500          17.20.050
9501          17.20.060
9502          17.20.070
9503          17.20.080
9504          17.20.090
9505          17.20.100
9506          17.20.110
9507          17.20.120
9508          (Missing)
9509          17.20.130
9510          17.20.140
9511          17.20.150
9512          17.20.160
9513          17.20.170
9514          17.20.180
9600–9649   (Missing)
9650–9658   (Repealed by 612)
              
 
DISPOSITION OF ORDINANCE TABLES
Ordinance Number
Ordinance
Number
1         Adopts municipal code
2         Sales and use tax (Repealed by 204)
3         Bond issue (Special)
4         Amends fees for subdivision and plan filings (Repealed by 155)
5         Fireworks (
          16.12)
6         Vending near schools (5.60)
7         Special gas tax street improvement fund (
          3.12)
8         Annexation to fire protection district (Special)
9         Zoning (Special)
10        Dairy regulations (
          6.12)
11        Electric distribution franchise (Special)
12        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
13        Business licenses (Repealed by 383)
14        Amends 4334, vending near schools (Repealed by 383)
15        Moving buildings (
          17.20)
16        Zoning (Repealed by 612)
17        Zoning (Repealed by 612)
18        Speed limits (Repealed by 494)
19        Amends 2902, council meeting time (
          2.04)
20        Permits for moving buildings and making excavations (
          17.20)
21        Amends 5101, 5102 and 5103, health (Repealed by 523)
22        Truck routes (
          10.24)
23        Amends 2902, council meeting times (
          2.04)
24        Fireworks (
          16.12)
25        Gas franchise (Special)
26        (Void)
27        Annexation (Special)
28        Moving buildings (
          17.20)
29        Capital outlay fund (
          3.12)
30        Amends 2908, mayor (
          2.04)
31        Dairy regulations (
          6.12)
32        Amends 2100, city administrator (
          2.08)
33        Adds 2250, director of finance (
          2.16)
34        Adds 2260, salary plan (
          2.32)
35        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
36        Rezone (Special)
37        Subdivisions (Repealed by 155)
38        Declares certain highways to fall under county jurisdiction (Special)
39        Waives fees for civil defense structures (
          17.24)
40        Civil defense (Repealed by 155)
41        Amends 7101, 7103 and 7104, sales and use tax (Repealed by 204)
42        Amends 2900, location of council chambers (
          2.04)
43        Truck route (
          10.24)
44        Zoning (Special)
45        Oath of office (Repealed by 155)
46        Curbs, gutters and sidewalks (
          12.08)
47        Building, electrical and plumbing regulations (
          17.08)
48        Amends 5204, dairy regulations (
          6.12)
49        Sanitary sewers and industrial waste (Repealed by 442)
50        Solicitors and peddlers (Repealed by 383)
51        Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
52        Buildings (
          17.04)
53        Swimming pools, excavations, abandoned chests (
          9.64)
54        Annexation (Special)
55        Rezone (Special)
56        Zoning (Repealed by 612)
57        Signs in public rights-of-way (Repealed by 612)
58        Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
59        Merchant patrols (Repealed by 383)
60        Coloring baby fowls and animals (
          9.20)
          Parking regulations (
61        10.04,
          10.16)
          Building, electrical and plumbing regulations (
62        13.08,
          17.08)
63        Subdivisions (Repealed by 121 and 155)
64        Curbs, gutters and sidewalks (
          12.08)
65        Building regulations (
          17.04)
66        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
67        Law enforcement officers training fund (
          2.44)
68        Zoning (Repealed by 612)
69        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
70        Annexation into fire protection district (Special)
71        Annexation (Special)
72        Amends 3306, 3307 and 3308, fireworks (
          16.12)
73        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
74        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
75        Truck routes (
          10.24)
76        Adds 5904, pound fees (Repealed by 429)
77        Fire prevention (Repealed by 384)
78        Health regulations (Repealed by 523)
79        Rezone (Special)
80        Amends 3307, fireworks (
          16.12)
81        Subdivisions (Repealed by 121 and 155)
82        Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
83        Zoning (Repealed by 612)
84        Amends 4506, abandoned vehicles (
          10.04)
85        Rezone (Special)
86        Commercial and industrial waste containers (Repealed by 419)
87        State employees' retirement system (
          2.36)
88        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
89        Parking (Not accepted)
90        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
91        Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
92        Building, electrical, and plumbing regulations (
          17.08)
93        Amends prior code § 6901, sanitary sewers and industrial waste (Repealed by 442)
94        Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
95        Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
96        Annexation (Special)
97        Amusements and entertainment (Repealed by 383)
98        City council's salary (Repealed by 232)
99        Signs and billboards, interim zoning ordinance (Special)
100       Zoning (Special)
101       Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
102       Amends 2908, election of mayor (
          2.04)
103       Building regulations (Repealed by 319)
104       Civil defense and disasters (Repealed by 249)
105       Zoning (Special)
106       Rezone (Special)
107       Signs and billboards, interim zoning (Special)
108       Amends 7223, business license fees (Repealed by 383)
109       Zoning (Repealed by 612)
110       Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
111       Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
112       Annexation (Special)
113       Rezone (Special)
114       Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
115       (Not adopted)
116       Notices to appear (Repealed by 491)
117       Grants jurisdiction over portions of certain roads to county (Special)
118       Zoning (Repealed by 612)
119       Interim zoning (Repealed by 128)
120       Amends 6401, moving buildings (
          17.20)
          Subdivisions (
121       20.04--
          20.32)
122       Building permit and plan checking fees (Repealed by 188)
123       Plumbing permits and plan checking fees (Repealed by 367)
124       Electrical regulations (Repealed by 235)
125       Fees for grading permits (Repealed by 188)
126       Prohibits certain conduct on commercial premises and parking lots (
          10.20)
127       Zoning (Special)
128       Zoning, repeals Ord. 119 (Repealed by 612)
129       Documentary stamp tax (
          3.08)
130       Amends 7403.2 and 7305, billiard halls (Repealed by 383)
131       Abandoned vehicles (
          10.08)
132       Zoning (Special)
133       (Not adopted)
134       Zoning (Repealed by 612)
135       Amends 5101, 5102 and 5103, health (Repealed by 523)
136       (Not adopted)
137       Overhead utility facilities (
          14.04)
138       Amends 5901 and 5902, animals (Repealed by 429)
139       Building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical regulations (
          17.08)
140       Carnivals, circuses, sideshows and rodeos (Repealed by 383)
141       Amends 4301, noises (
          9.04)
142       Zoning (Special)
143       Interim zoning (Special)
144       Zoning (Special)
145       Zoning (Special)
146       Oath of office (
          2.40)
147       Amends Ordinance 109, zoning (Title 21)
148       Amends Ordinance 109, zoning (Title 21)
149       Amends Ordinance 109, zoning (Title 21)
150       Amends Ordinance 109, zoning (Title 21)
151       CATV franchises (Repealed by 383)
152       Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
153       Annexation (Special)
154       Amends Chapter 16.04, fire code (Repealed by 384)
155       Repeals ordinances 4, 37, 40, 45, 63 and 81 and prior code §§ 2300, 3101, 4105,
          4111, 4112, 4113, 4312 and 9200 (Repealer)
156       Speed limit (Repealed by 494)
157       Adds 3205, fire prevention code (
          16.04)
158       Amends 2900, council chambers (
          2.04)
159       CATV franchise (Terminated by 296)
160       Rezone (Special)
          Renumbers 9110.37 and 9110.38, amends 9132.2, 9133.2, 9134.2, 9141.2, 9142.2 and
161       9105, adds 9110.37, 9154 and 9154.10--9154.83, oil well drilling and exploration
          (Repealed by 612)
162       Adds 4108, noise, dust and fumes by vehicles (
          9.04)
163       Code adoption, repeals 1100--1103 and 1300-1325 (
          1.01)
          Amends §
164       17.20.020, highway permit ordinance (
          17.20)
165       Authorizes amendment to contract with Board of Administration, State Employees'
          Retirement System (Special)
          Amends §
          6.12.070,
166       16.12.080,
          16.12.090(12) and 16.12.100, fireworks (
          16.12)
167       Amends §§ 13.04.020 and 13.04.030, adds § 13.04.040, sanitation (Repealed by 442)
168       Adds §§ 6.04.045, 6.04.055 and 6.04.056, water wells (Repealed by 523)
169       Amends §§ 5.80.100 and 5.80.110, carnival fees (Repealed by 383)
170       Annexation (Special)
171       Amends §§ 17.04.280 and 17.04.290, building code (Repealed by 188)
172       Amends § 17.08.120 8(a), electrical code (Repealed by 235)
173       Amends § 17.12.040 and adds § 17.12.045, plumbing code (Repealed by 188)
174       Adds § 17.16.050, mechanical code (Repealed by 188)
175       Interim zoning (Special)
176       Zoning (Special)
177       Adds § 8.04.060, animals (Repealed by 429)
          Amends §§
178       21.24.030 (7),
          21.26.030 (10), 21.30.240 and 21.30.330, zoning (Repealed by 612)
179       Zoning (Special)
180       Adds Ch. 21.11, zoning (Repealed by 612)
181       Zoning (Special)
182       Prezoning (Special)
183       Zoning (Special)
184       Annexation (Special)
185       Zoning (Special)
186       Adds § 8.04.070, impounding and boarding fees for animals (Repealed by 429)
187       Adds Ch. 10.25, bicycle routes (
          10.25)
          Amends §§ 17.04.010 through 17.04.040, building code; repeals §§ 17.04.200 through
188       17.04.290; amends §§ 17.12.010 through 17.12.030, plumbing code; repeals §§
          17.12.040 through 17.12.050; amends §§ 17.16.020 through 17.16.030, mechanical
          code; repeals § 17.16.050 (Repealed by 365, 366, 367)
          Adds (9) to §
189       21.22.030, conditional uses; adds (10) to §
          21.24.030, conditional uses (Repealed by 612)
190       Adds Ch. 6.09, residential waste and refuse receptacle storage (Repealed by 419)
          Amends §§
191       17.08.010 through
          17.08.030, electrical code (
          17.08)
192       Adds Ch. 10.29, equestrian regulations (
          10.29)
193       Not used
194       Amends § 5.08.040, and adds §§ 5.80.045 and 5.80.080 (5), carnivals and circuses
          (Repealed by 383)
          Amends §
195       20.12.010, subdivisions (
          20.12)
196       Amends § 5.72.150, vending machines (Repealed by 383)
197       Number not used
198       Zoning (Special)
199       Franchise to Shell Oil Company (Special)
200       Redevelopment agency (
          2.48)
          Amends §
201       2.32.020, salaries (
          2.32)
202       Zoning (Special)
203       Adds Ch. 3.14, purchasing (Repealed by 407)
204       Adds Ch. 3.05, sales and use tax; repeals Ch. 3.04 (
          3.05)
205       Adds Ch. 9.15, topless and bottomless waitresses and performers (
          9.15)
206       Franchise to Union Oil Company (Special)
207       Amends §§ 21.20.030 and
          21.22.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
208       Speed limit on portion of Desman Road (Repealed by 494)
209       Speed limit on portion of Knott Avenue (Repealed by 494)
210       Adds § 17.04.045, building code (Repealed by 235)
          Amends §
211       10.25.020, bicycle lanes (
          10.25)
212       Adds Ch. 21.09, O-S district (Repealed by 612)
213       Annexation (Special)
214       Number not used
215       Speed limit on portion of South Firestone Boulevard Frontage Road (Repealed by
          494)
216       Repeals § 2.40.020 (Repealer)
217       Adds § 21.30.325, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Amends §
218       2.32.020, salaries (
          2.32)
219       Amends § 8.04.060, animal license fees (Repealed by 429)
220       Adds § 8.04.080, leash law (Repealed by 429)
221       Approves and adopts redevelopment plan for the Industrial- Commercial
          Redevelopment Project (Special)
222       Amends §§ 5.72.030, 5.72.060, 5.72.070, 5.72.080, 5.72.090, 5.72.100, 5.72.110,
          5.72.120, 5.72.130 and 5.72.140, business license fees (Repealed by 383)
223       Prezone (Special)
224       Annexation (Special)
225       Annexation (Special)
226       Adds Ch. 5.77, motion picture theaters, theaters, model studios, picture arcades
          and bookstores (Repealed by 304)
          Adds (8) to §
227       21.18.030, (14) to § 21.20.030 and (11) to §
          21.22.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
228       Amends zoning (Special)
229       Amends § 2.24.010 and adds § 2.24.011, holidays (Repealed by 491)
230       Amends zoning (Special)
          Amends §
231       2.04.060, mayor (
          2.04)
          Adds §§ 2.32.055,
232       2.32.065,
          2.32.075 and 2.32.085, city council's compensation; repeals §§ 2.32.030, 2.32.040,
          2.32.050, 2.32.060, 2.32.070, 2.32.080 (2.32)
233       Amends zoning map (Special)
          Amends §
234       2.04.060, mayor (
          2.04)
          Amends §§
          17.04.010 and
          17.04.020, and adds § 17.04.065, building code; amends §§
          17.08.010 and
235       17.08.020, electrical code; amends §§
          17.12.010 and
          17.12.020, plumbing code; and amends §§
          17.16.020 and
          17.16.030, mechanical code; repeals §§ 17.04.045 and 17.08.040--17.08.120 (
          17.08)
          Adds §
236       10.16.040, parking of trailers and semitrailers (
          10.16)
237       Approves and adopts redevelopment plan for the Valley View Commercial
          Redevelopment Project (Special)
          Amends §
238       2.32.020, salaries (
          2.32)
          Amends §
239       10.25.020, bicycle lanes (
          10.25)
240       Adds § 8.04.090, dog licensing (Repealed by 429)
241       Reenacts and readopts §§ 17.04.190, 17.04.200, 17.04.210, 17.04.220, 17.04.230,
          17.04.240, 17.04.250, 17.04.260 and 17.04.270, building code (Repealed by 365)
          Adds §
242       10.04.110, skateboarding (
          10.04)
243       Amends retirement system contract (Not codified)
244       Approves lease to redevelopment agency (Special)
245       Rezone (Special)
246       Rezone (Special)
247       Adds Ch. 9.10, smoking in public places (
          9.10) (Repealed by 695)
248       Amends zoning map (Special)
249       Repeals and replaces Ch. 2.28, civil defense; repeals Ord. 104 (
          2.28)
250       Prezone (Special)
251       Prezone (Special)
252       Adds §§ 17.04.280, 17.04.281, 17.04.282, 17.04.283, 17.04.284 and 17.04.285,
          building code amendments (Repealed by 264)
253       Adopts redevelopment plan (Special)
254       Approves annexation No. 76-1 (Special)
255       Amends §
          21.08.010, zoning map change (Special)
256       Civil defense emergency organization; repeals Ord. 249 (
          2.28)
          Adds §
          2.40.050 and amends §§
257       2.40.010,
          2.40.030 and
          2.40.040, oath of office for city officers and employees (
          2.40)
          Amends §
258       21.08.010, zoning map change (Special) 259 Adds §
          10.04.120, all city employees authorized to enforce parking regulations (
          10.04)
260       Amends §
          21.08.010, zoning map change (Special)
261       Approves annexation No. 76-2 (Special)
          Adds §§
262       10.16.050 and
          10.16.055, parking (
          10.16)
263       Speed limit on Stanbrook Drive (Repealed by 494)
          Amends §§
          17.04.010,
          17.04.020,
          17.04.030(16),
          17.04.040,
264       17.04.060, 17.04.065, 17.04.080, 17.04.100 and 17.04.180, building code; amends §§
          17.12.010 and
          17.12.020, plumbing code; amends §§
          17.16.020 and
          17.16.030, mechanical code; repeals §§ 17.04.070, 17.04.090, 17.04.110--17.04.170,
          17.04.190--17.04.230 and 17.04.260--17.04.285 (Repealed by 365, 366, 367)
265       Amends § 8.04.060, animal license fee (Repealed by 429)
266       Adds § 16.04.051 and amends § 16.04.020, fire code (Repealed by 384)
267       Adds Ch. 3.06, transient occupancy tax (
          3.06)
268       Rezone (Special)
269       Adds Ch. 5.54, garbage and refuse permits (Repealed by 383)
270       Adds § 13.04.041, amends § 13.04.020 and readopts §§ 13.04.010, 13.04.030 and
          13.04.040, sanitary sewers (Repealed by 442)
271       Adds § 5.72.075, dwelling unit registration (Repealed by 383)
          Amends §§
272       17.04.010,
          17.04.020, 17.04.140--17.04.160, 17.04.180, 17.04.190 and 17.04.210--17.04.230,
          building code (Not codified)
          Amends §
273       2.04.060 mayor (
          2.04)
274       Adds § 10.12.211, speed limit on Escalona Road (Repealed by 358)
275       Rezone (Special)
276       Amends public employees' retirement system contract (Not codified)
277       Adds § 9.40.070, narcotic paraphernalia (Repealed by 511)
278       Adds § 8.04.095, dogs (Repealed by 429)
          Amends §
279       9.04.010, loud noises (
          9.04)
          Amends §§
280       21.34.010 and
          21.34.030, condominium conversions (Repealed by 612)
281       Amends § 8.04.060, animal license fee (Repealed by 429)
282       Amends §
          21.08.010, zoning map (Special)
          Amends §§
          17.08.010,
283       17.08.020,
          17.08.030 and
          17.08.040, electrical code (
          17.08)
284       Moratorium on adult businesses (Repealed by 293)
285       Amends § 21.30.370, occupancy permit (Repealed by 612)
286       Amends public employees' retirement system contract (Not codified)
287       Southwest suburban water franchise (Repealed by 383)
288       Adds Ch. 9.06, burglar and robber alarm (
          9.06) (Repealed by 649)
289       Amends §
          21.08.010, zoning map (Special)
          Adds §
290       17.20.045, moving buildings and excavations (
          17.20)
291       Amends §
          21.08.010, zoning map (Special)
292       Extends Ord. 284, moratorium on adult businesses (Repealed by 293)
293       Urgency Ord. regarding adult businesses; repeals Ords. 284 and 292 (Not codified)
294       Adds §§ 9.12.031 and 9.12.032, intoxication (
          9.12)
295       Adds Ch. 21.53, adult entertainment (Repealed by 515)
296       Terminates franchise granted under Ord. 159 (Special)
297       Adds § 5.84.235; amends §§ 5.84.010 through 5.84.230, franchises (Repealed by 283)
          Adds §§
298       21.20.035, 21.22.235, zoning (
          21.20,
          21.22)
          Amends §§
299       21.20.080,
          21.22.060, 21.24.090, zoning (Repealed by 612)
300       (Number not used)
301       Adds Ch. 5.78, bingo (Repealed by 383)
302       Adds § 5.78.205; amends §§ 5.78.010, 5.78.040, 5.78.200, bingo (Repealed by 383)
          Adds §§
303       9.12.060, 9.12.061, intoxication (
          9.12)
304       Amends §§ 21.53.060, 21.53.070, 21.53.080, 21.53.100, 21.53.140, zoning; repeals
          Ch. 5.77 (Repealed by 515)
305       Amends §§ 5.78.100, 5.78.200, bingo (Repealed by 383)
306       Franchise to Gulf Oil Corporation (Special)
          Adds §
307       8.08.020, horses (
          8.08)
308       Adds Ch. 9.85, sealing of sexually explicit material (
          9.85)
309       Amends §§ 5.84.060, 5.84.085, 5.84.090, 5.84.100, franchises (Repealed by 383)
310       Adds Ch. 5.85, grant of CATV franchise (Repealed by 383)
311       Amends § 5.84.175(C), franchises (Repealed by 383)
312       Amends § 21.53.080, zoning (Repealed by 515)
          Amends §§
          21.24.020,
313       21.24.030,
          21.26.020 and
          21.26.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
314       Adds §§ 21.30.390, 21.30.395, 21.30.400, 21.30.405, 21.30.410 and 21.30.415;
          amends § 21.30.175, zoning (Repealed by 612)
315       Amends §§ 3.14.050, 3.14.060, 3.14.080 and 3.14.090, purchasing procedures
          (Repealed by 407)
316       Adds Ch. 21.35, zoning (Repealed by 612)
317       Adds §§ 9.90.010 and 9.90.020, graffiti removal (Repealed by 468)
          Amends §§
          17.04.010,
318       17.08.010,
          17.12.010 and
          17.16.020, building codes (
          17.08)
319       Repeals Ord. 103 (Repealer)
320       (Not adopted)
321       (Not adopted)
322       Adds Ch. 2.52, planning commission (
          2.52)
323       Rezone (Special)
324       Amends Ch. 9.85, use of newsracks (
          9.85)
          Adds §§
325       10.16.060 and
          10.16.070, parking (
          10.16)
326       Adds § 8.04.045; amends § 8.04.060, animal license fees (Repealed by 429)
327       Adds § 5.85.150; amends §§ 5.85.060, 5.85.080 and 5.85.120, grant of CATV
          franchise (Repealed by 383)
328       Adds § 5.85.150; amends §§ 5.85.060, 5.85.080 and 5.85.120, grant of CATV
          franchise (Repealed by 383)
329       Amends subsection 303(f)1b and Table 30-A of Uniform Building Code (Repealed by
          365)
330       Adds §§ 13.04.050, 13.04.060 and 13.04.070; amends §§ 13.04.010, 13.04.020,
          13.04.030 and 13.04.040; repeals § 13.04.041, industrial wastes (Repealed by 442)
          Adds §
331       10.16.080, parking regulations (
          10.16)
          Amends §§
          10.04.020,
332       10.04.030,
          10.04.040 and
          10.04.050, traffic regulations (
          10.04)
333       Adds §§ 10.12.135 and 10.12.230; amends § 10.12.130, speed limits (Repealed by
          494)
334       Adds Ch. 2.56, claims and demands against the city (
          2.56)
335       Amends contract with public employees' retirement system (Special)
336       Amends §§ 3.14.050, 3.14.060, 3.14.080 and 3.14.090, purchasing (Repealed by 407)
          Adds § 3.14.120; amends §
337       3.14.020, purchasing (
          3.14)
338       Franchise to Shell Oil Company (Special)
339       Amends Ch. 2.08, city manager (
          2.08)
340       Amends §§ 3.14.050, 3.14.060 and 3.14.090, purchasing (Repealed by 407)
341       Amends §§ 3.14.050, 3.14.060 and 3.14.090, purchasing (Repealed by 407)
          Adds §§
          17.08.050, 17.08.060 and 17.08.070; amends §§
342       17.08.010 and
          17.08.040, electrical code (
          17.08)
343       Adds Ch. 3.07, admission tax (Repealed by 364)
          Adds §
344       10.29.040, equestrian trails (
          10.29)
345       Amends §
          21.24.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
346       Not Adopted
          Adds Ch. 21.13 and (9) to § 21.12.030; amends §§
347       21.12.030(1) and
          21.12.040, zoning (Repealed by 612)
348       Adds Ch. 3.09, oil producers' tax (
          3.09)
349       Amends §§ 3.07.010, 3.07.050, 3.07.060, 3.07.080, 3.07.090, 3.07.110 and 3.07.130,
          admission tax (Repealed by 364)
          Amends §§
350       3.05.120 and 3.05.130, sales tax (
          3.05)
351       Amends § 21.32.070, zoning (Repealed by 612)
352       Adds § 21.42.035; and amends § 21.42.040, zoning (Repealed by 612)
353       Adds § 5.72.150(j), business license fees (Repealed by 383)
354       Approves planned unit development No. 39 (Special) 355 Amends § 3.14.050,
          purchasing (Repealed by 407)
356       Adds § 21.30.195, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Amends §
357       2.04.020, council (
          2.04)
358       Adds §§ 10.12.220--10.12.290, amends §§ 10.12.010-10.12.040, 10.12.080--10.12.130,
          10.12.140-10.12.201; repeals § 10.12.211, speed limits (Repealed by 494)
359       Amends § 10.12.080, speed limits (Repealed by 494)
          Adds §
360       9.04.010(b)(5), noise (
          9.04)
361       Approves planned unit development No. 40 (Special)
          Amends §
362       2.32.065, compensation and salary (
          2.32)
363       Adds Ch. 9.94, admission charge parties (Repealed by 541)
364       Repeals Ch. 3.07 (Repealer)
365       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, building code (Repealed by 423)
366       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.16, mechanical code (Repealed by 421)
367       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.12, plumbing code (Repealed by 422)
368       Amends § 21.30.415, zoning (Repealed by 612)
369       Urgency ordinance; amends §§ 21.20.030 and
          21.22.030, zoning; repeals Ch. 9.16 (Repealed by 612)
          Adds § 21.30.420; amends §§
370       21.30.030(2) and
          21.24.020(6), zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Amends §
371       9.12.060, intoxication (
          9.12)
372       Fortunetelling businesses; amends §§ 21.20.030 and 21.22.030; repeals Ch. 9.16
          (Repealed by 612)
373       Amends §§ 21.24.080 and 21.26.070, zoning (Repealed by 612)
374       Approves planned unit development No. 41 (Special)
          Amends §
375       10.16.060, parking (
          10.16)
376       Not used
          Repeals and replaces §§
377       17.08.010,
          17.08.050 and 17.08.070, electrical code (
          17.08)
378       Amends §§ 21.20.030 and
          21.22.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
379       Amends §§ 21.32.040 and 21.32.090, zoning (Repealed by 612)
380       Amends § 21.32.110, zoning (Repealed by 612)
381       Amends § 21.32.090, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Adds subsection 11 to §
382       2.08.010, city manager (
          2.08)
          Adds Title 4, business permits and regulations; repeals and replaces Title 5,
          business licenses (
          4.02,
          4.04,
          4.06,
          4.10,
          4.15,
          4.25,
383       4.30,
          4.35,
          4.40,
          4.45,
          4.50,
          4.55,
          5.02,
          5.04,
          5.06)
384       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, fire prevention code (Repealed by 524)
385       Adds Ch. 21.55, abatement of public nuisances (Repealed by 612)
386       Development agreement (Special)
387       Adds Ch. 9.50, painting of house numbers on curbs (
          9.50)
          Amends §§
          10.24.010,
388       10.24.020 and
          10.24.030, truck routes (
          10.24)
          Amends §§
389       21.36.030, 21.38.050, 21.40.050 and
          21.46.010, zoning (Repealed by 612)
390       Redevelopment project (Special)
391       Redevelopment project (Special)
          Amends §
392       2.52.070(a), planning commission rules of conduct (
          2.52)
393       Amends §§ 21.20.030 and
          21.22.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
394       Amends §§ 21.30.150 and 21.30.370, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Amends §§ 21.20.030,
395       21.22.030 and
          21.24.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
396       (Not adopted)
397       Amends §§ 21.13.030(4) and (5), zoning (Repealed by 612)
398       Approves development agreement (Special)
          Amends §
399       3.06.030, transient occupancy tax (
          3.06)
          Adds §§ 21.06.035, 21.06.265, 21.06.402,
400       21.18.030(9), 21.20.030(17--19) and
          21.22.030(14--16), zoning (Repealed by 612)
401       Adds § 16.04.055, safe and sane fireworks (Repealed by 524)
402       Approves development agreement (Special)
403       Amends §
          21.12.040(5), zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Cable television transfer; adds §§ 4.50.095 and 14.04.095; amends §§
          4.50.080 and 4.50.150; repeals and replaces §
          4.50.050, the fifth paragraph of §§
          4.50.060, 4.50.085,
          4.50.160(a), 4.50.175(a)(4), (a)(5), (a) (6) and (d)(2),
          4.55.050(b),
404       4.55.080,
          4.55.110 and
          4.55.120 and Exhibit A to Ch. 4.55; deletes language from §§
          4.50.040 and
          4.50.070(d) and repeals §§ 4.50.230(f) and 4.55.090 (
          4.50,
          4.55)
405       Adds Ch. 9.42, threats with replica firearms (
          9.42)
407       Repeals and replaces Ch. 3.14, purchasing (
          3.14)
          Adds §§ 21.06.285, 21.06.362, 21.06.365, 21.06.375,
          21.20.020,(9),
408       21.22.020,(12),
          21.24.020(12),and (13)
          21.24.030(13),
          21.26.030(13) and 21.30.430, zoning (Repealed by 612)
409       Adds § 9.98.010, fees for use of sheriff personnel at loud or unruly assemblages
          (Repealed by 541)
410       Approves planned unit development No. 3 (Special) 411 Adopts previous supplement
          to municipal code (Not codified)
412       Repeals and replaces Ch. 1.08, penalties, civil remedies and severability (
          1.08)
413       Adds Ch. 1.04, public places for posting of notices (
          1.04)
414       Adds Ch. 9.96, skateboards (Repealed by 467)
415       Conditionally approves planned unit development (Special)
416       Conditionally approves planned unit development (Special)
417       Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.36, discharging of weapons; repeals § 9.40.030 (9.36)
          Amends §
418       9.36.010, discharging of weapons (
          9.36)
419       Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.08, garbage and refuse collection; repeals Chs. 4.20
          and 6.09 (Repealed by 485)
420       Redevelopment plan amendment (Special)
421       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.16, mechanical code (Repealed by 448)
422       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.12, plumbing code (Repealed by 448)
423       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, building code (Repealed by 448)
424       Approves development agreement (Special)
425       Approves development agreement (Special)
426       Adds new section to Ch. 10.12; amends § 10.12.080, prima facie speed limits
          (Repealed by 494)
427       Approves general plan amendment No. 1989-1 (Special)
428       Conditionally approves planned unit development (Special)
429       Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.04, animal control (Repealed by 522)
430       Urgency ordinance (Not codified)
431       Adds § 21.30.425, zoning (Repealed by 612)
432       Adds §
          21.26.030(14), zoning (Repealed by 612)
433       Approves amendment to development agreement (Special)
434       Adds § 21.30.040, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Adds §§ 21.20.030(22),
          21.22.030(19),
435       21.24.030(13),
          21.26.030(15); amends §§ 21.20.030(2),
          21.24.020(6); repeals § 21.30.420, zoning (Repealed by 612)
436       Rezone (Special)
437       Rezone (Special)
438       (Not adopted)
439       Approves development agreement (Special)
440       Adds § 21.32.075, zoning (Repealed by 612)
441       Amends § 21.32.090, zoning (Repealed by 612)
442       Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.04, industrial wastes (
          13.04)
443       Approves development agreement No. 6 (Special)
444       Establishes home mortgage financing program (Special)
445       Amends §§ 21.06.130 and
          21.12.040, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Amends §
446       4.55.100, CATV franchise (
          4.55)
447       Grants franchise to Golden West Refining Co. (Special)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, 17.12 and 17.16, buildings and construction (
448       17.04,
          17.12,
          17.16)
449       Modifies PUD No. 7 (Special)
          Adds §
450       3.14.150, purchasing recycled products (
          3.14)
451       Modifies development agreement No. 5 (Special)
          Amends §
452       2.32.065, council salaries (
          2.32)
          Adds (d) to § 5.06.020; amends §
453       5.06.040(4), business licenses (
          5.06)
454       Supports air pollution reduction (Special)
455       Approves development agreement (Special)
456       Amends Ch. 9.08, loitering and soliciting from streets (
          9.08)
          Adds Ch.
457       9.100, urinating and defecating in public places (
          9.100)
458       (Not adopted)
          Adds Ch.
459       9.102, abatement of public nuisance residential units (
          9.102)
460       Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08, electrical code (Repealed by 495)
461       Repeals and replaces §§ 8.04.020, 8.04.050 and 8.04.080, animal control (Repealed
          by 522)
462       Approves development agreement No. 7 (Special)
463       Repeals and replaces Chs. 17.04, 17.12 and 17.16, building codes (Repealed by 495)
464       Adds Ch. 21.33, trip reduction and travel demand measures (Repealed by 612)
465       Adds Ch. 2.60, claims and actions for money and damages (
          2.60)
          Amends §§
466       6.12.070 and 6.12.090, sale of fireworks (
          6.12)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.96, prohibition on skateboards and other wheeled
467       devices (
          9.96)
468       Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.90, graffiti (
          9.90) (9.90.090 repealed by 731)
469       Adds § 21.04.060, owner's liability for cost of reinspections (Repealed by 612)
          Amends §
470       2.28.060, emergency declaration (
          2.28)
          Amends §
471       2.28.060, emergency declaration (
          2.28)
472       Franchise grant to Shell California Pipe Line Company (Special)
          Repeals §§ 9.06.090, 9.06.100 and 9.06.110 and adds new §
473       9.06.090, burglary and robbery alarms (
          9.06) (Repealed by 649)
          Amends §
474       9.85.090(b), (9.85.080(b)) newsracks (
          9.85)
475       Adds Ch. 9.104, prohibition of signs in public places (Repealed by 496)
476       Approves general plan amendment No. 1993-1 (Special)
477       Approves planned unit development No. 46 (Special)
478       Approves development agreement No. 8 (Special)
479       Amends § 21.30.425, zoning (Repealed by 612)
480       Adds § 3.05.200, sales and use tax (Repealed by 481)
          Adds §
481       3.05.200, sales and use tax; repeals Ord. 480 (
          3.05)
          Amends §
482       2.04.060, council--mayor (
          2.04)
483       Repeals § 3 of Ord. 481 (Repealer)
          Amends §§
484       9.96.010 and
          9.96.020, skateboards and other wheeled devices prohibited (
          9.96)
485       Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.08, solid waste collection and salvage of recyclable
          materials (Repealed by 531)
486       Approves development agreement (Special)
          Amends §
487       16.12.070, fireworks (
          16.12)
488       Time limitations for projects 1, 2 and 3 (Special)
489       Adds Ch. 13.12, urban runoff (13.12) (Repealed by 671)
          Adds §§ 1.08.015, penalties, civil remedies and severability, and 9.40.055; amends
490       §
          9.40.050, minors (
          1.08)
          Amends §§
          1.08.010, penalties;
          2.04.050, council-mayor;
          3.08.050, documentary stamp tax;
          4.06.120,
          4.06.130,
          4.40.010,
          4.40.080, business permits and regulations;
          9.24.030,
          9.42.010,
          9.102.020,
          9.102.030(a) and (c), public peace, morals and safety;
          10.04.120, traffic regulations;
          14.04.020, underground utility districts;
          20.04.090,
          20.08.620,
          20.12.020(c),
          20.24.010,
          20.24.020(a)(2) and (c), subdivisions; and footnotes to Chs. 2.28 and 3.08, Title
491       6, Title 9, Ch. 10.08 and Title 20; repeals §§ 1.01.120, 2.28.100, 2.32.055,
          2.32.085, 3.05.130, 3.05.140, 3.05.170, 3.05.180, 3.05.190, 3.12.070, 4.06.070,
          9.04.020, 9.04.030, 9.04.040, 9.12.030, 9.12.040, 9.24.010, 9.24.020, 9.40.010,
          9.40.020, 9.40.030, 9.85.110 and Chs. 1.12, 1.16, 2.24, 9.32, 9.68, 9.72 and 9.80
          (
          1.08,
          2.04,
          2.28,
          3.08,
          4.06,
          4.40, 6, 9,
          9.24,
          9.42,
          9.102,
          10.04,
          10.08,
          14.04, 20,
          20.04,
          20.08,
          20.12,
          20.24)
492       Approves development agreement No. 5A (Special)
          Adds §
493       16.12.065 and amends §
          16.12.070, fireworks (
          16.12)
494       Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.12, speed limits (Repealed by 526)
495       Repeals and replaces Chs. 17.04, 17.08, 17.12 and 17.16, buildings and
          construction (Repealed by 536A)
496       Amends Ch. 21.50 and § 21.55.020(17), zoning; repeals Ch. 9.104 (Repealed by 612)
497       Adds § 21.30.155 and amends § 21.30.150, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Interim zoning ordinance prohibiting establishment of or change of use of any
498       existing business to adult-oriented business pending implementation of adult-
          oriented business regulations (Repealed by 515)
499       Extends Ord. 498 (Repealed by 515)
500       Amends contract with public employees' retirement system (Special)
          Adds Ch.
501       9.106, camping and storage of personal property (
          9.106)
502       Consent to change in control by merger of CATV franchisee (Not codified)
          Amends §§
503       21.24.030 and
          21.26.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
504       Adds Ch. 21.57, wireless communications facilities (Repealed by 612)
505       Interim zoning ordinance pertaining to development standards for adult-oriented
          businesses (Repealed by 515)
506       Interim zoning ordinance pertaining to development standards for rental gathering
          facilities (Repealed by 519)
          Amends §
507       1.04.010, public notices (
          1.04)
508       Adds Ch. 2.34, elections (
          2.34)
509       Interim zoning ordinance pertaining to development standards for rental gathering
          facilities (Repealed by 519)
510       Approves amendment to development agreement No. 9 (Special)
511       Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.40, minors (
          9.40)
512       Adds Ch. 12.06, delivery receptacles prohibited in public rights-of-way (
          12.06)
513       Amends §§ 21.26.100 and
          21.50.030, zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Adds Ch.
514       9.110, use of city-owned facilities, recreation and athletic facilities, and
          adjoining open space areas restricted (
          9.110)
515       Repeals and replaces Ch. 21.53, adult entertainment businesses; repeals Ords. 498,
          499 and 505 (Repealed by 612)
          Adds Ch.
516       9.112, shopping carts (
          9.112)
          Amends §
517       2.32.065, council (
          2.32)
          Amends §
518       10.16.060, off-street parking (
          10.16)
          Adds §§ 21.06.085, 21.06.095, 21.06.367 and 21.40.045; amends §§ 21.06.410,
          21.20.020, 21.20.030,
519       21.22.030,
          21.24.020,
          21.24.030 and 21.26.030; repeals Ords. 506 and 509; zoning (Repealed by 612)
          Adds Chs.
          9.108 and
520       9.109, noncharitable and charitable soliciting (
          9.108,
          9.109)
521       Adds Ch. 2.46, authority to arrest (
          2.46)
522       Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.04, animals (
          8.04)
523       Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.04, health code (
          6.04)
524       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, fire prevention code (Repealed by 574)
525       Amends § 16.12.160, fireworks (
          16.12)
526       Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.12, speed limits (
          10.12)
527       Rezone (Special)
          Renumbers § 9.12.061 to be § 9.110.030; amends Ch. 9.12 in its entirety, alcoholic
528       beverages (
          9.12,
          9.110)
529       Rezone (Special)
          Adds new Ch.
530       9.114, narcotics and gang-related crime eviction program (
          9.114)
531       Repeals and replaces Ch. 6.08, solid waste and recyclables collection services (
          6.08)
532       Adds Ch. 4.18, outcall dancers and models (Repealed by 532A)
532A      Adds Ch. 4.18, outcall dancers and models; repeals Ord. 432 (
          4.18)
          Amends §
533       9.40.060, minors (
          9.40)
534       Amends public employees' retirement system contract (Not codified)
535       Grants franchise to Southern California Edison Company (Special)
536       Repeals and replaces Chs. 17.04--17.16, buildings and construction (Repealed by
          536A)
          Repeals and replaces Chs. 17.04--17.16, buildings and construction (
          17.04,
536A      17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16)
537       Suspends issuance of entertainment permits; repeals Ord. 537U (Repealed by 552)
538       Adds Ch. 9.114 [Ch. 9.116], garage sales (
          9.116)
539       Amends § 21.55.230, abatement of public nuisances (Repealed by 612)
540       Redevelopment plan amendment (Special)
541       Adds §§ 21.55.020(20) and (21) and 21.55.030; repeals and replaces Ch. 9.98;
          repeals Ch. 9.94, nuisances (9.94, (21.55 repealed by 612)
542       Amends § 21.30.395, zoning (Repealed by 612)
543       Adds §§ 16.12.045 and 16.12.165; repeals Ord. 543U, fireworks (
          16.12)
          Adds Ch.
544       9.117, use of the city seal and logos (
          9.117)
          Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.070, 16.12.080, 16.12.090, 16.12.150,
545       16.12.160, 16.12.165 and 16.12.170, fireworks (
          16.12)
546       Adds Ch. 9.120, Fourth of July block parties (
          9.120)
547       Adds § 17.04.050, lock boxes required at specified locations (
          17.04)
548       Redevelopment plan amendment (Special)
549       Adds Ch. 1.10, judicial review of city decisions (
          1.10)
550       Adds Ch. 21.49, temporary use permits (Repealed by 612)
551       Amends planned unit development No. 47 (Special)
          Adds §§
          4.35.040(10)--(12) and 4.35.140; amends §§
          4.35.010,
          4.35.030(5),
          4.35.040,
552       4.35.040(3), (4) and (7)--(9),
          4.35.050,
          4.35.070,
          4.35.080,
          4.35.100(2), (3) and (6),
          4.35.110 and 4.35.120; repeals Ord. 537, entertainment permits (
          4.35)
          Amends §
553       9.110.030, hours of use of parks (
          9.110)
          Amends §
554       2.32.065, adjustment of council member compensation (
          2.32)
555       Adds Ch. 6.14, keeping of bees prohibited (
          6.14)
556       Adds Ch. 12.08, preservation, protection and removal of parkway trees (
          12.08)
          Adds §§
          13.12.020(d) and 13.12.075; amends §§
557       13.12.030 and
          13.12.090, urban runoff (
          13.12)
558       (Not used)
559       Franchise grant to CENCO (Special)
          Adds §§ 21.55.020(22); amends §§ 16.12.160--16.12.170 and 21.55.030, fireworks
560       regulations (
          16.12, (21.55 repealed by 612)
          Adds §
561       21.22.030(20); amends §
          21.22.020(8), pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers (Repealed by 612)
          Adds §§ 21.06.055, 21.06.195, 21.06.372, 21.06.374,
          21.18.030(10), 21.18.100, 21.20.030(23),
          21.20.100,
          21.22.030(21),
562       21.22.080,
          21.24.030(18), 21.24.120,
          21.26.030(19), 21.26.110 and 21.30.450; amends §§
          21.06.030, 21.06.350,
          21.22.020(4) and
          21.24.020(10), zoning (Repealed by 612)
563       Adds Ch. 21.60, property maintenance and use standards (Repealed by 612)
564       Adds §§ 13.12.020(d) and 13.12.075; amends §§ 13.12.030 and 13.12.090, urban
          runoff (13.12) (Repealed by 671)
565       Zoning (Special)
566       Rezone (Special)
          Amends
567       1.04.010, posting of public notices (
          1.04)
          Repeals and replaces Part 1 of Ch. 4.50, cable, video, and telecommunications
568       service providers (
          4.50)
569       Amends 16.12.045, fireworks regulations (
          16.12)
570       Approves development agreement No. 10 (Special)
571       Approves development agreement No. 11 (Special)
572       Amends §§ 13.12.020, 13.12.030 and 13.12.075, storm water runoff (13.12) (Repealed
          by 671)
573       (Number not used)
574       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, fire prevention code (Repealed by 612)
575       Amends § 1.04.010, designated public places for posting of notices (
          1.04)
576       (Number not used)
577       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.12, fireworks regulations (
          16.12)
          Amends § 9.96.030, applicability of chapter; adds § 9.96.035, electric personal
578       assistive mobility devices prohibited on pedestrian walkways and sidewalks (
          9.96)
579       Adds Ch. 9.09, loitering by criminal street gangs (
          9.09)
580       Approving and adopting the redevelopment plan for Project Area No. 4 (Special)
581       Merging four project areas and adopting a redevelopment plan for the merged area
          project (Special)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, building code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08,
582       electrical code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.12, plumbing code; repeals and
          replaces Ch. 17.16, mechanical code (Repealed by 612)
583       Adds Ch. 10.18, preferential parking program (
          10.18)
584       Amends Ch. 16.12, fireworks regulations (
          16.12)
585       Approves modification of Planned Unit Development No. 50 for Biola University
          (Special)
586       (Number not used)
          Amending, approving and adopting certain time limitations with respect to the
587       redevelopment plans for Project Area No. 1, Amended Project Area No. 1, Project
          Area No. 2 and Project Area No. 3 (Special)
588       Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.070 and 16.12.160, fireworks (
          16.12)
589       Adds §§ 21.06.406 and 21.30.460, zoning (Repealed by 612)
590       Adds § 2.08.010(12), powers and duties of city manager (
          2.08)
591       (Number not used)
592       Repeals and replaces Ch. 10.12, speed limits (
          10.12)
593       Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.070, 16.12.160 and 16.12.210, fireworks (
          16.12)
594       (Number not used)
595       (Number not used)
          Adds §
596       3.14.135, specialized contracting procedures permitted (
          3.14)
          Amends §
598       2.32.065, adjustment of council member compensation (
          2.32)
599       (Number not used)
600       (Number not used)
601       (Number not used)
          Repeals Ch. 4.08, repeals and replaces Ch. 4.10, massage establishments and
602       massage technicians (
          4.10)
603       (Number not used)
604       Repeals and replaces Ch. 4.25 (
          4.25)
605       Adds Ch. 4.60, sales from vehicles (
          4.60)
606       (Number not used)
607       Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.160, 16.12.210, fireworks (
          16.12)
          Adds § 21.06.408, tobacco retail business defined; amends §§ 21.18.030, 21.18.100,
608       21.20.030, 21.20.100, 21.22.030, 21.22.080, 21.24.030, 21.24.120, 21.26.030,
          21.26.110
612       Repeals and replaces Title 21, zoning code (Title 21) (§ 21.62.030, §§ 21.68.010 -
          21.68.160 repealed by 710)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, building code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08,
          electrical code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.12, plumbing code; repeals and
          replaces Ch. 17.16, mechanical code (
613       17.04,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16) (Repealed by 639)
614       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, fire code (
          16.04) (Repealed by 640)
615       Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.070, 16.12.160, sale of fireworks (
          16.12)
          Adds § 4.50.085, special provisions applicable to holders of state video
617       franchises (
          4.50)
          Amends §§ 21.20.020, 21.72.050, 21.108.020, Zoning (
618       21.20,
          21.72,
          21.108)
619       Adds §§ 21.48.010 - 21.48.040, medical marijuana dispensaries (
          21.48) (Repealed by 700)
621       Amends § 2.32.065, council member compensation adjustment (
          2.32)
622-U     Amends Ch. 21.32, flood hazard overlay zoning district (
          21.32)
          Add § 21.14.040; amends Ch. 21.14, enforcement, §§ 21.68.060, 21.88.030,
          21.112.010 - 21.112.040, and 21.114.020, zoning (
          21.14,
623       21.68,
          21.88,
          21.112,
          21.114) (§ 21.68.070 repealed by 710)
          Adds Ch. 21.15, abatement of public nuisances and § 21.20.055, drive-through
          facility standards; amends §§ 21.20.020, 21.76.020, 21.76.070, 21.84.090,
          21.86.020, 21.120.030, zoning (
          21.15,
624       21.20,
          21.76,
          21.84,
          21.86,
          21.120)
625       Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.070, 16.12.160, 16.12.210, fireworks (
          16.12)
626       Adds Ch. 9.124, maintenance of foreclosed and abandoned residential properties (
          9.124)
627       Amends §§ 21.76.020, 21.76.050, 21.76.070, signs (
          21.76)
628       Amends § 3.06.030, payment of transient occupancy tax (
          3.06)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 1.08, penalties, administrative and civil remedies, and
629       general provisions (
          1.08)
630       Amends §§ 16.12.030, 16.12.045, 16.12.050, fireworks (
          16.12)
631       Adds § 6.04.045, Title 11 amendments - water conservation requirements (
          6.04)
          Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.160 revising regulations pertaining to the
632       sale and use of safe and sane fireworks (
          16.12)
          Amends § 8.04.020, revising the date of the version of the Los Angeles County Code
633       adopted by reference as the city animal control ordinance; adds § 8.04.025,
          establishing fees for services related to the animal control ordinance (
          8.04)
634-U     Declares moratorium on land use entitlements and issuance of building permits
          (Special)
635-U     Extends moratorium on land use entitlements and issuance of building permits
          enacted by Ord. 634-U (Special)
          Amends § 9.90.070, revising regulations applicable to the recovery of graffiti
636       clean-up costs (
          9.09)
          Adds § 16.12.220, revising regulations applicable to dangerous fireworks and
637       providing for administrative fines (
          16.12)
          Amending §§ 16.12.045 and 16.12.065 pertaining to the sale and use of safe and
638       sane fireworks (
          16.12)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, Building Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.06,
          Residential Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08, Electrical Code; repeals and
          replaces Ch. 17.12, Plumbing Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.16, Mechanical
          Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.18 Green Building Standards Code (
639       17.04,
          17.06,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16,
          17.18) (Repealed by 666-U)
          Amending Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, and
          adding regulations for Residential Code and Green Building Standards Code (
          17.04,
639-U     17.06,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16,
          17.18)
640       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04 Fire Code (16.04) (Repealed by 670)
640-U     Amending Chapter 16.04 regarding the Fire Code (
          16.04)
641       Amending § 6.04.030 regarding mobile and other food facilities (
          6.04)
642       Amending §§ 8.04.020, 8.04.050, and 8.04.080 pertaining to the licensing of
          animals and animal facilities
643       Declares compliance with part 1.9 of division 24 of the California Health and
          Safety Code (Special)
          Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, and 16.12.160, pertaining to sale and use of safe
644       and sane fireworks (
          16.12)
645       Amends Chapter 4.10, pertaining to massage services (
          4.10) (Repealed by 681)
646       Adds § 21.16.015, pertaining to zoning for the Imperial Highway Specific Plan (
          21.16)
          Amends Table 21.16.010, adding the Imperial Highway Specific Plan to the table of
647       city zoning districts (
          21.16)
          Amends §§ 8.04.020 and 8.04.080 pertaining to potentially dangerous and vicious
648       dogs (
          8.04)
649       Repeals and replaces Ch. 9.06 Regulation of Alarm Systems (
          9.06)
          Adds § 17.04.055 pertaining to the Building Code; adds § 21.62.015 and amends §§
650       21.62.020 through 21.62.080 pertaining to fences and walls (
          17.04,
          21.62) (§ 17.04.055 repealed by 666-U; § 12.62.030 repealed by 710)
          Amends §§ 21.18.020 and 21.18.060 pertaining to residential zoning districts;
          amends § 21.68.050 pertaining to off- street parking requirements; amends §
          21.82.020 pertaining to Approving Authority; adds Chapter 21.103, pertaining to
          Large Family Day Care Permit; amends §§ 21.200.040 and 21.200.070 pertaining to
651       Zoning Code definitions (
          21.18,
          21.68,
          21.82,
          21.103,
          21.200) (§ 21.68.050 repealed by 710)
          Amends § 21.20.020 pertaining to commercial zoning districts, 21.22.020 pertaining
652       to industrial zoning districts (
          21.20,
          21.22)
653       Amends § 10.12.020 pertaining to speed limits (
          10.12)
654       Adds Ch. 3.10, Transactions and Use Tax (
          3.10)
655       Rezone (Special)
          Adds § 21.112.025 and amends §§ 21.112.030 through 21.112.050 pertaining to
656       Certificate of Compatibility (
          21.112)
657       Approves planned unit development No. 54 (Special)
658       Authorizes amendment to contract with Board of Administration, State Employees’
          Retirement System (Special)
          Amends § 9.06.100 and adds § 9.06.145, pertaining to nuisance alarms; adds §
659       9.98.040 pertaining to nuisance parties (
          9.06,
          9.98)
660       Approves planned unit development No. 53 for Biola University (Special)
          Adds Chs. 21.37, 21.38, and 21.39, Mixed Use, Special Housing, and Emergency
          Shelter overlay districts; adds Ch. 21.126, Reasonable Accommodation; amends Table
          21.16.010, adding the new overlay districts; amends Table 21.18.020, permitted
          uses in residential zoning districts; amends Ch. 21.52 title and § 21.52.020
          pertaining to Transitional and Supportive Housing; amends § 21.200.200 pertaining
          to Zoning Code definitions (
661       21.16,
          21.18,
          21.37,
          21.38,
          21.39,
          21.52,
          21.126,
          21.200)
662       Adds Ch. 9.128, Rewards for Information on Crimes (
          9.128)
          Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, 16.12.070, 16.12.150 and 16.12.160 pertaining to
663       fireworks; adds § 16.12.068, Master Permittee; removes §§ 16.12.100 and 16.12.155
          pertaining to fireworks (
          16.12)
664       Repeals § 9.08.030, solicitation (
          9.08)
665       Amends §§ 16.12.045, 16.12.065, and 16.12.160 regarding fireworks regulations (
          16.12 )
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, Building Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.06,
          Residential Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08, Electrical Code; repeals and
          replaces Ch. 17.12, Plumbing Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.16, Mechanical
          Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.18 Green Building Standards Code (
666-U     17.04 ,
          17.06 ,
          17.08 ,
          17.12 ,
          17.16 ,
          17.18 ) (Repealed by 667)
          Repeals and replaces Ch. 17.04, Building Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.06,
          Residential Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.08, Electrical Code; repeals and
          replaces Ch. 17.12, Plumbing Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.16, Mechanical
          Code; repeals and replaces Ch. 17.18 Green Building Standards Code (
667       17.04 ,
          17.06 ,
          17.08 ,
          17.12 ,
          17.16 ,
          17.18 )
          Amends §§ 2.52.030 and 2.52.050 regarding terms of office for and removal of
668       planning commission members (
          2.52 )
669-U     Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, Fire Code (
          16.04) (Repealed by 670)
670       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, Fire Code (
          16.04)
671       Repeals and replaces Ch. 13.12, Urban Runoff (
          13.12)
672       Extends existing franchise to Crimson California Pipeline, L.P. (Special)
          Prohibiting commencement of operation of any new massage establishment, including
673-U     issuance of related licenses, permits and land use entitlements, for 45 days
          (Special)
674-U     Extending Interim Ord. 673-U an additional ten months and fifteen days from its
          expiration (Special)
          Adds Ch. 17.26, Expedited Permitting for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy
675       Systems (
          17.26)
          Approves planned unit development no. 55 to allow for the construction of thirty-
676       three (33) single-family residential condominium units at 12000 La Mirada
          Boulevard (Special)
          Prohibiting all commercial medical marijuana uses in the city, including
677-U     deliveries; and prohibiting all medical marijuana cultivation, including
          cultivation for medical use by a qualified patient or primary caregiver (Special)
          (Repealed by 700)
          Granting a franchise to Cardinal Pipeline, L.P., a California limited partnership
678       to operate, maintain, inspect, repair, remove, remove replace and abandon an
          existing crude petroleum pipeline and appurtenant facilities in certain public
          streets (Special)
          Extending interim ordinance 677-U, prohibiting all commercial medical marijuana
679-U     uses in the city, including deliveries; prohibiting all medical marijuana
          cultivation, including cultivation for medical use by a qualified patient or
          primary caregiver (Special) (Repealed by 700)
          Extending interim ordinance 674-U, prohibiting the commencement of operation of
680-U     any new massage establishment, including issuance or business licenses, building
          permits and other land use entitlements to construct and/or operate any new
          massage establishment (Special) (Repealed by 682)
          Revising regulations applicable to massage services and businesses and replacing
681       Chapter 4.10 (
          4.10)
          Revising §§ 21.20.020 and 21.22.020 regarding land use regulations applicable to
682       massage establishments, and amending the imperial highway specific plan (
          21.20,
          21.22)
          Amending regulations applicable to noise levels in residential and commercial
683       zones (
          9.04)
          Providing for the election of members of the city council by five districts,
684       establishing the boundaries and identification number of each district,
          establishing the election order of each district and adding Ch. 2.02 (
          2.02)
          Interim ordinance prohibiting all commercial non-medical marijuana activity in the
685-U     city, prohibiting outdoor marijuana cultivation on private residences (Special)
          (Repealed by 700)
          Extending interim ordinance 677-U, prohibiting all commercial medical marijuana
686-U     uses in the city, including delivery, storage, cultivation and non-commercial
          cultivation (subject to proposition 64 exception) (Special) (Repealed by 700)
          Extending interim ordinance 685-U, prohibiting all commercial non-medical
687-U     marijuana activity in the city, prohibiting outdoor marijuana cultivation on
          private residences (Special) (Repealed by 700)
          Establishing procedures and requirements for conducting motion picture filming by
688       repealing § 4.06.110 and adding Ch. 4.65 (
          4.06,
          4.65)
          Amending the Los Angeles Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
689-U     Code, Residential Code, Green Building Standards Code, and Existing Building Code,
          by replacing Chs. 17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, and 17.18 and adding Ch.
          17.19 (17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.18, 17.19) (Repealed by 690)
          Amending the Los Angeles Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
690       Code, Residential Code, Green Building Standards Code, and Existing Building Code,
          by replacing Chs. 17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, and 17.18 and adding Ch.
          17.19 (17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.18, 17.19) (Repealed by 713-U)
          Approving a planned unit development No. 56 to construct a 28-unit apartment
691       building on a property located on the east side of La Mirada Boulevard South of
          Leffingwell Road (Special)
          Revising purchasing procedures for public projects, adopting emergency procurement
692       procedures and amending § 3.14.100 (
          3.14)
          Adopting by reference, Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Fire Code and
693-U     incorporating the 2016 edition of the California Fire Code and the 2015 edition of
          the International Fire Code, together with certain amendments and deletions, and
          including penalties, and replacing Ch. 16.04 (16.04) (Repealed by 694)
694       Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.04, Fire Code (
          16.04)
          Revising smoking in public recreational areas, city facilities, and city
695       workplaces regulations and replacing Ch. 9.10 (
          9.10)
696       Adds § 10.16.090 regarding parking restrictions on nonconforming vehicles (
          10.16)
697-U     Interim ordinance prohibiting new accessory dwelling units, a.k.a. second dwelling
          units, except those satisfying specified standards; suspending Ch. 21.54 (Special)
          Adds Ch. 9.132, Maintaining and Registering Vacant or Abandoned Commercial
698       Properties and Storefronts (
          9.132)
          Extends interim ordinance 697-U, prohibiting new accessory dwelling units, a.k.a.
699-U     second dwelling units, except those satifying specified standards; suspending Ch.
          21.54 (Special)
          Adds Ch. 9.132 [Ch. 9.133], Cannabis Prohibitions and Regulations; repeals and
          replaces Ch. 21.48, Commercial Cannabis Uses and Cultivation; amends related terms
          in §§ 21.20.100 and 21.22.090 (
700       9.133,
          21.20,
          21.22,
          21.48)
          Amends §§ 2.02.040 and 2.04.060 regarding City Council and Mayoral elections (
701       2.02,
          2.04)
          Extends interim ordinance 687-U, prohibiting all commercial non-medical marijuana
702-U     activity in the city, and prohibiting outdoor marijuana cultivation on private
          residences (Special)
703       Repeals § 9.116.070 regarding garage sale sign deposits (
          9.116)
          Amends § 4.50.085(a) by readopting the city’s public, education, and governmental
704       access support fee (
          4.50)
705       Amends municipal code sections associated with “Accessory Dwelling Units”
          (formerly, “Second Dwelling Units”) (Title 21)
          Amends § 16.12.050 regarding exceptions to the prohibition of dangerous fireworks
706       (
          16.12)
707       Adds Ch. 4.70, Sidewalk Vending (
          4.70)
          Amends §§ 2.52.030 and 2.52.050 regarding terms of office for and removal of
708       Planning Commissioners (
          2.52)
          Amends § 10.12.020 regarding prima facie speed limits on certain streets for the
709       purposes of electronic enforcement (
          10.12)
          Adding Ch. 21.56, Short-Term Rentals; amends § 21.62.075, electrified fence
          standards; repeals and replaces Ch. 21.68, Parking and Loading; amends §
          21.78.030, setback measurements; amends § 21.200.130, “L” definitions (
710       21.56,
          21.62,
          21.68,
          21.78,
          21.200)
          Approving zoning ordinance Amendment No. 50 allowing for non-restricted for-sale
711       housing within planning area 1B of the Imperial Highway Specific Plan associated
          with the development of 39-unit condominiums at 12841 Valley View Avenue (Special)
          Amending the Los Angeles Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
          Code, Residential Code, Green Building Standards Code, and Existing Building Code,
          by replacing Chs. 17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.18 and 17.19 (
          17.04,
712       17.06,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16,
          17.18,
          17.19) (Repealed by 713-U)
          Amending the Los Angeles Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
          Code, Residential Code, Green Building Standards Code, and Existing Building Code,
          by replacing Chs. 17.04, 17.06, 17.08, 17.12, 17.16, 17.18 and 17.19 (
          17.04,
713-U     17.06,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16,
          17.18,
          17.19)
714       Approving planned unit development No. 57 to allow for the construction of 56
          single-family residential condominium units at 13811 Valley View Avenue (Special)
715-U     Adding Ch. 12.10, City Wide Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities (12.10)
          (Repealed by 716)
716       Adding Ch. 12.10, City Wide Regulation of Small Wireless Facilities (12.10)
          Amends § 21.62.075 regarding electrified fence standards, § 21.68.050 regarding
          off-street parking standards, and § 21.76.070 regarding sign regulations (
717       21.62,
          21.68,
          21.76)
          Amends §§ 2.02.040 and 2.04.060 regarding City Council and Mayoral elections (
718       2.02,
          2.04)
          Adds Ch.
719       2.35, Electronic Filing of Campaign Disclosure Statements and Statements of
          Economic Interest (2.35)
          Adds Article IX, §§ 6.08.650 through 6.08.770, regarding Mandatory Organic Waste
720       Disposal Reduction, to Ch. 6.08 (
          6.08)
721       Amends § 2.02.020 regarding City Council Districts (
          2.02)
          Amends §§ 21.76.020, 21.76.050, 21.76.070 and 21.76.130 regarding signs to include
          electronic billboard provisions and adds § 21.76.140, Electronic Billboards, and
722       amends § 21.114.020 regarding site plan applicability (
          21.76,
          21.114)
          Amends § 21.20.055 regarding drive-through facility standards and the Imperial
723       Highway Specific Plan regarding drive-through businesses (
          21.20)
724       Adds Ch. 9.140, Unlawful Possession of a Catalytic Converter Prohibited (
          9.140)
725       Approving development agreement no. 16 (Special)
726       Approving development agreement no. 17 (Special)
          Amending the Los Angeles Building Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical
          Code, Residential Code, Green Building Standards Code, and Existing Building Code,
          by replacing Chs.
          17.04,
          17.06,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16,
727-U     17.18 and
          17.19 (
          17.04,
          17.06,
          17.08,
          17.12,
          17.16,
          17.18,
          17.19)
          Adding land use regulations to Chs.
          21.20 and
728       21.22, applicable to micro-brewery facilities and adds §
          21.20.057 (
          21.20,
          21.22)
729       Approving development agreement no. 18 (Special)
730       Approving development agreement no. 15 (Special)
          Amends §
731       9.90.070 regarding regulations applicable to graffiti, and repeals § 9.90.090 (
          9.90)
          Amends §
732       4.35.120 regarding regulations applicable to entertainment permit, and repeals §
          4.35.130 (
          4.35)
          Amends §
724       8.04.020 regarding adoption of the animal control ordinance (
          8.04)
          Amends §§
          21.30.010 through
733       21.30.030, adding land use regulations applicable to maintenance of chickens in
          residential zones (
          21.30)
735       Development agreement regarding billboards (Special)
          Adopting amendments to the city’s subdivision ordinance and zoning amendment no.
          57 amending titles 20 and 21 to implement policies of 6th cycle 2021-2029 update
          of the housing element of the general plan, amending Chapters
          20.32,
          21.16,
          21.18,
          21.20,
          21.37,
          21.38,
          21.39,
          21.52,
          21.68,
          21.82,
          21.96,
736       21.112,
          21.126,
          21.200, adding Chapters
          20.30,
          20.34,
          21.41,
          21.43,
          21.49,
          21.53,
          21.57,
          21.58,
          21.117,
          21.128, and deleting Chapter 21.54 (20.30, 20.32, 20.34, 21.16, 21.18, 21.20,
          21.37, 21.38, 21.39, 21.41, 21.43, 21.49, 21.52, 21.53, 21.57, 21.58, 21.68,
          21.82, 21.96, 21.112, 21.117, 21.126, 21.128, 21.200)
737       Adopting zoning map amendment No. 57 (Special)
738       Adopting specific plan amendment No. 2024-1 (Special)
739-U     Prohibiting the establishment, implementation, or operation (temporary or
          permanent) of discount stores (Special)
740-U     Prohibiting the establishment, implementation, or operation (temporary or
          permanent) of discount stores (Special)
          Establishing regulations governing camping and storage of personal property in the
          city, amending
741       Chapter 9.106 and adding §
          10.16.065 regarding the use of vehicles for human habitation on public property (
          9.106,
          10.16)
743       Adds §
          16.04.080 regarding fire hazard severity zones (16.04)
          
 
